VILLAGE CODE
OF
NORTH UTICA, IL
2013
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-08, passed 5-1-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the Village of North Utica, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-08, passed May 1, 2025.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions
of this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
NORTH UTICA VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-5: Copies Of Code
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the village board of trustees, this code is hereby
declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official village code of
North Utica. This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the NORTH
UTICA VILLAGE CODE and is hereby published by authority of the village board of
trustees and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation
of the village as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2013 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect, except
the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2013 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(2013 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code, while in
actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the village and shall be returned to the office of the
village clerk when directed so to do by order of the village board of trustees.
(2013 Code)
1-1-5: COPIES OF CODE:
   A.   Copies To Village Officials: All of the printed copies of this code
belonging to the village shall be deposited with the clerk. He shall deliver
one copy thereof to the president and each member of the board of trustees and
copies to such other persons as the president and board of trustees may direct.
(1966 Code § 651)
   B.   Copies To Other Bodies: The president and board of trustees shall have
the power to extend or reciprocate courtesies of other municipalities by
presenting them with a copy of this code, bound at the expense of the village,
as to them as shall seem suitable, and they shall also have the power to
present two (2) copies of this code to the Illinois municipal league. (1966
Code § 652)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
   A.   Tax levy ordinances;
   B.   Appropriation ordinances;
   C.   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
   D.   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations;
   E.   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants;
   F.   Salary ordinances;
   G.   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other
public places;
   H.   Improvement ordinances;
   I.   Bond ordinances;
   J.   Ordinances relating to elections;
   K.   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the village; and
   L.   All special ordinances. (2013 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of section
1-2-1 of this chapter, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances with respect to such provisions only. (2013 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the village herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the village under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2013 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code
or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or
ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or
any part thereof. The village board of trustees hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2013 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the village board of trustees may be fully
carried out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provisions of this code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience
and general welfare. Where any provision of this code imposes greater
restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this
code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be
deemed to be controlling. (2013 Code)
   C.   Time:
      1.   Computation Of Time: The time within which any act provided by law
is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last, unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or a holiday as defined or
fixed in any statute now or hereafter in force in the state, and then it shall
also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Saturday, Sunday or holiday is
also a holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be
excluded. (1966 Code § 96)
      2.   Official Time: Central Standard Time shall be the official time for
the transaction of the village business; except, that the village time shall
coincide with daylight saving time as used in Illinois. All clocks and other
timepieces in or upon public buildings or other premises maintained by or at
the expense of the village shall be set and run at the official time prescribed
by this subsection. (1966 Code § 96; amd. 2013 Code)
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other village officer to do some act or perform
some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or
other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   G.   May/Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
   H.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   I.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   J.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the village of North Utica".
   K.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the
village has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the village ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2013 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES, BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, the village board of
trustees of the village of North Utica.
CODE: The village code of the village of North Utica.
CORPORATE LIMITS OR VILLAGE LIMITS: The legal boundaries of the village, except
as otherwise provided by law.
COUNTY: The county of LaSalle, state of Illinois.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year for the village shall begin on April 1 of each
year and end on March 31 of the following year.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MAYOR: The mayor of the village.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the village, or any activity which, by its perpetuation, can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OATH: Shall include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear"
and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PRESIDENT: The president of the village board of trustees.
PROPERTY: Shall include real, personal and mixed property.
QUORUM: A majority of the members of a board, commission or committee holding
office, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code.
REAL PROPERTY: Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
SIDEWALK: Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION: Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET: Includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts
and all other public ways in the village, and shall include all areas thereof
embraced between the property lines and dedicated to the public use.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The village of North Utica, county of LaSalle, state of Illinois.
WHOLESALE, WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically
defined, shall be understood and held to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for
purposes of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in smaller
quantities direct to the consumer.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law on any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person or, in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (1996 Code § 92; amd. 2013 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (2013 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   General Penalty Imposed:
      1.   Fine; Imprisonment: Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this
code, any person found to have been in violation of any of the terms and
provisions of this code shall be fined in an amount not exceeding seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). No imprisonment for failure to pay such fine, penalty
or cost shall exceed six (6) months for each offense. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. A violation hereof may be
established by a preponderance of the evidence.
      2.   Additional Penalties: In addition to the fine described in
subsection A1 of this section, the circuit court may impose a period of
"conditional discharge", as defined in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-4,
or "court supervision", as defined in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-21,
for a period of up to six (6) months, an order of restitution, an order to
perform community service, an order to complete an education program and/or any
other appropriate penalties or conditions authorized in any section of this
code or stand alone ordinance or any conditions for conditional discharge set
forth in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3 or for court supervision in 730
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3.1, as the foregoing are amended from time to
time.
      3.   Costs And Fees: Any person violating the terms or provisions of this
code shall be subject, in addition to the penalties set out in this subsection,
to the payment of court costs and reasonable attorney fees.
      4.   Default In Payment: A default in the payment of a fine or any
installment of a fine may be collected by any means authorized for the
collection of monetary judgments. The village attorney may retain attorneys and
private collection agents for the purpose of collecting any default in payment
of any fine or installment of that fine. Any fees or costs incurred by the
village with respect to attorneys or private collection agents retained by the
village attorney under this subsection A4 shall be charged to the offender.
   B.   Acts Consistent With Criminal Laws Of State: If, by the terms of an
ordinance, an act that would be consistent with the criminal laws of the state
is declared to be a misdemeanor, the penalty therefor shall be for a period of
incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary not to exceed
six (6) months. The matter shall be prosecuted under the rules of criminal
procedure of the state, and the village shall be required to establish guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt. (2013 Code)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2013 Code)
   D.   Minimum Penalty Amounts Only: Whenever in this code a minimum but no
maximum fine or penalty is imposed, the court may, in its discretion, fine the
offender any sum exceeding the minimum fine or penalty but not exceeding seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (1966 Code § 644; amd. 2013 Code)
   E.   Amendments To Code: In case of amendment of any section of this code
containing the provisions for which a penalty is provided in another section,
the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the
section so amended or the amending section, whether reenacted in the amendatory
ordinance or not, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. (1966
Code § 648)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the village board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (2013 Code)
CHAPTER 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Corporate Seal
1-5-2: Elections
1-5-3: Surety Bonds
1-5-4: Comprehensive Plan
1-5-5: Village Website
1-5-6: Responsible Bidder On Certain Public Works Projects
1-5-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
The Corporate Seal of the Village shall be a circular disk with the words
"Village of North Utica" inscribed therein. (1966 Code § 91)
1-5-2: ELECTIONS:
Elections for Municipal offices shall be held as provided by statute and at the
time prescribed by statute. (1966 Code § 94)
1-5-3: SURETY BONDS:
   A.   Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the Village is required as a
prerequisite to exercising the duties of any office or position, or to the
issuance of a license or permit, or for the exercise of any special privilege,
the surety on such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do
business in the State as a surety company, in the absence of specific
provisions to the contrary by ordinance.
   B.   Whenever, in its opinion, additional sureties or an additional surety
may be needed on any bond to indemnify the Village against loss or liability
because of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties or for any other
reason, the Village may order a new surety or sureties to be secured for such
bond. If such new surety or sureties are not procured within ten (10) days from
the time such order is transmitted to the principal on the bond, or his
assignee, the Board shall declare the bond to be void, and thereupon, such
principal or assignee shall be deemed to have surrendered the privilege or
position as condition of which the bond was required. (1966 Code § 95)
1-5-4: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
The comprehensive plan, dated July 2002 and attached to the ordinance codified
herein, is hereby adopted as the official comprehensive plan of the Village.
(Ord. 2002-16, 8-14-2002)
1-5-5: VILLAGE WEBSITE:
The Village website shall be operated under the following terms:
   A.   Listing:
      1.   Authority To List: Any business, other government agency, or
nonprofit organization located within the Village boundaries, or within the one
and one-half (1.5) mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village, or owned
and operated by a member in good standing of a Village based business
organization, shall be allowed to be listed on the website. (Ord. 2004-25, 9-
22-2004)
      2.   Fee; Exemptions And Waivers: No fees will be charged to other
government agencies or nonprofit organizations. All businesses desired to be
listed will be charged a onetime twenty five dollar ($25.00) setup fee and
fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each change in their listing. (Ord. 2004-25, 9-22-
2004; amd. 2013 Code)
      3.   Requirements:
         a.   Each listing is limited to name, address, phone/fax numbers, e-
mail address, website link, and a maximum seventy five (75) word description.
         b.   Any business/organization desiring a listing or a change in
listing shall complete an application form (see exhibit A attached to the
ordinance codified herein) and pay the required fee. (Ord. 2004-25, 9-22-2004)
      4.   Authority And Nonliability Of Village: The Village retains full
control over the context of the website and may refuse to list or may delete
any material deemed objectionable. The Village is not responsible for the
accuracy of any listing.
      5.   Special Events And Activities: The Village may list special events/
activities or any other items at the Village's discretion. Special event/
activity forms are attached to the ordinance codified herein as exhibit B.
(Ord. 2004-25, 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Website Address: The internet address of the Village website shall be
www.utica-il.gov unless changed by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2004-25, 9-22-
2004)
1-5-6: RESPONSIBLE BIDDER ON CERTAIN PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS:
   A.   Public Works: For purposes of this section, the term "public works"
shall mean the following: any constructing, altering, reconstructing,
repairing, rehabilitating, refinishing, refurbishing, remodeling, remediating,
renovating, custom fabricating, improving, moving, wrecking, painting,
decorating, demolishing, and adding to or substracting from any public
building, structure, airport facility, highway, roadway, street, alley, bridge,
sewer, drain, ditch, sewage disposal plant, water work, parking facility,
railroad, excavation, or other project, development, real property, or
improvement, or to do any part thereof, whether or not the performance of the
work herein described involves the addition to, or fabrication into, any
structure, project or development, real property or improvement herein
described of any material or article of merchandise, which is paid for out of a
public fund or out of a special assessment and which contract for such work
will exceed the sum of forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00). The term also
includes any public works leased by a political subdivision under a lease
containing an option to purchase. For purposes of this section, the term
"public works" does not include the following: landscaping, any work and/or
maintenance done by Village employees, and any specific project exempted from
this section by action of the Village Board where the Village Board finds such
project requires a particular skill, experience and expertise necessary for
successful completion of the project. The Village retains the authority under
Illinois law to not seek and advertise for bids on a project provided two-
thirds (2/3) of the Village Trustees holding office approve the contract.
   B.   Bid Submission Requirements: In determining whether a bidder is a
"responsible bidder" for the award of a public works contract, the bidder must
submit the following information and supporting documentation verified under
oath on a form designated by the authority, in order for the bid to be
accepted:
      1.   Documents evidencing compliance with all applicable laws and
ordinances pre-requisite to doing business in Illinois.
      2.   Documents evidencing current registration with the Illinois
Department of Revenue if bidder has employees (e.g., document with account
number, Illinois Business Tax number).
      3.   Documents evidencing current registration with the Illinois
Department of Employment Security if bidder has employees (e.g., document with
UI account number).
      4.   Disclosure of any Federal, State or local tax liens or tax
delinquencies against the contractor or any officers of the contractor in the
last five (5) years.
      5.   A statement that all employees are: a) covered under a current
workers' compensation insurance policy and b) properly classified under such
policy. If the bidder is insured with a carrier, the evidence of workers'
compensation insurance shall be a copy of the "information page" of the
contractor's workers' compensation policy and any continuation of that
information page which include the name and address of the insured, as well as
the class codes the compensation premium is based on and the total estimated
remuneration per class code.
      6.   A statement of compliance with all provisions of the Illinois
Prevailing Wage Act 1  and all rules and regulations therein, for the past five
(5) years. Such statement shall also provide that the contractor has reviewed
the Prevailing Wage Act or Federal Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, has reviewed
and agrees to pay the applicable prevailing wage rates attached to the bid
specifications, and will strictly comply with the Prevailing Wage Act or
Federal Davis-Bacon and Related Acts and related requirements. A contractor who
has been found by the Illinois Department of Labor to be in violation of the
Prevailing Wage Act twice within a three (3) year period shall be deemed not to
be a responsible bidder for two (2) years from the date of the latest finding.
      7.   A copy of the written program for the prevention of substance abuse
to be filed with a public body pursuant to the Substance Abuse Prevention on
Public Works Projects Act 2 .
      8.   A statement that individuals who will perform work on the public
works project on behalf of the contractor are properly classified as either: a)
an employee or b) an independent contractor under all applicable State and
Federal laws and local ordinances.
      9.   Documents evidencing any professional or trade license required by
law or local ordinance for any trade or specialty area in which the contractor
is seeking a contract award. Additionally, the contractor must disclose any
suspension or revocation of such license held by the company, or of any
director, officer or manager of the company.
      10.   Evidence of participation in apprenticeship and training programs
applicable to the work to be performed on the project which are approved by and
registered with the United States Department of Labor's Office of
Apprenticeship, or its successor organization. The required evidence includes a
copy of all applicable apprenticeship standards and Apprenticeship Agreement(s)
for any apprentice(s) who will perform work on the public works project.
      11.   Bidder shall certify that all employees expected to perform work on
the project have completed a 10-hour or greater OSHA safety program within the
last five (5) years. Only workers that have satisfactorily completed a 10-hour
or greater OSHA safety program will be allowed to participate on the project.
The bidder must have copies of employee OSHA cards on file, and the authority
may request the bidder provide copies of employees OSHA cards; failure to
produce an employee's OSHA card may result in a determination that the bidder
is not a responsible bidder.
      12.   Disclosure of the name and address of each subcontractor from whom
the contractor has accepted a bid and/or intends to hire on any part of the
project. Further, each such subcontractor shall be required to adhere to the
requirements set forth herein as though it were bidding directly to the
authority. Each contractor shall submit all subcontractor information and
supporting documentation to the authority prior to the subcontractor commencing
work on the project.
      13.   Statements as to past performance, which shall give an accurate and
complete record of all public works projects completed in the past three (3)
years by the contractor. Such statements shall include the name of the public
body and the project, original contract price, final contract price, and the
names of all subcontractors used, if applicable, and a statement as to
compliance with completion deadlines.
Any material changes to the contractor's status, at any time, must be reported
in writing to the authority within fourteen (14) days of its occurrence.
Failure to comply with this requirement is grounds for the contractor to be
deemed a non-responsible bidder.
   C.   Incomplete Submissions By Bidders And Subcontractors: It is the sole
responsibility of the contractor to comply with all submission requirements at
the time it submits its bid to the authority. Contractor submissions deemed
inadequate or incomplete may result in a determination that the contractor is
not a responsible bidder.
The submission requirements also apply to all subcontractors, except that the
contractor shall submit all subcontractor submissions to the authority prior to
the subcontractor commencing work on the project. Failure of a subcontractor to
submit the required information shall not disqualify the successful bidder from
performing work on the project and shall not constitute a contractual default
and/or breach by the successful bidder. However, the authority may withhold all
payments otherwise due for work performed by a subcontractor, until the
subcontractor submits the required information and the authority approves such
information.
   D.   Lowest Bidder Not Chosen: The Village shall comply with the
requirements of the law if not awarding a contract to the lowest bidder.
   E.   Multiple Low Bids: When two (2) or more responsible bidders submit the
same low bid, the contract award shall be determined by drawing lots at a
public meeting of the authority, unless one bidder is a local contractor and
one is a non-local contractor, in which event the local contractor shall be
awarded the contract.
   F.   Public Records: All information submitted by a contractor or
subcontractor pursuant to this section are subject to the requirements of the
Illinois Freedom of Information Act 3  if deemed public records.
   G.   Materiality: The requirements for this section are a material part of
the bid documents and the contract and the successful bidder shall insert this
section in all subcontracts. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-11-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
2 2. 820 ILCS 265/1 et seq.
3 1. 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Village President
1-6-2: Board Of Trustees
1-6-3: Meetings
1-6-4: Rules Of Order
1-6-1: VILLAGE PRESIDENT:
   A.   Election; Term Of Office: The village president shall be elected for a
term of four (4) years, and he shall be the president of the board of trustees,
as provided by statute. (1966 Code § 1)
   B.   Bond, Oath, Compensation: Before entering upon the duties of his
office, the president shall give a bond, with sureties to be approved by the
board of trustees conditioned upon his faithful performance of his duties, in
the sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). He shall take the oath of office
as prescribed by statute and shall receive such compensation as may be set from
time to time by the board. (1966 Code § 4; amd. Ord. 2004-31, 9-22-2004)
   C.   Duties And Powers:
      1.   Generally: The president shall:
         a.   Be the chief executive officer of the village, and he shall
perform all such duties as may be required of him by statute or ordinance.
(1966 Code § 2)
         b.   Have supervision over all the executive officers of the village.
(1966 Code § 2; amd. 2013 Code)
         c.   Have full authority and be responsible for personnel
administration over employees of the village. Such authority shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
            (1)   Discipline, including reprimand and suspension.
            (2)   Hiring of employees.
            (3)   Termination of employees.
            (4)   Approval of work hours and schedules.
            (5)   Day to day direction, management and scheduling of work to be
completed.
            (6)   All other general personnel administration decision authority
necessary for the proper functioning of and in the best interests of the
village.
He may delegate any personnel administration authority to village departments
(such as the chief of police, superintendent of public works, etc.) as he deems
appropriate. (Ord. 2010-03, 2-10-2010)
         d.   Have the power and authority to inspect all books and records
kept by any village officer or employee at any reasonable time. (1966 Code § 2)
      2.   Designation Of Duties: Whenever there is a question as to the
respective powers or duties of any appointed officer of the village, this shall
be settled by the president, and he shall have the power to delegate to any
such officer any duty which is to be performed when no specific officer has
been directed to perform the duty. (1966 Code § 3)
   D.   President Pro Tem: During the temporary absence or disability of the
village president, the board of trustees shall elect one of its number to act
as president pro tem who, during the absence or disability of the president,
shall perform the duties pertaining to the office. (1966 Code § 5)
1-6-2: BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
   A.   Election; Term; Powers And Duties: The board of trustees, consisting of
six (6) members, shall be elected to office for a four (4) year term, according
to the method provided by statute. The newly elected officials of the village
board shall commence their terms at the first regular meeting of the village
board held in the month of May following the election. The Board of Trustees
shall be the Legislative Department of the Village government and shall perform
such duties and have such powers as may be delegated to the Board by statute.
(1966 Code § 6; amd. Ord. 2008-31, 11-12-2008)
   B.   Oath And Compensation: The members of the Board of Trustees shall take
the oath of office prescribed by statute and shall receive such compensation as
may be provided by ordinance. (1966 Code § 7)
1-6-3: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings:
      1.   Place, Day And Time: The Village Board shall hold its regular
meetings at the Village Hall on the second Thursday of each month at seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M. (Ord. 2017-32, 12-13-2017)
      2.   Agenda On Website: The Village shall post on its website the agenda
of any regular meetings of the Board of Trustees. Any agenda of a regular
meeting that is posted on the Village website shall remain posted on the
website until the regular meeting is concluded. (2013 Code)
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the Village
President or any three (3) Trustees upon at least forty eight (48) hours'
notice, which notice shall also include the agenda for the special meeting.
(1966 Code § 8; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Emergency Meetings: Emergency meetings may be held and notice is to be
provided as soon as practicable 1 . (2013 Code)
   D.   Meeting Place: The meeting place of the Board shall be the Village
Hall, unless otherwise ordered by the Board. (1966 Code § 8)
   E.   Presiding Officer: The Village President shall be the presiding officer
of all regular and special meetings of the Board of Trustees and at all times
when the Board meets as a Committee of the Whole. (1966 Code § 9)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/2.02.
1-6-4: RULES OF ORDER:
   A.   Order Of Business: The order of business of the Village Board of
Trustees shall be as follows:
      1.   Roll call.
      2.   Minutes of the preceding meeting.
      3.   Financial statement.
      4.   Approval of bills.
      5.   Communications, resolutions, ordinances and bills.
      6.   Reports of officers.
      7.   Reports of committees.
      8.   Other business. (1966 Code § 10; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Rescinded Action: No vote or action of the Board of Trustees shall be
rescinded at any special meeting of the Board unless there shall be present at
such special meeting as many members of the Board as were present at the
meeting when such vote or action was taken, as provided by statute. (1966 Code
§ 11)
   C.   Resolutions: Any resolution submitted to the Board shall be reduced to
writing before being voted upon, upon request of any two (2) members of the
Board. (1966 Code § 12)
   D.   Addressing Meetings: No person, other than the President or a member of
the Board, shall address that body at any regular special meeting except upon
consent of a majority of the members present. (1966 Code § 13)
   E.   Suspension Of Rules: The rules of order, other than those prescribed by
statute, may be suspended at any time by the consent of a majority of the
members present at any meeting. (1966 Code § 14)
   F.   Robert's Rules Of Order: "Robert's Rules of Order" shall govern the
deliberations of the Board of Trustees except when in conflict with any of the
foregoing rules. (1966 Code § 15)
   G.   Quorum: A majority of the Trustees shall constitute a quorum to do
business, but no ordinance shall be passed except upon the favorable vote of a
majority of the elected members, as provided by statute. (1966 Code § 16)
   H.   Committees:
      1.   Committee Of The Whole: A Committee of the Whole shall consist of
all members of the Village Board of Trustees and Village President, and hold
its regular meetings at the Village Hall on the fourth Thursday of each month
at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. (Ord. 2017-32, 12-13-2017)
      2.   Special Committees: Special committees shall be created from time to
time as directed by the Board of Trustees.
      3.   Appointment And Composition: All standing and special committees
shall consist of three (3) members each, including the Chair, unless the Board
shall direct otherwise. All committees shall be appointed by the President.
(1966 Code § 17)
   I.   Disturbing Meetings: It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any
meeting of the Board of Trustees or of any committee thereof. Any person
violating the provisions of this subsection shall be fined not less than one
dollar ($1.00) nor more than ten dollars ($10.00) for each offense.
   J.   Public Comment At Village Meetings:
      1.   Pursuant to Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/2.06(g), any person shall
be permitted an opportunity to address public officials under the rules
established and recorded by the public body. Public participation at meetings
of the village shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
         a.   Public Comment At Village Board Meetings: An individual desiring
to address and/or comment on an agenda item shall submit a paper to the Village
Clerk prior to the start of the Village Board meeting containing his/her name,
and the agenda item to be discussed. Comment shall be limited to five (5)
minutes.
         b.   General Public Comment At Village Board Meetings: Public comment
at a Village Board meeting shall be open to all matters of public concern
during the period of scheduled public comment as listed on the agenda.
         c.   Public Comment At Other Village Meetings: Public comment, not
exceeding five (5) minutes per person unless otherwise allowed additional time
by the presiding officer, shall be allowed at all Village Planning Commission,
Committee of the Whole, and all other meetings of a public body of the village.
      2.   Prior to speaking, the individual shall state his/her name for the
record. Such comments by any one (1) person shall be limited to five (5)
minutes unless an extension of time is granted at the presiding officer’s
discretion. Citizens shall not yield unused time to other speakers. The
presiding officer shall have the right at any time to close comment by that
person, when, in the presiding officer’s discretion, such input violates the
provisions of these rules, or is otherwise irrelevant, repetitious or
disruptive. After a reasonable period of time has been devoted to public
comments, and all those desiring to provide comment have not had a chance to do
so, the public comment portion of the agenda may be closed upon a motion and
second of the Village Board and a majority vote in favor thereof. Any person
who was not able to address the Village Board will be encouraged to attend a
subsequent meeting to address the Village Board or to provide written comments.
      3.   If numerous persons wish to comment on a single topic, the Village
Board may recognize a specified number of individuals who wish to speak in
favor of, against or wish to make general comments regarding the topic. The
Village Board shall not be required to allow every person who wishes to address
the issue to do so, but as many views as possible are encouraged to be heard.
Any person who is not able to speak during the time for public comment shall be
allowed and encouraged to present his/her views to the Village Board in
writing.
      4.   Members of the public, as an alternative to speaking, may submit
written materials to the Village Board regarding any matter of public concern.
      5.   Decorum: Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or
offensive comments at a village meeting and are expected to comply with these
rules. All comments must be civil in nature. Any person who engages in
threatening, slanderous or disorderly behavior when addressing a village
meeting shall be deemed out-of-order by the presiding officer and his/her time
to address the meeting shall end. An individual who violates these rules may be
removed from the meeting at the discretion of the presiding officer. (1966 Code
§18; amd. Ord. 2019-28, 10-24-2019)
CHAPTER 7
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION:
1-7-1: Scope Of Provisions
1-7-2: Appointments
1-7-3: Term Of Office; Vacancies
1-7-4: Oath And Bond
1-7-5: Compensation
1-7-6: Powers And Duties
1-7-7: Records To Successor
1-7-8: Impersonation Of, Interference With Officers
1-7-9: Participation In Illinois Municipal League Risk Management Association
1-7-10: Employee Manual Adopted
1-7-1: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply alike to all officers and employees
of the village, regardless of the time of the creation of the office or
position or the time of the appointment of the officer or employee. (1966 Code
§ 67)
1-7-2: APPOINTMENTS:
All officers, other than elective officers, shall be appointed by the president
and the board of trustees, as is provided by statute; provided, that all
employees shall, in the absence of any provisions to the contrary, be appointed
or selected by the village president. (1966 Code § 68)
1-7-3: TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
Every appointive officer of the village shall hold office until his successor
is appointed and qualified, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. In case of
a vacancy in any such office, it shall be filled in the same manner in which
appointments or selections are made, in the absence of provisions to the
contrary. (1966 Code § 69; amd. 2013 Code)
1-7-4: OATH AND BOND:
   A.   Oath: Every officer of the village shall, before entering upon his
duties, take the oath prescribed by statute. (1966 Code § 71)
   B.   Bond: Every officer and employee shall, if required by the board of
trustees, upon entering upon the duties of his office, give a bond in such
amount and with such sureties as may be determined by the board, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office or position. (1966
Code § 75)
1-7-5: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Village President: The salary of the village president shall be the sum
of ten thousand two hundred dollars ($10,200.00) per year. In addition, the
village president shall receive the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for
each board of trustees meeting attended in excess of one board meeting per
month.
   B.   Village Trustees: The salary of the trustees of the village shall be
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each village board meeting attended.
The amount paid for each committee meeting attended shall be fifty dollars
($50.00).
   C.   Village Clerk: The salary of the village clerk shall be eight thousand
seven hundred dollars ($8,700.00) per year. In addition, the village clerk
shall receive the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each board of
trustees meeting attended in excess of one board meeting per month. (Ord. 2008-
32, 11-12-2008)
   D.   Village Collector: Effective April 1, 2012, the village collector shall
receive three hundred three dollars ($303.00) per week which shall be paid
according to the village customary payroll distribution. (Ord. 2012-12, 3-14-
2012)
   E.   Local Liquor Control Commissioner: The local liquor control
commissioner shall be paid an annual salary of four thousand eight hundred
dollars ($4,800.00) for service as such commissioner.
   F.   Expenses: The village president and all elected officials shall be
reimbursed for actual expenses incurred upon submission of evidence of said
incurred expense. (Ord. 2008-32, 11-12-2008)
1-7-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Assignment Of Duties: The board of trustees shall have the power to
assign to any appointive officer any duty which is not assigned by ordinance to
some other specific officer, and shall determine disputes or questions relating
to the respective powers or duties of officers. (1966 Code § 73)
   B.   Inspection Of Records: All records kept by any officer of the village
shall be open to inspection by the president or any member of the board of
trustees at all reasonable times, whether or not such records are required to
be kept by statute or ordinance. (1966 Code § 74)
   C.   Arrests: The village president, members of the board of trustees, as
well as every member of the police department, are hereby declared to be
conservators of the peace with such powers to make arrests as are given to
conservators of the peace by statute. (1966 Code § 76)
1-7-7: RECORDS TO SUCCESSOR:
Every officer and employee of the village, within five (5) days after written
notification and request, shall deliver to his successor all books and records
which may be the property of the village, and if no successor has been
appointed within one week after the termination of office, such property shall
be delivered to the village clerk or village treasurer. (1966 Code § 77; amd.
2013 Code)
1-7-8: IMPERSONATION OF, INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS:
   A.   Impersonation: It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate
without lawful authority any village officer or employee. (1966 Code § 78; amd.
2013 Code)
   B.   Interference: It shall be unlawful to interfere with any village
officer or employee in the duties of his office or employment. (1966 Code § 79;
amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title for each offense. (2013 Code)
1-7-9: PARTICIPATION IN ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL LEAGUE RISK MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION:
   A.   Participation Authorized: The village board hereby authorizes and
approves the membership in the Illinois municipal league risk management
association, and the village president and village clerk shall execute an
intergovernmental cooperation contract with the Illinois municipal league risk
management association for membership on an annual basis and each year
thereafter unless this section is repealed.
   B.   Contributions: Each member hereby agrees to contribute to the
association a sum of money to be determined by the association at the time of
its annual renewal based on the needs of the association and the loss
experience of the member, which sum shall constitute the cost of the member's
contribution for membership in the association. (Ord. 2004-05, 4-7-2004)
1-7-10: EMPLOYEE MANUAL ADOPTED:
The employee manual for the village is hereby adopted by reference. Said
employee manual is on file in the office of the village clerk for public use
and inspection. (2013 Code; amd. Ord. 2020-03, 3-12-2020)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE CLERK; VILLAGE COLLECTOR
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Appointment
1-7A-2: Bond
1-7A-3: Duties
1-7A-4: Vacancies
1-7A-5: Serve As Collector; Duties
1-7A-1: APPOINTMENT:
The office of village clerk for the village of North Utica shall become an
appointed position upon the first to occur of the expiration of the current
elected term, or the office of clerk otherwise becoming vacant. Appointment
shall be by the village president with the concurrence of the village board.
(Res. R-2015-04, 4-8-2015)
1-7A-2: BOND:
Before entering the duties of office, the village clerk shall execute a bond in
the amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his duties. (1966 Code § 20)
1-7A-3: DUTIES:
The village clerk shall:
   A.   Signatures: Seal and attest all contracts of the village and all
licenses, permits and such other documents as shall require this formality.
(1966 Code § 21)
   B.   Documents: Be the custodian of all documents belonging to the village
which are not assigned to the custody of some other officer. (1966 Code § 26)
   C.   Indices: Keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records
kept by him so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had. (1966 Code
§ 27)
   D.   Records: In addition to the record of ordinances and other records
which the clerk is required by statute to keep, keep a register of all licenses
and permits issued, and the payments thereon, a record showing all of the
officers and regular employees of the village and such other records as may be
required by the board of trustees. (1966 Code § 24)
   E.   Accounts: Keep accounts showing all monies received by him and the
source and disposition thereof, and such other accounts as may be required by
statute or ordinance. (1966 Code § 23)
   F.   Monies Collected: Turn over all monies received by him on behalf of the
village to the village treasurer promptly upon receipt of the same, and with
such monies, he shall give a statement as to the source thereof. (1966 Code §
22)
   G.   Seal: Be the custodian of the village seal and affix its impression on
documents whenever this is required. (1966 Code § 25)
   H.   Recording Amendments: Keep a separate book containing every amendment
or addition passed to this code, with a reference on each copy of such
amendment or addition as to the place in the record of ordinances where the
original ordinance may be found. This record shall be kept in addition to the
record of ordinances which the clerk is required to keep by statute. (1966 Code
§ 649)
   I.   Additional Duties: In addition to the duties herein provided, the clerk
shall perform such other duties and functions as may be required by statute or
ordinance. (1966 Code § 28)
1-7A-4: VACANCIES:
In case the office of village clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the
president and board of trustees shall appoint a successor as provided by
statute. (1966 Code § 29)
1-7A-5: SERVE AS COLLECTOR; DUTIES:
The village clerk is appointed to the position of collector effective August 1,
2010, until further action by the board of trustees. The collector shall have
all duties as specified by Illinois law, by village ordinance, and by the board
of trustees. (Ord. 2010-22, 7-14-2010)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE TREASURER
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Appointment And Term
1-7B-2: Bond
1-7B-3: Duties
1-7B-4: Special Assessment Fund
1-7B-5: Warrants, Transfer Of Funds
1-7B-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
There is hereby created the office of village treasurer who shall be appointed
by the president and board of trustees as provided by statute. The treasurer
shall serve for one year, or until his/her successor is appointed. (1966 Code §
30; amd. 2013 Code)
1-7B-2: BOND:
The village treasurer shall give a bond before entering upon the duties of his
office in the sum required by the board of trustees, but the amount shall not
be less than that required by statute. This bond shall be conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his duties as the treasurer and shall be conditioned to
indemnify the village for any loss by reason of any neglect of duty or any act
of the treasurer. (1966 Code § 32)
1-7B-3: DUTIES:
The treasurer shall:
   A.   Generally: Perform such duties as may be prescribed for him by statute
or ordinance. He shall receive all monies paid into the village, whether
directly from the person paying the monies or from the hands of such other
officer or employee as may receive the monies, and he shall pay out monies only
on vouchers or orders properly signed by the president and clerk. (1966 Code §
33)
   B.   Deposit Funds: Deposit the village funds in such depositories as may be
selected from time to time as provided by law, and shall keep the deposit of
the village monies separate and distinct from his own monies, and shall not
make private or personal use of any village money. (1966 Code § 34)
   C.   Keep Records: Keep records showing all monies received by him, showing
the source from which said monies are received and the purpose for which paid,
and he shall keep records at all times showing the financial status of the
village. (1966 Code § 35)
   D.   Accounts: Keep such books and accounts as may be required by statute or
ordinance, and he shall keep them in the manner required by the board of
trustees. (1966 Code § 36)
1-7B-4: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND:
All monies received on any special assessment shall be held by the treasurer as
a special fund to be applied only to the payment of the improvements or bonds
and vouchers issued therefor, together with interest thereon for which the
assessment was made, and said monies shall be used for no other purpose, unless
to reimburse the village for monies expended for such improvements. Payment on
bonds or vouchers shall be made in accordance with statute and the law, and the
treasurer shall keep his books and accounts in such manner so that proper
prorations in payments of principal and interest can be made and ascertained.
(1966 Code § 37)
1-7B-5: WARRANTS, TRANSFER OF FUNDS:
All warrants drawn on the treasurer must be signed by the president and
countersigned by the clerk, stating the particular fund or appropriation to
which the same is chargeable and the person to whom payable, and no money shall
be otherwise paid except as may be provided by statute. Money shall not be
transferred by the treasurer from one fund to another after it has been
received by him nor appropriated to any other purpose than that for which it
has been collected or paid, except as may be ordered by the president and board
of trustees in the manner and form prescribed by statute. (1966 Code § 38)
ARTICLE C. LEGAL COUNSEL
SECTION:
1-7C-1: Position Established
1-7C-2: Compensation
1-7C-3: Supersedes All Statutes And Ordinances
1-7C-1: POSITION ESTABLISHED:
The position of legal counsel is established. The legal counsel shall have only
those responsibilities as specifically delegated thereto, and shall serve at
the pleasure of the board and president. No other requirements or obligations
of the position of legal counsel shall be placed upon said person in order to
qualify for the position unless specifically delineated in this article or any
amendments hereto. (Ord. 88-03, 2-3-1988; amd. 2013 Code)
1-7C-2: COMPENSATION:
Legal counsel shall be paid on an hourly basis, as are all other independent
contractors of the village. (Ord. 88-03, 2-3-1988)
1-7C-3: SUPERSEDES ALL STATUTES AND ORDINANCES:
   A.   This article shall supersede all statutory authority vested in the
village relating to the position of village attorney or comparable positions as
defined or referred to in the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 88-03, 2-3-
1988; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   This article shall supersede all other ordinances, motions and
resolutions of the village so far as they are inconsistent herewith. (Ord. 88-
03, 2-3-1988)
ARTICLE D. SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
SECTION:
1-7D-1: Office Created; Appointment
1-7D-2: Powers And Duties
1-7D-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of superintendent of public works, an
executive office of the village. The superintendent of public works shall be
appointed by the president and board of trustees. (1966 Code § 49)
1-7D-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The superintendent of public works shall:
      1.   Streets: Have charge of the construction and care of all public
streets, alleys and driveways in the village, and of keeping the same clean,
and shall see to it that all gutters and drains therein function properly and
that the same are kept free from defects. (1966 Code § 50)
      2.   Lighting: Supervise the lighting of the public streets and alleys
and shall keep the lighting system in efficient operation and good repair.
(1966 Code § 51)
      3.   Water And Electric Systems: Have charge of the operation and
maintenance of the municipal water and electric distribution systems. (1966
Code § 52)
      4.   Custodian Of Property: Be the custodian of all properties of the
village, which properties are not assigned to the care or custody of any other
officer. (1966 Code § 54)
   B.   All officers or employees assigned to the department of public works
shall perform their duties subject to the orders and under the supervision of
the superintendent of public works. (1966 Code § 53)
CHAPTER 8
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Definitions
1-8-2: Prohibited Political Activities
1-8-3: Gift Ban
1-8-4: Penalties
1-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given the following
definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action;
b) relating to collective bargaining; or c) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy
in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a
regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 1 .
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as the term is defined in section 3
of the Illinois public labor relations act 2 .
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited
to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as
a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does
not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time,
compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence.
With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated
time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is
executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work
time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of
the election code 3 .
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village, whether on a full time or part time
basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and
control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is
to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village of North Utica.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance or
other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a)
compensation for employment; b) service credit towards pension benefits; and c)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by
statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action; b) relating to collective bargaining; or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or the county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code 4 , but only with regard to those activities
that require filing with the state board of elections or the county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: A. Preparing for, organizing, or participating
in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other
political event.
   B.   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
   C.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   D.   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   E.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   F.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   G.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   H.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   I.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   J.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes.
   K.   Distribution, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   L.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   M.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against
any referendum question.
   N.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   O.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   A.   Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer; or 2) by an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   B.   Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer; or 2) with
an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   C.   Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer; or 2) by an employee,
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
   D.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. 2004-
09, 5-12-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
2 2. 5 ILCS 315/3.
3 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
4 2. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
1-8-2: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any "compensated time", as defined in this chapter.
No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the
village in connection with any prohibited political activity.
   B.   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as
part of that officer's or employee's duties; 2) as a condition of employment;
or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal
time off).
   C.   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   D.   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this chapter.
   E.   No person, either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment; or 2) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 2004-09, 5-12-
2004)
1-8-3: GIFT BAN:
   A.   Gifts Banned: Except as permitted by this section, no officer or
employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer
or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall
intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as
defined in this chapter, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance.
No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates
this subsection.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   Subsection A of this section is not applicable to the following:
         a.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public.
         b.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse
or immediate family member, pays the fair market value for.
         c.   Any: 1) contribution that is lawfully made under the election
code; or 2) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a
political organization or candidate.
         d.   Educational materials and missions.
         e.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
         f.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half- brother,
half-sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of
the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
         g.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: 1) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; 2)
whether, to the actual knowledge of the recipient, the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and 3) whether, to the actual knowledge of the
recipient, the individual who gave the gift also, at the same time, gave the
same or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or
immediate family members.
         h.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00)
per person in value on a single calendar day; provided, that the food or
refreshments are: 1) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared; or 2) catered. For the purposes of this subsection B1h, "catered"
means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are
delivered by any means.
         i.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
         j.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of
this chapter, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
         k.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
         l.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
      2.   Each of the exceptions listed in this subsection is mutually
exclusive and independent of every other.
   C.   Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an
immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate
this chapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift
from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to
its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under
section 501 (c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter
amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 2004-09, 5-12-2004)
1-8-4: PENALTIES:
   A.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-8-2 of this chapter may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three
hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined an amount not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   B.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-8-3 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount not less than one
thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).
   C.   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation
of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement authorities, the
state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a
term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a
period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined
an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   D.   A violation of section
1-8-2 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney
for the village by filing in the circuit court an information, or sworn
complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to
the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of
the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. (Ord. 2004-09, 5-12-2004)
   E.   A violation of section
1-8-3 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by the
legal counsel for the village. (Ord. 2004-09, 5-12-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
   F.   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of section
1-8-2 or
1-8-3 of this chapter is subject to discipline or discharge. (Ord. 2004-09, 5-
12-2004)
CHAPTER 9
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY; AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
SECTION:
1-9-1: Equal Employment
1-9-2: Sexual Harassment
1-9-3: Nondiscrimination
1-9-4: Compliance With Provisions
1-9-5: Administration Of Provisions
1-9-1: EQUAL EMPLOYMENT:
The village hereby declares to uphold all laws related to equal employment
opportunity including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Title VI of the civil rights act of 1964 which prohibits discrimination
in the participation in or benefits of programs or activities receiving federal
financial assistance on the basis of race, color, or national origin.
   B.   Title VII of the civil rights act of 1964 which prohibits
discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin in all
employment practices, including hiring, firing, promotions, compensation, and
other terms, privileges and conditions of employment.
   C.   Title IX of the education amendments of 1972 which prohibits
discrimination in federally assisted education programs.
   D.   The equal pay act of 1963 which covers all employees who are covered by
the fair labor standards act. The act forbids pay differentials on the basis of
sex.
   E.   The age discrimination act of 1967 which prohibits discrimination
because of age against anyone between the ages of forty (40) and sixty five
(65).
   F.   Federal executive order 11246 which requires every contract with
federal financial assistance to contain a clause against discrimination because
of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
   G.   Section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 and DOL implementing
regulations at 29 CFR 32 which prohibits any discrimination based on handicap.
   H.   Section 167 of JTPA and the U.S. DCL regulations at 29 CFR parts 31 and
32 which provides that no person in the United States shall be excluded from
participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination
on the basis of race, color, or national origin, under any program or activity
receiving federal financial assistance from the department of labor. (Ord.
2000-06, 5-3-2000)
   I.   Article I, sections 17, 18 and 19 of the Illinois constitution which
prohibits discrimination based on race, color, creed, national ancestry,
handicap, and sex in the hiring and promotion practices of any employer. (Ord.
2000-06, 5-3-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
   J.   Article 2 of the Illinois human rights act 1 .
   K.   Americans with disabilities act (42 USC 12101 et seq.) and the
regulations thereunder (28 CFR 35.130) (ADA), which prohibits discrimination
against persons with disabilities in the provision of any aid benefit or
service. (Ord. 2000-06, 5-3-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 775 ILCS 5/2, 1994 state bar edition.
1-9-2: SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   A.   Compliance With Laws: The village shall uphold all laws related to
sexual harassment.
   B.   Definition: "Sexual harassment" means any unwelcome sexual advances or
requests for sexual favors or any conduct of a sexual nature when:
      1.   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment;
      2.   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
      3.   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
   C.   Examples Of Sexual Harassment:
      1.   Sexual harassment may involve individuals of the same or different
gender. Sexual harassment is most frequently associated with those situations
in which a power differential exists between persons involved; however, it also
may occur between individuals of the same status. Examples of conduct which
may, if continued or repeated, constitute sexual harassment are:
         a.   Unnecessary touching, patting, hugging, or brushing against a
person's body.
         b.   Staring, ogling, leering, whistling.
         c.   Sexually explicit statements, comments, questions, jokes, or
anecdotes.
         d.   Graphic comments about a person's clothing or body.
         e.   Sexually suggestive objects or pictures in the workplace.
         f.   Harassing use of the electronic mail or telephone communication
system.
         g.   Other physical or verbal conduct of a sexual nature.
      2.   Such conduct, whether intended or not, constitutes sexual harassment
and is illegal under both state and federal law. Violations of this policy will
not be permitted.
   D.   Complaint Procedures:
      1.   Complaints Filed With Village:
         a.   The village encourages anyone who feels that he/she has been a
victim of sexual harassment to report such incidents to the village president
or a village board member. Complainants are urged to report sexual harassment
incidents as soon as possible, since a delay in reporting may make it difficult
to gather appropriate information and documentation. It is not necessary for
sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the complaint. The
following steps may also be taken: document or record each incident (what was
said or done, the date, the time and the place). Documentation can be
strengthened by written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone
messages.
         b.   Complaints will be kept in confidence to the extent practicable
and appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 2000-06, 5-3-2000)
         c.   The village president, with approval of the board, shall appoint
a committee of at least three (3) people, one of whom shall be the legal
counsel for the village. The role of the committee will be to hear and consider
testimony and other relevant reliable evidence, to make findings of fact, to
determine whether the village policy on sexual harassment has been violated,
and if so, to recommend appropriate relief and disciplinary action(s). A copy
of the written decision shall be promptly furnished to the employee making the
complaint. (Ord. 2000-06, 5-3-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
         d.   The employee will be able to have a representative present at any
discussion between the employee and the village board or committee.
      2.   Complaint Filed With State: The employee making the complaint may
elect to file a written complaint with the Illinois department of human rights
or the Illinois human rights commission. The alternative complaint avenues are
available if the employee would prefer to use them instead of the internal
procedures.
         Illinois department of human rights 312-814-6245
         Illinois human rights commission 217-785-4350
   E.   Protection From Retaliation: The employee is protected by the Illinois
human rights act 1  from retaliation because he or she has opposed that which
he or she reasonably and in good faith believes to be unlawful sexual
harassment in employment or because he or she has made a charge, filed a
complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an investigation under this
chapter. (Ord. 2000-06, 5-3-2000)
   F.   Penalties: Penalties shall be provided as allowed by law. (2013 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 775 ILCS 5/6-101, 1994 state bar edition.
1-9-3: NONDISCRIMINATION:
   A.   The village will assure nondiscriminatory employment practices in
recruitment, recruitment advertising, employment, placement, layoff or
termination, promotion, demotion or transfer, rate of pay or other forms of
compensation and use of facilities.
   B.   The village will not contract with other agencies, banks, businesses,
vendors, etc., who practice or establish a pattern of discrimination based on
sex, color, race, religion, age, developmentally disabled/handicap, national
origin, political affiliation or belief.
   C.   The village assures that it will actively provide nondiscriminatory
outreach, selection, and service to all individuals.
   D.   Efforts will be made to hire minority individuals for all categories so
that minority employment in all categories of the work force will represent a
proportionate share of minority populations in the village as well as
surrounding areas.
   E.   The village will provide accommodations to the best of its ability for
developmentally disabled/handicapped employees contingent on budget and
structural limitations. (Ord. 2000-06, 5-3-2000)
1-9-4: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
All village employees are expected to adhere to this policy and to work
actively for its implementation both internally and in carrying out village
program activities. (Ord. 2000-06, 5-3-2000)
1-9-5: ADMINISTRATION OF PROVISIONS:
The village president and board of trustees shall carry out the EEO/AA (equal
employment opportunity/affirmative action) plan. (Ord. 2000-06, 5-3-2000; amd.
2013 Code)
CHAPTER 10
SEXUAL HARASSMENT 1
SECTION:
1-10-1: Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-10-2: Definition Of Sexual Harassment
1-10-3: Procedure For Reporting An Allegation Of Sexual Harassment
1-10-4: Prohibition On Retaliation For Reporting Sexual Harassment Allegations
1-10-5: Consequences Of A Violation Of The Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-10-6: Consequences For Knowingly Making A False Report
 
Notes
  1. This policy was drafted using the Illinois Department of Human Rights
1 Sexual Harassment Model Policy and has been modified to conform to Public Act
  100-0554.
1-10-1: PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts have
determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under Title VII
of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a
right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment
is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual
orientations. It is a policy of the Village of North Utica to prohibit
harassment of any person by any municipal official, municipal agent, municipal
employee, municipal agency or municipal office on the basis of sex or gender.
All municipal officials, municipal agents, municipal employees and municipal
agencies or municipal offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any
person, regardless of any employment relationship or lack thereof. (Ord. 2018-
37, 12-12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-29, 11-12-2020)
1-10-2: DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   A.   This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in the
Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual harassment as:
   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct
of a sexual nature when:
      1.   Submission to such conduct is made a term or condition of an
individual's employment, either explicitly or implicitly; or
      2.   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
      3.   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
   B.   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes, but is not
limited to:
      1.   Verbal Harassment: sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults,
humor, jokes about: sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual
propositions, threats, repeated requests for dates; or, statements of a sexual
nature about other employees, even outside of their presence.
      2.   Non-verbal Harassment: suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling),
leering, obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls,"
"smacking" or "kissing" noises.
      3.   Visual: posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
      4.   Physical Harassment: touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing,
pinching, brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
      5.   Textual/Electronic Harassment: "sexting" (electronically sending
messages with sexual content, including pictures or video), the use of sexually
explicit language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of
electronic communication (email/text/picture/video messages, intranet/online
postings, blogs, instant messages and posts on social network websites, like
Facebook and Twitter).
      The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a "reasonable person." (Ord. 2018-37, 12-12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-
29, 11-12-2020)
1-10-3: PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes herself/himself
to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident(s) as
directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his position to
the offending employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not necessary
for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual harassment,
including the following:
   A.   Electronic/Direct Communication: If there is sexual harassment behavior
in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly express
her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the offending
behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent messages are
needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
   B.   Contact With Supervisory Personnel. At the same time direct
communication is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or
intimidated by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the
immediate supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a
director of human resources, an ethics officer, the city manager or
administrator or the chief elected official of the municipality.
   The employee experiencing what she/he believes to be sexual harassment must
not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there are no witnesses
and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other responsible officer, the
municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of the harassment.
   C.   Resolution Outside Municipality: The purpose of this policy is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
municipality. However, all municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within 300 days of the alleged
incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint with the EEOC must
also be filed within 300 days.
   D.   Allegations of Sexual Harassment Made Against an Elected Official of
the Governmental Unit by Another Elected Official of a Governmental Unit: In
addition to the methods of reporting included above, an elected official may
request an independent review of a complaint of sexual harassment by another
elected official. The request shall be made to the human resources director,
the city manager or administrator or the chief elected official of the
municipality. The official receiving the request shall take immediate action in
keeping with the procurement process of the municipality to retain a qualified
individual or entity for the independent review of the allegations of sexual
harassment in violation of this policy. The outcome of the independent review
shall be reported to the corporate authorities.
   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what was
said or done, the date, the time and the location), including, but not limited
to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and
investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome. (Ord. 2018-
37, 12-12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-29, 11-12-2020)
1-10-4: PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ALLEGATIONS:
   A.   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or
municipal office shall take any retaliatory action against any municipal
employee or official due to a municipal employee's or official's:
      1.   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this policy;
or
      2.   Providing information related to an investigation or testimony
before any public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any
violation of this policy; or
      3.   Assistance with or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
   B.   For purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the reprimand,
discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer or change in
the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal employee that is taken
in retaliation for a municipal employee's or official's involvement in
protected activity pursuant to this policy.
   C.   No individual making a report will be retaliated against, even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
   D.   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/15-10) provides
whistleblower protection from retaliatory action, and this policy prohibits
retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, or
denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in retaliation for an employee who
does any of the following:
      1.   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy or practice of any officer, member, agency or other
employee that the employee reasonably believes is in violation of a law, rule
or regulation; or
      2.   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule or regulation by any officer, member, agency or other employee; or
      3.   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act or this policy.
   E.   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (740 ILCS 174/15(a)), an employer may
not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a court, an
administrative hearing, before a legislative commission or committee or in any
other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the
information discloses a violation of a state or federal law, rule or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a state or federal law, rule or regulation. (740 ILCS 174/15(b)).
   F.   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-101), it is a
civil rights violation for a person, or for two or more people to conspire to
retaliate against a person because she/he has opposed that which she/he
reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment,
because she/he has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted or
participated in an investigation, proceeding or hearing under the Illinois
Human Rights Act.
   G.   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or passed
over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may file a
retaliation charge within three hundred (300) days of the alleged retaliation.
(Ord. 2018-37, 12-12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-29, 11-12-2020)
1-10-5: CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION OF THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreements, any person who violates this policy or the
Prohibition on Sexual Harassment contained in 5 ILCS 430/5-65, may be subject
to a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000) per offense, applicable
disciplinary actions or discharge by the municipality and any applicable fines
and penalties established pursuant to local ordinance, state law or federal
law. Each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any discipline imposed
by the municipality shall be separate and distinct from any penalty imposed by
an ethics commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a court of law or a
state or federal agency. (Ord. 2018-37, 12-12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-29, 11-12-
2020)
1-10-6: CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT:
A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser to
accomplish an outcome other than stopping sexual harassment or stopping
retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false report is not a report
made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the seriousness of the
consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is a severe offense
that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who intentionally
makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this policy shall
be subject to disciplinary action or discharge pursuant to applicable municipal
policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/or
collective bargaining agreements.
In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act to
an ethics commission, an inspector general, the Illinois State Police, a
State's Attorney, the Attorney General or any other law enforcement official is
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. An ethics commission may levy an
administrative fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000) against any person
who intentionally makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation. (Ord. 2018-
37, 12-12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-29, 11-12-2020)
TITLE 2
FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1
INVESTMENT POLICY
SECTION:
2-1-1: Village Policy
2-1-2: Scope
2-1-3: Prudent Investments
2-1-4: Delegation Of Authority To Invest
2-1-5: Objectives
2-1-6: Ethics And Conflicts Of Interest
2-1-7: Authorized Financial Dealers And Institutions
2-1-8: Authorized And Suitable Investments
2-1-9: Collateralization
2-1-10: Safekeeping And Custody
2-1-11: Diversification
2-1-12: Internal Control
2-1-13: Performance Standards
2-1-14: Reports Required
2-1-15: Annual Review Of Policy
2-1-1: VILLAGE POLICY:
It is the policy of the village to invest public funds in a manner which will
provide the highest investment return with the maximum security while meeting
the daily cash flow demands of the village and conforming to all state and
local statutes governing the investment of public funds. This investment policy
is hereby adopted. (Ord. 99-23, 12-8-1999)
2-1-2: SCOPE:
This policy includes all funds governed by the board of trustees and the
president. (Ord. 99-23, 12-8-1999)
2-1-3: PRUDENT INVESTMENTS:
Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then
prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in
the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment,
considering the probable safety of their capital, as well as the probable
income to be derived. The standard of prudence to be used by investment
officials shall be the "prudent person" standard and shall be applied in the
context of managing an overall portfolio. (Ord. 99-23, 12-8-1999)
2-1-4: DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY TO INVEST:
Management and administrative responsibility for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the treasurer who, under the delegation of the board of
trustees, shall establish written procedures for the operation of the
investment program. (Ord. 99-23, 12-8-1999)
2-1-5: OBJECTIVES:
   A.   The purpose of this investment policy is to establish cash management
and investment guidelines for the stewardship of public funds under the
jurisdiction of the treasurer. The specific objectives of this investment
policy are as follows:
      1.   Legality: Conformance with federal, state and other legal
requirements.
      2.   Safety: Preservation of capital and protection of investment
principal.
      3.   Liquidity: Maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet operating
requirements.
      4.   Yield: Attainment of market rates of return.
      5.   Public Confidence: The treasurer shall avoid any transaction that
might impair public confidence.
      6.   Community Involvement: The treasurer will give consideration to the
financial institution's positive community involvement when considering
financial institutions to be used as depositories.
      7.   Investment Timing:
         a.   All funds will be invested for a period of one day or longer,
depending on the requirement for the disbursement of funds.
         b.   All funds shall be deposited within two (2) working days at
prevailing rates or better in accordance with Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   B.   The portfolio should be reviewed periodically as to its effectiveness
in meeting the village needs for safety, liquidity, rate of return,
diversification and its general performance. (Ord. 99-23, 12-8-1999)
2-1-6: ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and
management of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to
make impartial decisions. (Ord. 99-23, 12-8-1999)
2-1-7: AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS:
   A.   The village board of trustees will have the responsibility to select
which financial institutions will be depositories for village funds.
   B.   The treasurer will take into consideration security, size, location,
condition, service, fees and the community relations involvement of the
financial institution when choosing a financial institution.
   C.   At no time will the village investments exceed sixty five percent (65%)
of the financial institution's capital and surplus.
   D.   All financial institutions having any type of financial relationships,
deposits, investments, loans, etc., are required to provide a complete and
current "Call Report" required by their appropriate regulatory authority each
calendar quarter within thirty (30) days of the "Call" request date. (Ord. 99-
23, 12-8-1999)
2-1-8: AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS:
   A.   Investments may be made in any type of security allowed for in Illinois
statutes regarding the investment of public funds.
   B.   Investments shall be made that reflect the cash flow needs of the fund
type being invested. (Ord. 99-23, 12-8-1999)
2-1-9: COLLATERALIZATION:
   A.   It shall be at the discretion of the treasurer to determine whether or
not collateral will be required of financial institutions receiving funds.
   B.   At all times, the treasurer will require that deposits in excess of ten
percent (10%) of the capital and surplus of a financial institution will be
collateralized. The treasurer may request collateral for any part of deposits
in financial institutions when the treasurer determines it to be in the best
interests of safeguarding the funds on deposit.
   C.   When collateral is required, one hundred five percent (105%) of the
deposit will be required. Only the following collateral will be accepted:
      1.   U.S. government direct securities;
      2.   Obligations of federal agencies, obligations of federal
instrumentalities;
      3.   Obligations of the state of Illinois;
      4.   Obligations of the village; and/or
      5.   Acceptable collateral as identified in Illinois Compiled Statutes
for use by the state treasurer. (Ord. 99-23, 12-8-1999)
2-1-10: SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY:
All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase agreements,
entered into by the village shall be conducted on a delivery versus payment
(DVP) basis. Securities will be held by an independent third party custodian
designated by the mayor and evidenced by safekeeping receipts and a written
custodial agreement. (Ord. 99-23, 12-8-1999)
2-1-11: DIVERSIFICATION:
The village shall diversify its investments to the best of its ability based on
the type of funds invested and the cash flow needs of those funds.
Diversification can be by type of investment, number of institutions invested
in, and length of maturity. (Ord. 99-23, 12-8-1999)
2-1-12: INTERNAL CONTROL:
The treasurer is responsible for establishing and maintaining an internal
control structure designed to ensure that the assets of the village are
protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control structure shall be
designed to provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met. The
internal controls shall address the following points:
   A.   Control of collusion;
   B.   Separation of transaction authority from accounting;
   C.   Custodial safekeeping; and
   D.   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments and wire
transfers. (Ord. 99-23, 12-8-1999)
2-1-13: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the parameters
specified within this policy. The portfolio should obtain a comparable rate of
return during a market/economic environment of stable interest rates. Portfolio
performance should be compared to benchmarks with similar maturity, liquidity
and credit quality as apply to the portfolio. (Ord. 99-23, 12-8-1999)
2-1-14: REPORTS REQUIRED:
   A.   All investment transactions shall be recorded by the treasurer or the
treasurer's staff. A report will be generated, at least monthly, listing all
active investments. This report will be made available to the village board of
trustees. An annual report should also be provided to the board.
   B.   A statement of the market value of the portfolio shall be issued to the
board of trustees quarterly. (Ord. 99-23, 12-8-1999)
2-1-15: ANNUAL REVIEW OF POLICY:
The policy shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the treasurer, and any
modifications made thereto must be approved by the board of trustees. (Ord. 99-
23, 12-8-1999)
CHAPTER 2
INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRIES FOR TAX INCREMENT FINANCING
SECTION:
2-2-1: Authority To Create Registries
2-2-2: Registration Rules Adopted
2-2-1: AUTHORITY TO CREATE REGISTRIES:
The village clerk is hereby authorized and directed to create an "interested
parties registry" in accordance with section 11-74.4-4.2 of the TIF (tax
increment financing) act for each redevelopment project area created under the
TIF act, whether now existing or created after the effective date hereof. (Ord.
2003-01, 1-8-2003; amd. 2013 Code)
2-2-2: REGISTRATION RULES ADOPTED:
In accordance with section 11-74.4-4.2 of the act, the village hereby adopts
the "Registration Rules" attached to the ordinance codified herein as exhibit A
as registration rules for each such interested parties registry. The village
clerk shall have the authority to amend such registration rules from time to
time as may be necessary or desirable to comply with and carry out the purposes
intended by the TIF act. (Ord. 2003-01, 1-8-2003)
CHAPTER 3
FEES
SECTION:
2-3-1: Permits, Special Uses, Variances, Rezoning
2-3-2: Development Fees
2-3-3: Transition Fee For New Developments
2-3-1: PERMITS, SPECIAL USES, VARIANCES, REZONING:
   A.   Fees Established: In order to partially defray the expenses incurred by
the village, the following fees shall be charged to applicants: (Ord. 2004-27,
9-22-2004)
      1.   Building permit: Three dollars ($3.00) per one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) of construction cost; thirty dollars ($30.00) minimum fee.
      2.   Fence permit: Thirty dollars ($30.00) for residential and thirty
dollars ($30.00) for commercial and industrial. (Ord. 2010-10, 4-14-2010, eff.
4-14-2010)
      3.   Home occupation permit: Thirty dollars ($30.00). (Ord. 2010-10, 4-
14-2010, eff. 4-14-2010; amd. 2013 Code)
      4.   PUD permit: Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
      5.   Rezoning or amendment: Five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      6.   Sign permit: Thirty dollars ($30.00).
      7.   Special use permit: Five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      8.   Variance: Five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      9.   Zoning appeal: Five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      10.   Floodplain permits: Fifty dollars ($50.00) for construction of a
dwelling and for any other development requiring three (3) site inspections by
the zoning enforcement officer; twenty five dollars ($25.00) for all other
development projects.
      11.   Swimming pool permit: Thirty dollars ($30.00).
      12.   Occupancy permit: Thirty dollars ($30.00).
      13.   Demolition permit: Thirty dollars ($30.00).
   B.   Waiver Of Permit Fees: The zoning enforcement officer has the authority
and discretion to waive any permit fee for another governmental body or for a
nonprofit applicant.
   C.   Additional Fees: In addition to the fees imposed by Section A, at 5, 6,
8, and 9, if the actual publication cost incurred by the Village exceeds
$500.00, then the applicant shall be responsible to pay the additional cost for
publishing to the Village within ten (10) days of the date of notice, either by
U.S. Mail or email, by the Village of the additional cost owed.
(Ord. 2010-10, 4-14-2010, eff. 4-14-2010; amd. 2013 Code; Ord. 2024-38, 10-17-
2024)
2-3-2: DEVELOPMENT FEES:
   A.   Fees Established: The owners of all property located within, or
subsequently annexed to, the village, who wish to develop said property, shall
pay a fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per acre to the
village before any building permit is issued by the village for new
construction. Also, before water service, sewer service, stormwater sewer
service or electrical service is furnished, whichever shall first occur, the
developer shall pay the water and sewer hookup fees set out in subsection 8-1-
8A of this code for each hookup. Each structure intended to have water or sewer
service shall have a separate hookup. (Ord. 98-14, 12-8-1998; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Disposition Of Fees: All fees shall be paid into the water and sewer
fund.
   C.   Fees Are Additional: The fees provided by this section shall be in
addition to all other fees for connection to municipal services. (Ord. 98-14,
12-8-1998)
2-3-3: TRANSITION FEE FOR NEW DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Fee Required; Exemption: A transition fee is imposed in connection with
the issuance of each and every building permit for the construction of
residential structures (excluding residential structures which are subject to a
deed restriction prohibiting occupants under 55 years of age and those
residential structures which are part of a hotel/resort/conference center and
are utilized by the owner as a second home, vacation home; and/or rented
through the hotel/resort/conference center which are not occupied as permanent
residences; provided, that if an excluded structure is occupied as a permanent
residence, the occupant shall pay the then applicable transition fee) within
the village, which said fee shall provide for the current level and quality of
educational services benefiting the village provided by the applicable school
districts. Payment of said fee shall be incorporated into any preannexation
agreement, annexation agreement and/or development agreement. The village shall
require all builders to enter into a voluntary builders'/owners' transition fee
agreement with the applicable school districts, in a form approved by the
school districts, which shall require the payment of the transition fee prior
to the issuance of a building permit. A transition fee shall not be required
for any property already annexed into the village, unless such property is
rezoned to a residential classification from a nonresidential classification.
   B.   Fee Amount:
      1.   The following schedule shall apply for all residential dwelling
units for which permits are issued pursuant to subsection A of this section:
 
Calendar Year Of Issuance Transition Fee Amount
2006                      $3,250.00
 
      2.   In 2007 and every year thereafter through 2011, the fee shall be
increased by the previous year's consumer price index for all urban consumers
("CPIU") published by the United States department of labor. In the year 2012,
the transition fee established by this section shall be reevaluated to
determine the appropriate level that should then be required for payment of the
fee.
   C.   Payment And Distribution Of Fee: The transition fee required by this
section shall be payable at the time each building permit is issued by the
village for each residential unit. The transition fee shall be paid by separate
check made payable directly to the applicable school district and shall note
the residential unit or units for which the fee is paid. No building permit
shall be issued by the village unless and until said payment of the transition
fee is delivered to the applicable school districts. Waltham Community
Consolidated Elementary school district 185 shall receive two-thirds (2/3) of
the transition fee, and LaSalle Peru High school district 120 shall receive
one-third (1/3) of the transition fee, where both districts serve the same
residential unit for which the transition fee is required to be paid.
   D.   Use Of Funds: The transition fee funds required by this section shall
be allocated to and used by each school district at its discretion for the
following funds: building fund, education fund, operation and maintenance fund,
or transportation fund.
   E.   Real Estate Affected: Any residential dwelling unit hereafter
constructed on real estate platted after the effective date hereof, whether
single-family, duplex or multi-family, shall require the payment of the
transition fee set forth herein, subject to the requirements of subsection A of
this section. In the case of a duplex or multi-family structure, one fee shall
be imposed on each such structure if all within such structure are one bedroom
only. With regard to all other duplex or multi-family structures, the fee
imposed by this section shall be payable for each unit with more than one
bedroom contained in the structure prior to the issuance of any building permit
for the construction of any part of a duplex or any part of any multi-family
structure. (Ord. 2007-15, 5-9-2007)
CHAPTER 4
HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
2-4-1: Taxes Imposed; Rates
2-4-2: Exemptions From Taxes
2-4-3: Collection And Enforcement By State
2-4-4: Effective Date Of Taxes
2-4-5: Reserved
2-4-6: Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
2-4-1: TAXES IMPOSED; RATES:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property
titled or registered with an agency of this state's government, at retail in
the village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such
sales made in the course of such business; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all
persons engaged in the village in the business of making sales of service at
the rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of all tangible personal
property transferred by such servicemen either in the form of tangible personal
property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service.
(2013 Code)
2-4-2: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAXES:
Such home rule municipal retailers' and service occupation taxes shall not be
applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed
off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks,
and food which has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription
and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine
testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. (2013 Code)
2-4-3: COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT BY STATE:
The taxes hereby imposed and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident of the taxes shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois state
department of revenue. (2013 Code)
2-4-4: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAXES:
The taxes established in this article will take effect                   .
(2013 Code)
2-4-5: RESERVED:
2-4-6: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed; Rate:
      1.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the village at the rate of
three percent (3%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of
that business.
      2.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
section 8-11-22, of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-22).
   B.   Collection Of Tax By Retailers:
      1.   The tax imposed by this section shall be remitted by such retailer
to the Illinois Department of Revenue (“Department”). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this section and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller’s tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
      2.   The taxes are hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department. The Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-26, 9-26-2019)
CHAPTER 5
SIMPLIFIED TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
2-5-1: Tax Rate
2-5-2: Effective Date Of Tax
2-5-1: TAX RATE:
The rate of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed under the
provisions of sections 5-25 and 5-30 of the simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act, P.A. 92-0526, is five percent (5%). (Ord. 2002-17,
9-11-2002)
2-5-2: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX:
The tax imposed under section
2-5-1 of this chapter shall take effect for all gross charges billed by
telecommunications retailers on and after January 1, 2003. (Ord. 2002-17, 9-11-
2002)
CHAPTER 6
UTILITIES TAXES
SECTION:
2-6-1: Definitions
2-6-2: Taxes Imposed; Effective Dates
2-6-3: Exemptions From Taxes
2-6-4: Taxes Are Additional
2-6-5: Collection Of Electricity Tax
2-6-6: Return By Taxpayer
2-6-7: Credit For Overpayment
2-6-8: Violation; Penalties
2-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter and the imposing of utilities taxes, the
following definitions or meanings shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: A. The consideration received for the distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling of gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as the
case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services
and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used,
labor or service cost, or for any other expenses whatsoever.
   B.   The gross receipts from the business shall be deemed to originate
within the limits of the village if the address to which the bill for the
service is sent is within those village limits. Gross receipts from the
business shall also be deemed to originate within the limits of the village,
even if the address to which the bills for the service is sent is outside those
limits, if:
      1.   The billing address is not located within a municipality that
imposes a tax under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2; and if the party
responsible for the bill is not an individual, that party's principal place of
business in Illinois is located within the limits of the village; or
      2.   If the party responsible for the bill is an individual, that party's
principal residence in Illinois is located within the limits of the village.
   C.   Gross receipts shall not include that portion of the consideration
received for distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas to business
enterprises described in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2, paragraph (e),
to the extent and during the period in which the exemption authorized by said
paragraph (e) is in effect or for school districts or units of local government
described in paragraph (f) during the period in which the exemption authorized
in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2, paragraph (f), is in effect.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver,
trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.
(Ord. 95-14, 8-2-1995; amd. 2013 Code)
2-6-2: TAXES IMPOSED; EFFECTIVE DATES:
   A.   Gas Tax:
      1.   A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption
within the limits of the village, and not for resale, at the rate of five
percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom. (Ord. 96-19, 5-1-1996; amd. Ord.
98-06, 7-1-1998; Ord. 2002-17, 9-11-2002; 2013 Code)
      2.   Persons or organizations believed, at this time, to be subject to
this chapter shall include, but are not limited to, Illinois Power.
      3.   The tax imposed in this subsection shall be based on the "gross
receipts", as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed
on or after April 3, 1996. (Ord. 96-19, 5-1-1996)
   B.   Electricity Tax:
      1.   A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the privilege of using
or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed
within the corporate limits of the village at the following rates, calculated
on a monthly basis for each partner: (Ord. 98-06, 7-1-1998)
Number Of Kilowatt Hours Used Or Consumed Per Month Cents Per Kilowatt Hour
Number Of Kilowatt Hours Used Or Consumed Per Month Cents Per Kilowatt Hour
First 2,000                                         $0.61
Next  48,000                                        0.40
Next  50,000                                        0.36
Next  400,000                                       0.35
Next  500,000                                       0.34
Next  2,000,000                                     0.32
Next  2,000,000                                     0.315
Next  5,000,000                                     0.31
Next  10,000,000                                    0.305
Electricity in excess of 20,000,000                 0.30
 
(Ord. 98-06, 7-1-1998; amd. 2013 Code)
      2.   The tax rates set forth in subsection B1 of this section are
proportional and will be used at least through December 31, 2008, and do not
exceed the revenue that could have been collected during 1997 using the rates
enumerated in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2 (as modified by public act
90-561).
      3.   Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2, the rates set
forth in subsection B1 of this section shall be effective: a) on August 1,
1998, for residential customers; and b) on the earlier of: 1) the last bill
issued prior to December 31, 2000; or 2) the date of the first bill issued
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-104, for nonresidential
customers.
      4.   The provisions of this subsection shall not be effective until
August 1, 1998. (Ord. 98-06, 7-1-1998)
2-6-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAXES:
None of the taxes authorized by this chapter may be imposed with respect to any
transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the
business or privilege may not, under the constitution and statutes of the
United States, be made the subject of taxation by the state of Illinois or any
political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting gas or
electricity, or using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at
retail, be subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter for those
transactions that are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of
the "municipal retailers' occupation tax act" authorized by section 8-11-1 of
the Illinois municipal code; nor shall any tax authorized by this chapter be
imposed upon any person engaged in a business or on any privilege unless the
tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon all persons engaged in
businesses of the same class in the village, whether privately or municipally
owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege within the village. (Ord.
98-06, 7-1-1998; amd. Ord. 2002-17, 9-11-2002; 2013 Code)
2-6-4: TAXES ARE ADDITIONAL:
The taxes established in this chapter shall be in addition to other taxes
levied upon the taxpayer or its business. (Ord. 98-06, 7-1-1998)
2-6-5: COLLECTION OF ELECTRICITY TAX:
   A.   The electricity tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from
the purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in the state who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of
the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser, and
if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for
delivering the electricity. Any electricity tax required to be collected
pursuant to this chapter and any such tax collected by a person delivering
electricity shall constitute a debt owed to the village by such person
delivering the electricity; provided, that the person delivering electricity
shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the
charges for which are written off as uncollectible; and provided further, that
if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be
obligated to remit such tax. For purposes of this section, any partial payment
not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the
delivery of electricity. (Ord. 98-06, 7-1-1998; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser
by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an
amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax to reimburse the person
delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data
to the village upon request.
   C.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
village in the manner prescribed by the village.
   D.   Persons delivering electricity who file returns pursuant to this
section shall, at the time of filing such return, pay the village the amount of
the tax collected pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 98-06, 7-1-1998)
2-6-6: RETURN BY TAXPAYER:
   A.   On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall make a
return to the village for the preceding month stating:
      1.   His name.
      2.   His principal place of business.
      3.   His gross receipts and/or kilowatt hour usage during the month upon
the basis of which the tax is imposed.
      4.   Amount of tax. (Ord. 98-06, 7-1-1998)
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the board of
trustees may require. (Ord. 98-06, 7-1-1998; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making such return, pay to the village the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided, that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of
any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based
upon any differences between such billings, and the taxable gross receipts.
(Ord. 98-06, 7-1-1998)
2-6-7: CREDIT FOR OVERPAYMENT:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under
the provisions of this chapter, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an
error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this chapter from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years
prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. No action to
recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter shall be
commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount. (Ord.
98-06, 7-1-1998)
2-6-8: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or
who wilfully violates any other provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and in
addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due 1 . (Ord.
98-06, 7-1-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
CHAPTER 7
TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION:
2-7-1: Short Title
2-7-2: Scope; Application Of Provisions
2-7-3: Definitions
2-7-4: Notice Requirements
2-7-5: Delinquent Notices, Payments, Remittances Or Other Filings
2-7-6: Application Of Tax Payments
2-7-7: Certain Credits And Refunds
2-7-8: Audit Procedure
2-7-9: Appeals
2-7-10: Payment Required; Interest And Penalties
2-7-11: Installment Contracts
2-7-12: Statute Of Limitations
2-7-13: Voluntary Disclosure
2-7-14: Publication Of Tax Ordinances; Copies
2-7-15: Review Of Liens
2-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-17-2001)
2-7-2: SCOPE; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village
procedures in connection with all of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   B.   Application Of Provisions; Conflicting Provisions: This chapter shall
be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the village tax
ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or
inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. 2001-
01, 1-17-2001)
2-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to
them as follows:
ACT: The local government taxpayers' bill of rights act.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village president and board of trustees.
HEARING OFFICER: An administrative individual appointed by the village
president, with the advice and consent of the village board, to conduct
hearings and to issue final determinations regarding the collection of locally
imposed and administered taxes.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village clerk is charged with the administration
and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff,
employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax
administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The local tax
administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter
to give full effect hereto. The exercise of such authority by the local tax
administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village and not an agency or
department of the state. The term does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under the property tax code or fees collected by the village other
than infrastructure maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and, with respect to consumer taxes, includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
VILLAGE: The village of North Utica, LaSalle County, state of Illinois. (Ord.
2001-01, 1-17-2001)
2-7-4: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local
tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
   A.   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the person
concerned at the person's last known address; or
   B.   Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-17-2001)
2-7-5: DELINQUENT NOTICES, PAYMENTS, REMITTANCES OR OTHER FILINGS:
Any notice, payment remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date; or b) received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate
postage prepaid. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-17-2001)
2-7-6: APPLICATION OF TAX PAYMENTS:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: first, to the tax due for the applicable period; second, to
the interest due for the applicable period; and third, to the penalty for the
applicable period. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-17-2001)
2-7-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   A.   Written Protest Required: The village shall not refund or credit any
taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the
event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment
or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
   B.   Statute Of Limitations: The statute of limitations on a claim for
credit or refund shall be four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in
which payment in error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund
of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person
who has not paid the amounts directly to the village.
   C.   Procedure: The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as
follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator, in
writing, a claim for credit or refund, together with a statement specifying:
         a.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         b.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         c.   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled
check or receipt for the payment;
         d.   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with claim; and
         e.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator
of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         a.   Grant the claim; or
         b.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as
to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum, based on
a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or
the grant of a credit. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-17-2001)
2-7-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this section.
   A.   Information Required: Each notice of audit shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   B.   Time For Conducting Audit:
      1.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours, and if
the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to
the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within
thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
      2.   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the local tax administrator agree to some other convenient time. In the
event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question,
the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   C.   Taxpayer's Books And Records:
      1.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given
rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in
the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by
the village.
      2.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer
or tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the
time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   D.   Overpayments: If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a
locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30)
days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   E.   Payment To Improper Entity: In the event a tax payment was submitted to
the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall
notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-17-
2001)
2-7-9: APPEALS:
   A.   Contents Of Notice Regarding Taxes Due: The local tax administrator
shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's
issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a
notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the
following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   B.   Request For Hearing: A taxpayer who receives written notice from the
local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file
with the local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing,
setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator
within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.
   C.   Hearing Scheduled; Notice: If a timely written notice and petition for
hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for
hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be
scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written
protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date
convenient to all parties.
   D.   Time Limit For Filing Hearing Request: If a written protest and
petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the
tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing
without further notice.
   E.   Reopening, Extension Of Hearing Request: Upon the showing of reasonable
cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along
with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax
administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and
petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest
and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days
after the expiration of the forty five (45) day period.
   F.   Conduct Of Hearing; Decision:
      1.   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under this section, the local tax
administrator or hearing officer (if 1 is appointed) shall conduct a hearing
regarding any appeal.
      2.   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed fourteen (14) days, unless agreed to by the local tax
administrator.
      3.   At the hearing, the local tax administrator or hearing officer shall
preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to
judicial proceedings shall not apply.
      4.   Within seven (7) calendar days of the conclusion of the hearing, the
local tax administrator or hearing officer shall make a written determination
on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax
collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. (Ord. 2001-01,
1-17-2001)
2-7-10: PAYMENT REQUIRED; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Time For Payment: In the event a determination has been made that a tax
is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be
paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
   B.   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be five
percent (5%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days
and the number of days elapsed.
   C.   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village
issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure
to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the
total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was
required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a
failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
   D.   Abatement Of Penalties: The local tax administrator shall have the
authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or
failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine
reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. 2001-01,
1-17-2001)
2-7-11: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) calendar days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-17-2001)
2-7-12: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
   A.   The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice
of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   B.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-17-
2001)
   C.   If any tax return is not filed or if, during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due,
the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years after the end of the calendar
year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar
year in which the return for the applicable period was filed, whichever occurs
later.
   D.   No statute of limitation shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-17-2001; amd. 2013 Code)
2-7-13: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. Except for the amount of tax and interest due
under this section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application
may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period
before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly
determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the
underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which
case, the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and
interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-17-
2001; amd. 2013 Code)
2-7-14: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES; COPIES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public, upon request, at the village
clerk's office. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-17-2001)
2-7-15: REVIEW OF LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   A.   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
   B.   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   C.   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord.
2001-01, 1-17-2001)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definition
3-1-2: License Required; Scope
3-1-3: License Is Additional
3-1-4: Ineligibility For License
3-1-5: Application For License And Renewal; Contents Of License
3-1-6: License Fee
3-1-7: Inspection Or Investigation Of Applicant
3-1-8: Approval Or Disapproval Of License
3-1-9: Term Of License; Renewals
3-1-10: Nontransferability Of License; Unlawful Use
3-1-11: Separate License For Each Location; Change Of Location
3-1-12: Display Of License; Conditions Of Removal
3-1-13: Record Of Licenses
3-1-14: Nuisances Prohibited
3-1-15: Work Conditions
3-1-16: Additional Regulations For Public Businesses
3-1-17: Inspection Of Premises
3-1-18: Suspension Or Revocation Of License; Appeal
3-1-19: Exemptions From Provisions
3-1-20: Violation; Penalty
3-1-21: Outdoor Dining
3-1-1: DEFINITION:
The term "commercial establishment" is defined, for the purpose of this
chapter, as a place where commodities are exchanged, bought or sold or where
services are provided. (2013 Code)
3-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; SCOPE:
   A.   License Required: No person shall conduct, engage in, maintain,
operate, carry on or manage any business, occupation, activity or
establishment, either by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, for
which a license is required by this chapter, without first having obtained a
license for such business, occupation, activity or establishment.
   B.   Scope:
      1.   Home occupations are expressly governed by this chapter as well as
all requirements of the zoning ordinance of the village.
      2.   Peddlers, hawkers, itinerant vendors and transient merchants are
subject to compliance with the village peddlers and solicitors ordinance. (Ord.
2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
3-1-3: LICENSE IS ADDITIONAL:
The license required in this chapter shall be in addition to any vehicle
license, liquor license, building permit, inspection fees or any other fees or
charges that may be required by other village ordinances, whether now existing
or hereafter adopted. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
3-1-4: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No license for the operation of a commercial establishment in the village shall
be issued if one or more of the following conditions are determined to exist:
   A.   The building or premises of the commercial establishment does not
comply with the provisions and terms of the village zoning ordinance,
subdivision ordinance, fire regulations, health regulations, or other
applicable ordinances and regulations of the village.
   B.   The building or premises of the commercial establishment is in a
condition of being unsanitary or unsafe so as to endanger the public safety,
health or welfare.
   C.   The owner of the commercial establishment or such legal entity
comprising the commercial establishment is indebted to the village. (Ord. 2007-
03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
3-1-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE AND RENEWAL; CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Applications for all licenses required hereunder shall be made to the
village clerk in writing on a form provided for that purpose, except as
otherwise provided herein. The form to be utilized is attached to the ordinance
codified herein as exhibit A. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007; amd.
2013 Code)
   B.   If the applicant is an individual (sole proprietorship), the
application shall contain the applicant's name, residence address and
residential telephone number. If the applicant is a partnership or other
noncorporate business entity, the application shall contain the name and
residential address and residential telephone number of each partner, principal
or member thereof. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall
contain the name, residential address and residential telephone number of each
principal officer and the registered agent thereof. If the applicant is an
unincorporated association, the application shall contain the name, residential
address and residential telephone number of the spokesperson, chair, or other
leader of the association.
   C.   Each application also shall contain:
      1.   A designation of the type or kind of business to be operated;
      2.   The location or proposed location of the place of business,
occupation or activity;
      3.   The applicable fee to be paid;
      4.   The number of the certificate of registration required under the
retailers' occupation tax act (sales tax), service occupation tax act, and/or
use tax act, if applicable;
      5.   The employer identification number for the applicant; and
      6.   Such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance
of village officials in the evaluation of such application, including proof of
any insurance policy or bond required by this chapter.
   D.   All persons desiring to operate a licensable commercial activity or
establishment as listed in this chapter shall file with the village clerk an
application for a license to operate the commercial activity in the village no
later than thirty (30) days prior to the time such person desires to commence
operation in the village. Thereafter, prior to a person's continued operation
of such a licensable commercial activity or establishment in a subsequent
license year, said person shall file a renewal application not later than
December 1 prior to each subsequent license year. In the event such person
fails to file said renewal application by December 31 of the year, a late fee
of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall also be charged and be payable at the time of
application. However, if application is made after January 31, the late fee
shall be sixty dollars ($60.00) and shall be charged and be payable at the time
of application. Delinquency may also result in suspension and/or revocation of
the right to conduct commercial activities within the village.
   E.   Each license issued by the village shall, in the absence of any
provision to the contrary, bear the signature of the village clerk or his
designee for purposes of this chapter. Each license issued shall be dated and
shall state to whom it is issued, for what purpose, the location, if any, at
which such business is to be conducted and the date when the license is to
expire. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
3-1-6: LICENSE FEE:
   A.   Established: The annual one year license fee shall be fifteen dollars
($15.00). (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Collection Of Fee; Refunds: The required fee for each license issued
shall be collected in full at the time of application for a license or at the
time of renewal thereof. In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any
license fee, or part thereof, by reason of the death of the licensee or by any
reason of nonuse of the license or discontinuance of the operation of the
commercial establishment.
   C.   Proration Of Fee: When any license is issued on or between the dates of
January 1 and June 30 of any year, the license fee shall be the amount as
determined by subsection A of this section. When any license is issued on or
between the dates of July 1 and December 31 of any year, the license fee to be
paid shall be seven dollars fifty cents ($7.50). Except as otherwise provided,
all license fees shall become a part of the general corporate fund. (Ord. 2007-
03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
3-1-7: INSPECTION OR INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Subsequent to receipt of an application for a license where ordinances of the
village necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such
license, the village clerk shall refer such application to the proper officer
or employee for making such investigation. The officer or employee charged with
the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon
to the village clerk, favorable or otherwise. All investigations, except where
otherwise provided, shall be made by the chief of police or by some other
officer or employee designated by the village. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff.
6-1-2007; amd. 2013 Code)
3-1-8: APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Approval: If, after due consideration of the information contained in
the application, the village president shall determine the application is
satisfactory, he/she shall approve the application. Thereupon, the village
shall notify the applicant and issue a license as provided herein. (Ord. 2007-
03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
   B.   Disapproval: If, after due consideration of the information contained
within the application, the village president shall determine that matters
concerning the application are unsatisfactory, he/she shall disapprove the
application, indicating the reasons therefor. Thereupon, the village clerk
shall notify the applicant that the application has not been approved and that
no license will be issued. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007; amd. 2013
Code)
3-1-9: TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWALS:
   A.   Term Of License: The license year for the village shall commence on
January 1 and terminate on December 31 in each year, where no provision to the
contrary is made. All licenses, whenever issued, shall terminate on December 31
in each year.
   B.   Notice Of Expiration: The village clerk shall endeavor to notify each
annual licensee of the expiration date of the license held by the licensee at
least sixty (60) days prior to such expiration date; provided, however, that a
failure to make such notification or the licensee's failure to receive it shall
not exclude the licensee from the obligation to obtain a new license or a
renewal.
   C.   Renewal: Except as otherwise provided herein, the license may be
renewed upon proper application and payment of the required fee. The
requirements and procedures for granting and issuing a license renewal shall be
the same as the requirements and procedures for granting a new license. (Ord.
2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
3-1-10: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE; UNLAWFUL USE:
   A.   Nontransferability: No license may be assigned, sold, loaned,
transferred, used as collateral or otherwise encumbered. No person shall use or
display any license certificate, tag, badge or sticker which has been
improperly acquired. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Unlawful Use: No person shall alter, deface, forge, or counterfeit any
license, certificate, plate, tag, badge or sticker issued by the village. (Ord.
2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
3-1-11: SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH LOCATION; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
   A.   Separate License For Each Location: No license for the operation of a
business, establishment or activity in the village shall be construed to permit
its operation in more than one location in the village. A separate license
shall be required for each location. For the purpose of this chapter, the
existence of a single location shall be evidenced by the fact that all
buildings containing the principal or accessory uses: (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007,
eff. 6-1-2007; amd. 2013 Code)
      1.   Shall be connected or shall be located on the same lot or parcel;
      2.   Shall be operated and managed by the same person or owner; and
      3.   Shall be an establishment with the same classification.
   B.   Change Of Location: The location of any licensed commercial
establishment, or of any permitted act, may be changed provided:
      1.   Ten (10) days' written notice thereof is given to the village clerk;
      2.   There is compliance with the village building code, zoning
ordinances, including the sign ordinance, and other applicable ordinances; and
      3.   The license fee required is paid. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-
1-2007)
3-1-12: DISPLAY OF LICENSE; CONDITIONS OF REMOVAL:
   A.   Display Required:
      1.   Subject to the terms and provisions of this chapter, upon payment in
full of the required license fee to the village, the village shall issue a
license tag or sticker or certificate or similar evidence of license which
shall be displayed by the owner of the commercial establishment in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises within ten (10) days after receipt
of said license.
      2.   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in
the village to keep his license displayed at all times in a prominent place on
the premises, machine or vehicle used for such business.
   B.   Conditions Of Removal: No person shall destroy, obliterate, take,
remove or carry away, without the consent of the owner, any license,
certificate, plate or sticker which has been issued by the village except when
such license, certificate, plate or sticker has been discontinued or the
licensed premises has been abandoned. Nothing herein shall prevent the village
president or his duly authorized representative from removing any license,
certificate, plate or sticker from the possession of a former licensee, his
premises, any vehicle or any machine when said license has been revoked under
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
3-1-13: RECORD OF LICENSES:
The village clerk shall maintain a record of all commercial establishments and
commercial licenses issued under this chapter. These records shall be used for
the purpose of classifying and licensing all commercial establishments in the
village. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
3-1-14: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Generally: Generally, no business or establishment, whether or not
licensed, shall be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in
fact; and no building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises, or part thereof
shall be used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any business or
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance, or so as to be dangerous to life
or detrimental to health. Any charge of conducting or operating a nuisance may
be made under this chapter or under the provisions of the village ordinance
prohibiting nuisances generally.
   B.   Unsafe Or Unhealthful Businesses:
      1.   No building or structure utilized, constructed, or maintained in
connection with any business or occupation shall evidence an unsanitary, unsafe
or dangerous condition.
      2.   No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatever which shall be
dangerous or detrimental to health shall be allowed to exist in connection with
any business or occupation, or be used in any work or labor performed in the
village. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
3-1-15: WORK CONDITIONS:
   A.   Healthy Conditions Generally: No owner, lessee, manager or
superintendent of any store, factory, workshop, or other place shall allow or
cause any room or part thereof to be overcrowded or inadequate or faulty in
respect to light, ventilation, heat or cleanliness.
   B.   Sanitation: All such places of employment shall be kept in a clean
condition, free from the odor of a sewer, drain, privy, stable, or other
nuisance; also, so far as practicable, such premises shall be free from all
gases, vapors, dust or otherwise which are injurious to health. Sufficient
washroom facilities for all employees shall be provided, and such facilities
shall be properly ventilated.
   C.   Heat Requirements: It shall be the duty of every person owning or
controlling the heating plant which furnishes heat to any factory, workshop,
retail business, or other commercial establishment, to maintain a temperature
when workers are present within such factory or workshop of not less than sixty
five degrees Fahrenheit (65°F) without such undue restriction of ventilation so
as to interfere with proper sanitary conditions therein; provided, however,
that this requirement shall not apply to any factory or workshop where the
business conducted therein is of such a nature that a lower temperature than
sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65°F) is necessary or expedient for work or the
manufacturing process of such business.
   D.   Inspections: The appropriate village officials shall visit or cause to
be visited all such places of employment in the village as often as they shall
deem necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this section, in
addition to times as may be elsewhere provided, and to have such arrangements
made as may be deemed necessary for the health and safety of the employees.
(Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
3-1-16: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR PUBLIC BUSINESSES:
All businesses or commercial establishments licensed under this chapter which
invite the public generally into their establishments for the purpose of
conducting business, commercial activity, or any other activity licensed under
this chapter shall be subject to the following regulations in addition to all
other applicable provisions of the village ordinances:
   A.   All areas within the licensed premises where the public may enter shall
be kept in a safe and sanitary condition.
   B.   All business or commercial establishments subject to this section shall
refrain from all deceptive trade practices as defined by village ordinance or
state or federal law or regulation and shall comply with all applicable laws
and regulations regarding consumer protection and deceptive trade practices. In
the event of any such violation, the business license of the establishment may
be revoked pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises open to the public or
engaging in the transportation, processing, preparation or packaging of food or
beverages, any person who the employer knows or should have known, based upon
reasonable observation, was afflicted with or who is a carrier of any
contagious or infectious disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who
knows or should have known that he was afflicted with or a carrier of any such
disease to work in or about any such premises. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff.
6-1-2007)
3-1-17: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the village president to determine whether or
not all licensees are in compliance with all applicable ordinances and
regulatory requirements during the period of the license. Whenever inspections
of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed
business or occupation are provided for or required by this chapter or any
ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions
of any ordinance or regulation of the village, or to detect violations thereof,
it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to
admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee
of the village who is duly authorized by the village president to make such
inspection at any reasonable time that such admission or entry is requested.
   B.   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the village
president may revoke, under the provisions of this chapter, the license of any
owner or operator of a licensed business in the village who refuses to permit
any duly authorized officer or employee to make such inspection or to take an
adequate sample of said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or
employee while in the performance of his duties. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff.
6-1-2007)
3-1-18: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; APPEAL:
   A.   Summary Suspension:
      1.   When the conduct or operation of any business, occupation, activity
or establishment, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall constitute a nuisance
in fact and a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general
welfare, or where the holder of any license shall have refused to allow an
inspection of his premises or has refused to furnish a sample of his goods for
testing, the village president shall be authorized to summarily order the
cessation of business and the closing of the premises until the danger no
longer exists. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
      2.   Within fourteen (14) days after a license is suspended pursuant to
subsection A1 of this section, the village president shall call a hearing in
accord with subsection C of this section for the purpose of determining whether
or not the license should be revoked. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007;
amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation:
      1.   Unless otherwise provided, any license issued under this chapter may
be suspended or revoked by the village president after notice and hearing as
provided in subsection C of this section for any of the following causes:
         a.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
         b.   Any violation by the licensee of this chapter or other village
codes or ordinances relating to the license, the subject matter of the license,
or the premises occupied.
         c.   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor
where such conviction indicates the inability to operate a safe, honest and
legitimate business operation within the village. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007,
eff. 6-1-2007; amd. 2013 Code)
         d.   Failure of the licensee to pay the license fee or any other
indebtedness, charge, fine or penalty owing to the village.
         e.   Refusal to permit inspections or interferences with an authorized
village officer or employee while in the performance of his/her duties in
making such inspections as provided in this chapter.
         f.   When the conduct of any licensee, agent or employee is so
inimical to the public health, safety or general welfare and/or the continued
operation of the business constitutes a nuisance and thus gives rise to an
emergency.
      2.   Said suspension or revocation, if ordered, shall be in addition to
any other provision imposing a penalty for the violation of any section of the
codes or ordinances of the village.
   C.   Hearing: The government affairs committee of the village shall conduct
a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license should be
suspended or revoked in accordance with the following provisions: (Ord. 2007-
03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
      1.   Notice of the hearing for suspension or revocation of a license
shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice may be hand
delivered or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
licensee to his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set
for the hearing.
      2.   The village legal counsel shall represent the village at the
hearing. The licensee shall be permitted counsel and shall have the right to
submit evidence and cross examine witnesses. The committee shall render the
decision, which may include suspension for up to ten (10) days, or revocation,
and/or the payment of fines and performance of other actions. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-
14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007; amd. 2013 Code)
      3.   At or prior to the hearing, the parties may enter into an agreement
which establishes a series of actions to be taken and/or fines to be paid which
will avoid suspension or revocation at that time.
   D.   Appeal: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the committee in
connection with the suspension or revocation of a license as provided in this
section, shall have the right of appeal to the entire village board of
trustees. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the village board of
trustees, within ten (10) days after notice of suspension or revocation, a
written statement, under oath, setting forth specifically the grounds for
appeal. The village board of trustees shall thereupon set the time and place
for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the
applicant or licensee in the same manner as provided in this section. The
decision of a majority of the village board of trustees present at the hearing
of such appeal shall be required to reverse the decision of the committee.
(Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
3-1-19: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
   A.   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not be made applicable
to a building or premises or portion thereof, the principal use of which is for
the practice or operation of a business which is preexempted from regulation by
state law; provided, however, that such activities, when accessory to the
operation of a "commercial establishment", as defined in section
3-1-1 of this chapter, shall not exclude the principal commercial establishment
from the terms and provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The license fee requirements of this chapter shall not apply to
activities sponsored or conducted by religious, educational, charitable, civic
or political organizations or institutions; or to governmental institutions or
agencies acting in either a governmental or proprietary capacity; or to any
franchised public utility; or to carriers regulated exclusively by the federal
government. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to diminish the
authority of the village to perform any of its necessary or ordinary regulatory
functions, nor shall any organization as described in this subsection be
relieved of the responsibility of filing an application and securing a license
as is otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-
2007)
3-1-20: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in,
maintain, operate, carry on or manage any business, occupation, activity or
establishment, either by himself or through an agent, employee or partner,
contrary to the standards and regulations set forth in this chapter.
   B.   Penalty: Any person, corporation or organization violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day
of violation and each violating location shall be considered a separate offense
under this subsection. (Ord. 2007-03, 2-14-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
3-1-21: OUTDOOR DINING:
   A.   Definition: "Sidewalk dining" means the act of selling food and
beverages on a village sidewalk immediately in front of, or adjacent to, an
existing restaurant or retail food store owned by the applicant. The restaurant
or retail food store must have a current license from the county health
department.
   B.   License: No person shall operate sidewalk dining on a village sidewalk
without a valid license to do so issued by the village.
   C.   License Requirements: The village clerk shall issue a license to an
applicant if the applicant meets the requirements of this section. The
applicant shall complete an application on a form approved by the village
clerk. The applicant shall, at a minimum, provide the following information:
      1.   The applicant's name and address. If the applicant is a corporation,
the applicant shall identify a manager and state the name and address of its
manager.
      2.   Attach a copy of its "plan of operation" as provided for in
subsection G of this section.
      3.   Provide evidence of insurance insuring the applicant against
liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance or operation of the
applicant's sidewalk dining in amounts of at least one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for the injury or death of one or more persons, and one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for damage to property. The village shall be
named as an additional insured in the policy providing such insurance and such
policy shall further provide that it may not be canceled except upon ten (10)
days' written notice filed with the village clerk.
   D.   Term: The term of a license shall be until December 31 of the year in
which it was issued unless it is revoked by the village. (Ord. 2014-16, 7-9-
2014)
   E.   Fee: The fee is fifteen dollars ($15.00) per year. No part of the fee
is proratable. (Ord. 2014-19, 8-13-2014)
   F.   Inspection: The village reserves the right to inspect the sidewalk
dining premises at any time.
   G.   Plan Of Operation: Each applicant shall provide a copy of its plat of
operation to the building inspector for approval. The plan of operation shall
provide, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   A dimensional plan drawn to scale and done in a professional manner
showing the sidewalk and all public improvements (light posts, benches,
planters, trees and tree grates) in the immediate area.
      2.   The location of the curb relative to the building, building entrance
and the proposed location of all dining furniture.
      3.   The heights of the dining furniture to be placed on the sidewalk and
the number of feet and location of the unobstructed pedestrian walkway.
   H.   Restrictions: The applicant agrees to conduct the sidewalk dining in a
safe manner. The applicant agrees it shall:
      1.   Operate the sidewalk dining in accordance with the plan of operation
filed with the village.
      2.   Keep the premises clean and free from refuse at all times. The
applicant shall clean and sweep the sidewalk area at the end of each business
day.
      3.   A five foot (5') clear zone shall be maintained at a corner location
of two (2) public sidewalks. The items shall be immediately adjacent to the
building and shall not extend beyond the applicants' storefront on any side.
      4.   Operate so that it does not interfere with pedestrian traffic or
vehicular traffic, or access into or from any building.
      5.   Clearly display its sidewalk dining license from an adjacent window
so that it is visible from the sidewalk.
      6.   Maintain all furnishings in good condition at all times. The dining
furniture shall be of such a quality so as not to create a windblown hazard. No
picnic tables, plastic tables, or chairs are allowed. All furniture shall be
consistent with color, style, and type. Any barriers must be sturdy, decorative
metal or wood.
      7.   The applicant shall not provide amplified music or music speakers
for the sidewalk dining.
      8.   The hours for the outdoor dining shall be limited to the hours of
the applicant's existing business.
      9.   No glass containers/cups shall be provided to outdoor dining
customers.
      10.   No advertising on umbrellas, furniture, or barriers including any
types of logos, graphics, or names is allowed.
   I.   Revocation Or Suspension: An applicant's license may be revoked or
suspended. A license may be suspended for up to thirty (30) days. A revocation
or suspension may occur if the village president or the president's designee
find, after a hearing, that:
      1.   The applicant has violated any provisions of this section, the laws
of this state or ordinances of the village while engaged in the operation of
the sidewalk dining; or
      2.   The application contains false or misleading information.
The village shall give the applicant at least ten (10) days' written notice,
mailed to the address set forth on the application, stating the alleged
violation and the date of the hearing. The applicant may present evidence at
such hearing and cross examine any witnesses. Any decision made by the village
shall be in writing and may be appealed to the village board of trustees if
done so within twenty (20) days of the date of the decision. (Ord. 2014-16, 7-
9-2014)
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Purpose
3-2-2: Definitions
3-2-3: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
3-2-4: Licenses Required; Classifications; Fees
3-2-5: Application For License
3-2-6: Persons Ineligible For License
3-2-7: License Unavailable
3-2-8: Bond Requirements
3-2-9: Investigation Of Applicant; Approval Or Rejection Of License
3-2-10: Number Of Licenses
3-2-11: Term Of License
3-2-12: Change Of Location
3-2-13: Transfer Of License
3-2-14: Renewal Of Licenses
3-2-15: License To Be Posted; Duplicates
3-2-16: Days And Hours Of Operation
3-2-17: Vacated And Forfeited Licenses
3-2-18: Building And Premises Requirements
3-2-19: Beer Gardens
3-2-20: Sales To Certain Persons Restricted
3-2-21: Prohibited Acts
3-2-22: Investigations; Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-2-23: Appeals
3-2-24: Penalties
3-2-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be construed to the end that the health, safety and welfare
of the people of the village shall be protected and temperance in the
consumption of alcoholic liquors shall be fostered and promoted. (Ord. 78-12,
7-5-1978)
3-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms, as used in this
chapter, shall be construed according to the definitions given in this section:
                                   Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer,
                                   and every liquid or solid, patented or not,
                                   containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer,
                                   and capable of being consumed as a beverage
                                   by a human being. The provisions of this
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR:                  chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in
                                   the manufacture of denatured alcohol
                                   produced in accordance with acts of congress
                                   and regulations promulgated thereunder, nor
                                   to any liquid or solid containing one-half
                                   of one percent (0.5%) or less of alcohol by
                                   volume.
                                   Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic
                                   fermentation of an infusion or concoction of
BEER:                              barley or other grain, malt, and hops in
                                   water, and includes, among other things,
                                   beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter, and
                                   the like.
                                   Any area contiguous to the licensed
                                   premises, described in any class A retail
                                   license, class C club license, or class D
BEER GARDEN:                       retail license, which is wholly or partly
                                   outdoors, and is intended for the sale and
                                   on premises consumption of alcoholic liquor,
                                   or beer and wine.
                                   Manufactures no more than 155,000 gallons
                                   (5,000 barrels) per year only at a
                                   designated licensed location, to make sales
                                   to importing distributors, and to non-
                                   licensees for use and consumption only, who
BREWPUB:                           stores beer at the designated location and
                                   who is allowed to sell as retail from the
                                   licensed location, provided that a brew pub
                                   licensee shall not sell for off-location
                                   consumption more than 155,000 gallons (5,000
                                   barrels) per year.
                                   A corporation organized under the laws of
                                   this state, not for pecuniary profit, solely
                                   for the promotion of some common object
                                   other than the sale or consumption of
                                   alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained
                                   by its members through the payment of annual
                                   dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a
                                   building or space in a building, of such
                                   extent and character as may be suitable and
                                   adequate for the reasonable and comfortable
                                   use and accommodation of its members and
                                   their guests and provided with suitable and
                                   adequate kitchen and dining room space and
                                   equipment and maintaining a sufficient
                                   number of servants and employees for
                                   cooking, preparing and serving food and
                                   meals for its members and their guests;
                                   provided, that such club files with the
                                   local liquor control commissioner at the
                                   time of its application for a license under
CLUB:                              this chapter two (2) copies of a list of
                                   names and residences of its members, and
                                   similarly files within ten (10) days of the
                                   election of any additional member his or her
                                   name and address; and, provided further,
                                   that its affairs and management are
                                   conducted by a board of directors, executive
                                   committee, or similar body chosen by the
                                   members at their annual meeting and that no
                                   member or any officer, agent, or employee of
                                   the club is paid or directly or indirectly
                                   receives, in the form of salary or other
                                   compensation, any profits from the
                                   distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to
                                   the club or the members of the club or its
                                   guests introduced by members beyond the
                                   amount of such salary as may be fixed and
                                   voted at any annual meeting by the members
                                   or by its board of directors or other
                                   governing body out of the general revenue of
                                   the club.
                                   An establishment that distills, ferments,
                                   brews, makes, mixes, concocts, processes,
                                   blends, bottles or fills an original package
CRAFT DISTILLERY:                  with any alcoholic liquor which produces no
                                   more than thirty-five thousand (35,000)
                                   gallons of alcoholic spirits per calendar
                                   year.
                                   Every building or other structure kept,
                                   used, maintained, advertised and held out to
                                   the public to be a place where food is
                                   actually served and consumed and sleeping
                                   accommodations are offered for adequate pay
                                   to travelers and guests, whether transient,
                                   permanent or residential, in which twenty
                                   five (25) or more rooms are used for the
HOTEL:                             sleeping accommodations of such guests and
                                   having one or more public dining rooms where
                                   meals are served to such guests, such
                                   sleeping accommodations and dining rooms
                                   being conducted in the same building or
                                   buildings in connection therewith, and such
                                   building or buildings, structure or
                                   structures being provided with adequate and
                                   sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment
                                   and capacity.
LICENSED PREMISES:                 The premises described in the license.
LICENSEE:                          Any person receiving a license under this
                                   chapter.
MICRO-                             A limited production brewery, typically
BREWERY:                           manufacturing and selling specialty beers
                                   and often selling its products only locally.
                                   Includes all persons who are owners or are
                                   in control of any place where the sale or
                                   distribution of alcoholic liquor is carried
                                   on. If the owner or proprietor is: a) an
                                   individual or fiduciary, that person shall
                                   reside within the corporate limits of the
OWNER OR PROPRIETOR:               village; b) a partnership, the majority
                                   interest in said partnership shall reside
                                   within the corporate limits of the village;
                                   c) a corporation; and d) a joint stock
                                   company, a majority interest in the joint
                                   stock company shall be owned by persons
                                   residing within the corporate limits of the
                                   village.
                                   Any establishment catering to the general
PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE:              public whose principal business is the sale
                                   of alcoholic liquors, not for consumption on
                                   the premises.
PERSON:                            Any person, firm, partnership, club,
                                   association or corporation.
                                   Any public place kept, used, maintained,
                                   advertised and held out to the public as a
                                   place where meals are served, and where
                                   meals actually are regularly served, without
                                   sleeping accommodations, such space being
                                   provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen
                                   and dining room equipment and capacity and
RESTAURANT:                        having employed therein a sufficient number
                                   and kind of employees to prepare, cook and
                                   serve suitable food for its guests. A
                                   restaurant may include a bar area with a
                                   seating capacity for up to six (6)
                                   individuals. Sixty percent (60%) of total
                                   annual revenue must be derived from the sale
                                   of food.
RETAIL SALE:                       The sale for use or consumption and not for
                                   resale.
                                   A license that is issued to a facility, upon
                                   application approval, for the sale of
                                   alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the
SEASONAL LICENSE:                  premises and/or in a prepackaged container
                                   for off-premises consumption, for a limited
                                   period of time as stated on the license at
                                   the time of issuance by the Village Liquor
                                   Commissioner.
                                   A license that is issued to an establishment
                                   which brews beer on the premises and offers
TAPROOM BREWERY LICENSE:           the brewed beer for sale to the public for
                                   consumption on the premises and/or for sale
                                   in packaged containers for consumption off
                                   the premises.
                                   A license that is issued upon application
                                   for a temporary event to be held in the
TEMPORARY EVENT LICENSE:           village and expires at the time stated on
                                   the license without any further action by
                                   the village.
                                   Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the
                                   fermentation of the natural contents of
                                   fruits or vegetables containing sugar,
WINE:                              including such beverages when fortified by
                                   the addition of alcoholic liquor; provided,
                                   that the total alcoholic content does not
                                   exceed fourteen percent (14%).
                                   Any public place kept, used, maintained,
                                   advertised and held out to the public as a
                                   place where wine is produced and offered to
WINE SALE AND PRODUCTION FACILITY: the public for consumption on the premises
                                   and/or for sale in prepackaged containers
                                   for consumption off the premises. Such space
                                   must be provided with adequate and sanitary
                                   facilities.
                                   An establishment or place engaged in the
                                   manufacturing and sale of less than 50,000
                                   gallons of wine per year (also Cider and
                                   Mead). (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978; amd. Ord. 88-
WINERY:                            10, 6-1-1988; Ord. 91-04, 6-5-1991; Ord. 97-
                                   02, 4-7-1997; Ord. 97-06, 6-4-1997; Ord. 99-
                                   07, 6-16-1999; Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003; Ord.
                                   2007-02, 2-14-2007; 2013 Code; Ord. 2016-19,
                                   8-17-2016; Ord. 2019-27, 10-8-2019; Ord.
                                   2021-15, 4-22-2021; Ord. 2022-30, 9-8-2022)
 
3-2-3: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The President of the Board of Trustees is hereby designated and appointed the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner, as designated and provided by an Act of the
General Assembly of the State of Illinois, entitled "an Act relating to
alcoholic liquors" in force January 31, 1934. (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978)
3-2-4: LICENSES REQUIRED; CLASSIFICATIONS; FEES:
No person shall sell, either at retail or wholesale, or, as part of the
commercial establishment's regular and normal course of business, permit the
possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor at the commercial establishment
by customers of the commercial establishment, or have in his possession and
offer for sale alcoholic liquor within the corporate limits of the Village
without having first obtained a license so to do as provided by this chapter,
or under article A of this chapter, if applicable, and paid to the Village
Clerk the license fee for such license, which license shall be designated and
classified as follows:
   A.   Class A Retail License: The annual license for a Class A license for
the sale of alcoholic liquor, to be consumed either on or off the premises,
shall be the sum of six hundred dollars ($600.00), payable annually in advance
and further subject to the terms of section
3-2-22 of this chapter.
   B.   Class B Package Liquor Store License: The annual license fee for a
Class B license for the sale of alcoholic liquors, on the premises but not to
be consumed on the premises, shall be the sum of three hundred dollars
($300.00), payable annually in advance, and subject to the terms of section
3-2-11 of this chapter.
   C.   Class C Club License: The annual license fee for a Class C license for
the sale of alcoholic liquor in a "club", as defined in section
3-2-2 of this chapter, and to be consumed on the premises by the members
thereof, shall be the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), payable annually in
advance, and subject to the terms of section
3-2-11 of this chapter.
   D.   Class D Retail License: The annual license fee for a Class D license
for the sale of beer and wine, to be consumed on the licensed premises, shall
be the sum of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00), payable annually in
advance, and subject to the terms of section
3-2-11 of this chapter.
   E.   Class E Retail Beer Garden License: The annual license fee for a Class
E license for the sale of alcoholic liquor, to be consumed in a beer garden,
shall be the sum of four hundred dollars ($400.00), payable annually in
advance. No person shall operate a beer garden selling alcoholic liquor without
an otherwise valid license as provided by this section and subject to the terms
of section
3-2-19 of this chapter.
   F.   Class F Restaurant License: The annual license fee for a Class F
license for the sale of alcoholic liquor, to be consumed on the premises of a
restaurant only during the time that food is being served and a menu is in
effect, shall be the sum of six hundred dollars ($600.00), payable annually in
advance, and subject to the terms of section
3-2-11 of this chapter.
   G.   Class G Beer/Wine Sale, And Production Facility License: The annual
license fee for a Class G license for the production and dispensing of
alcoholic liquor, limited to wine, and the dispensing only of beer, to be
consumed on the premises and/or to be sold in prepackaged containers for
consumption off the premises, shall be the sum of six hundred dollars
($600.00), payable annually in advance, and subject to the terms of section
3-2-11 of this chapter. The dispensing of beer shall be limited to tastings
only and the dispensing of draft beer is not permitted.
   H.   Class H Temporary Event License: The annual license fee for a class H
license for the temporary sale of alcoholic liquor shall be the sum of fifty
dollars ($50.00), payable at the time of issuance. The village may waive this
fee for nonprofit organizations or other charitable events on a case by case
basis.
   I.   Class I - Craft Distillery/Brewpub/Microbrewery/Winery License: The
annual license fee for a Class I license shall authorize a brewpub, distillery,
microbrewery or winery to: a) furnish samples of its alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises, b) sell its and others alcoholic beverages by the
glass for consumption on the premises as permitted by federal licensing, c)
sell its alcoholic beverages in the original corked, capped or sealed and
labeled container for consumption on or off the premises, d) permit a patron to
remove one unsealed and partially consumed bottle of wine for off premises
consumption, and e) manufacture, distill, and/or brew, shall be the sum of six
hundred dollars ($600.00), payable annually in advance, and subject to the
terms of section
3-2-11 of this chapter. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be
removed from the premises shall be securely sealed by the licensee or an agent
of the licensee prior to removal from the premises and placed in a transparent
onetime use tamperproof bag. The licensee or agent of the licensee shall
provide a dated receipt for the bottle of wine to the patron.
   J.   Class J Seasonal License: The annual license fee for a Class J license
for seasonal sale of alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the premises, or in
packaged containers for off premises consumption, such packaged alcohol sales
limited to the private label brand of the license holder, shall be the sum of
Four Hundred dollars ($400.00), payable annually in advance.
   K.   Class K - Taproom Brewery License: The annual license fee for a Class K
Taproom Brewery license for the brewing of beer and for the sale of such brewed
beer for consumption on the premises, or in packaged containers for off
premises consumption, shall be the sum of Six Hundred dollars ($600.00),
payable annually in advance. (Ord. 2015-18, 7-8-2015; amd. Ord. 2016-19, 8-17-
2016; Ord. 2018-14, 4-12-2018; Ord. 2019-27, 10-8-2019; Ord. 2021-15, 4-22-
2021; Ord. 2021-21, 6-10-2021; Ord. 2022-30, 9-8-2022)
3-2-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a liquor license shall be made to the village president in
writing upon blanks prepared and furnished by the village, signed: a) by the
applicant, if an individual; or b) by at least two (2) members of a
partnership, if the applicant is a partnership; or c) by the president and
secretary thereof if the applicant is a corporation, and verified by oath or
affidavit of the signers. The application shall contain the following
information and statement:
   A.   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation, for profit, or a club,
the date of the incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the
names and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority interest
of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominees, the
name and address of such person.
   B.   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
   C.   The character of business of the applicant; and in case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
   D.   The length of time that applicant has been in business of that
character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued.
   E.   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made.
   F.   The location and description of the premises or place of business which
is to be operated under such license, and the name of the owner of the premises
if not owned by the applicant, and the date of the termination of the lease
held by the applicant.
   G.   A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a
similar or other license on premises other than described in this application.
   H.   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is
not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter or any ordinance or statute.
   I.   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof or by
the federal government has been revoked, and the reason therefor.
   J.   The date of incorporation if an Illinois corporation, or the date of
becoming qualified under the Illinois business corporation act to transact
business in Illinois if a foreign corporation.
   K.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
state of Illinois or of the United States or any ordinance of the village in
the conduct of his business. (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978)
   L.   That he has not received or borrowed money or anything else of value,
and that he will not receive or borrow money or anything else of value, except
as permitted by 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes, directly or indirectly from any
manufacturer or importing distributor. (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978; amd. 2013 Code)
   M.   That the proposed location is not within one hundred feet (100') of any
church, school, hospital or other location prohibited by an act of the general
assembly, entitled "an act relating to alcoholic liquors", approved February 1,
1934.
   N.   That the applicant is willing to show satisfactory proof of good moral
character and reputation. (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978)
3-2-6: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
No license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who is not a resident of the village.
   B.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   C.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   D.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal law or
the laws of the state.
   E.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   F.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause.
   G.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for a license upon a first application.
   H.   A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license.
   I.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within a
political subdivision.
   J.   A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a
foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois business corporation
act to transact business in Illinois.
   K.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required for the
licensee.
   L.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor
subsequent to 1934, or shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to
answer charges for any such violation.
   M.   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
to be issued.
   N.   Any law enforcing public official, village president, or member of the
village board of trustees; and no such official shall be interested in any way,
either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of
alcoholic liquor.
   O.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   P.   Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a state retail
liquor dealer's license. (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978)
3-2-7: LICENSE UNAVAILABLE:
If at the time of filing of an application for a liquor license under section
3-2-5 of this chapter, no license of the type being sought is available, and no
such license becomes available within thirty (30) days from the date of filing
of the application, the application shall be returned to the applicant, and any
bond posted shall also be returned. In such circumstance, no action will be
undertaken by the village president, and the village shall not be obligated to
hold any type of hearing on the application. (Ord. 93-13, 12-1-1993)
3-2-8: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Amount:
      1.   Every person desiring a license shall execute a penal bond in form
and with security to the village, conditioned upon the faithful observance of
the provisions of the laws of the United States, the laws of the state and of
this chapter. Such bond shall be in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
and shall, on approval by the village president, be filed in the office of the
village clerk. (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978)
      2.   Any bond posted shall be held by the village for the duration of the
term of the liquor license. Said bond shall be conditioned upon the observance
of the provisions of this chapter and shall be further conditioned that the
applicant shall pay to the village all fines and costs recovered against him/
her under the provisions of this chapter and any and all other ordinances
regulating the sale of such liquors now in force or hereafter adopted, on
account of any act done by the holder of such license in violation of this
chapter or any such ordinance during the period for which license shall be
granted, and further conditioned, that the applicant will pay all persons all
damages they may sustain, either in person or property, or means of support, by
reason of the sale of alcoholic liquors by the licensee. Upon the termination
or nonrenewal of the license, the bond shall be returned less any outstanding
fines, penalties, and/or costs which were incurred and are unpaid. (Ord. 93-13,
12-1-1993)
   B.   Sureties:
      1.   No person holding a license under this chapter shall be acceptable
as a surety for any other person holding or requesting a license to engage in
the sale of alcoholic liquors, nor shall the holder of any license for the sale
of alcoholic liquors be permitted to sign any bond for bail for any other
person requesting or offering bail under any complaint for violation of any
provisions of this chapter or of the laws of the United States or of the state
of Illinois.
      2.   All sureties on such bonds must be property owners within the
corporate limits of the village or a duly organized and responsible surety
company, authorized to do business in the state and shall satisfactorily show
that they are financially responsible for the amount set forth in the bond or
bonds. The financial responsibility of such sureties shall be investigated and
either approved or disapproved by the village president. (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978)
3-2-9: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; APPROVAL OR REJECTION OF LICENSE:
The president of the board of trustees shall investigate the statements in each
application, and the character of such applicant, and within thirty (30) days
after any such application is referred to him, shall recommend or report in
writing the rejection or approval of such application. Such report or
recommendation shall be filed with the village clerk and be referred to the
board of trustees at its next regular or special meeting. Any rejection so made
by the president of the board of trustees as said liquor control commissioner
shall be final, and no license shall be granted by the board of trustees if
rejected. (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978)
3-2-10: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
The number of licenses to be issued under the classifications set forth in this
chapter shall be:
Class A retail license                                 No more than 13
Class B package liquor store license                   No more than 5
Class C club license                                   Unlimited
Class D retail beer and wine license                   No more than 1
Class E retail beer garden license                     No more than 4
Class F restaurant license                             No more than 0
Class G beer/wine sale and production facility license No more than 4
Class H temporary event license                        No more than 10
Class I craft distillery license                       No more than 1
Class J seasonal license                               No more than 1
Class K taproom brewery license                        No more than 1
 
(Ord. 2006-77, 11-8-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-02, 2-14-2007; Ord. 2008-18, 5-14-
2008; Ord. 2013-01, 1-9-2013; Ord. 2014-14, 6-11-2014; Ord. 2014-18, 8-13-2014;
Ord. 2014-22, 10-8-2014; Ord. 2015-13, 6-10-2015; Ord. 2016-06, 4-13-2016; Ord.
2016-19, 8-17-2016; Ord. 2021-05, 2-11-2021; Ord. 2021-08, 3-11-2021; Ord.
2021-15, 4-22-2021; Ord. 2022-26, 8-11-2022; Ord. 2022-30, 9-8-2022)
3-2-11: TERM OF LICENSE:
All licenses shall be for the term of one year and shall expire on June 30
following their issue. For every license issued on or after January 1 of any
calendar year, the license fee shall be one-half (1/2) of the annual amount
specified in section
3-2-4 of this chapter, but there shall be no further fractional division of
license fees payable under this chapter. All license fees shall be payable in
advance annually except in the above mentioned cases. (Ord. 2011-18, 6-8-2011)
3-2-12: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A class A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H or I license, as defined in section
3-2-4 of this chapter, shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor, or of beer
and wine, only in the premises described in the application and license, except
as otherwise provided herein. Such location may be changed only upon the
written permit to make such change issued by the village president. No change
of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one
for the sale of alcoholic liquor, or for beer and wine, under the laws of the
state and the ordinances of the village. Notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, a holder of a class G license shall be allowed to also operate as
authorized by his license at the location of his winemaking facility, provided
there is compliance with all other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-65,
10-11-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-02, 2-14-2007)
3-2-13: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year
after issuance unless sooner revoked. Any such license shall not be
transferable except upon written application and approval of the village
president. The fee for such transfer shall be ten dollars ($10.00) and shall
accompany the request for transfer. (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978)
3-2-14: RENEWAL OF LICENSES:
   A.   Applications for renewals of licenses shall be filed with the village
clerk on or before June 1 of the calendar year. The village clerk shall report
the names of all applicants for renewals of licenses to the board of trustees
at its next regular meeting and shall present the signed application of the
applicant as provided in section
3-2-5 of this chapter, the amount of license fee payable or tendered and
whether or not any written complaint has been filed as to the manner in which
the applicant for such renewal of a license has carried on the business
authorized thereby. (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   All applications for renewal of licenses shall be referred to the
President of the Board of Trustees for recommendation as to rejection or
approval as in the case of applications for original licenses, and procedure
upon such recommendation shall be as in the case of applicants for original
licenses.
   C.   An application for renewal of any license upon its expiration shall not
be granted if written complaint has been filed with the Village Clerk or
Village President as to the manner in which the applicant for such renewal has
carried on the business authorized by such license until hearing has been had
on such complaint. The President of the Board of Trustees shall act on the
approval or rejection of such application for renewal within five (5) days
after the completion of the hearing on said complaint. The procedure with
reference to a hearing on application for renewal of a license shall conform
with the procedure as provided in an Act of the General Assembly of the State
of Illinois, entitled "an Act relating to alcoholic liquors", in force January
31, 1934. (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978)
   D.   A daily fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be applied to those
license holders that have not provided their applications, required renewal
fee, and all required documents including proof of dram shop insurance and a
true copy of the State of Illinois Liquor License, if not submitted on or
before June 1st of the calendar year as specified in subsection A of this
section. (Ord. 2017-36, 12-13-2017)
3-2-15: LICENSE TO BE POSTED; DUPLICATES:
Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
immediately, upon receiving such license, post and keep posted, while in force,
in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises the license so issued. Whenever
such license shall be lost or destroyed, a duplicate in lieu thereof shall be
issued by the Village Clerk upon the payment of a fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00). (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978; amd. 2013 Code)
3-2-16: DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION:
   A.   Classes A, B, C, D, E, G And H Licenses: No person issued a Class A, B,
C, D, E, G or H license to sell alcoholic liquor under this chapter shall
permit his or her establishment to be open for the sale of such liquors between
the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day,
except on Sunday mornings, when such establishment may remain open for the sale
of such liquors until two o'clock (2:00) A.M. (Ord. 99-07, 6-16-1999; amd. Ord.
2003-05, 3-12-2003; Ord. 2007-02, 2-14-2007)
   B.   Class F License: A person issued a Class F license to sell alcoholic
liquor on a restaurant's premises may serve alcoholic liquor only between the
hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on Sunday
through Thursday, and between eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. on Fridays and Saturdays. (Ord. 99-07, 6-16-1999)
3-2-17: VACATED AND FORFEITED LICENSES:
The premises for which a license has been issued shall be operated as a going
business, and in the event said premises are closed for more than ninety (90)
days without specific authorization from the Liquor Commissioner, the said
license issued to said premises shall be declared vacated and forfeited. (Ord.
93-13, 12-1-1993)
3-2-18: BUILDING AND PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Unobstructed View: No license shall be issued for any premises unless
said licensed premises are so constructed that a clear and unobstructed view of
all the interior thereof may be had by those passing on the street, road or
sidewalk. No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be
permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside
such premises which shall prevent a clear view into all the interior of such
licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no
obstructions, nor any arrangement of light or lighting, shall be permitted in
or about the interior of such licensed premises which shall prevent a full view
of the entire interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk. Any
licensee who shall permit or cause the view in or about the interior of his
licensed premises to be obstructed or who shall not provide adequate lighting
for such licensed premises, as above provided, shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this chapter.
   B.   Sanitary Conditions: All and any premises, whether wholesale or retail,
licensed under Class A, B, C, D, E, F, G or H shall be kept in a sanitary
condition and shall be open to inspection by the Chief of Police or any other
authorized Village official, or in the absence thereof, the County Health
Department.
   C.   Outdoor Dining License: Any business that has a valid outdoor dining
license, and a valid liquor license that permits the consumption of alcohol on
the licensed premises shall be allowed to serve and allow consumption of
alcohol in the outdoor dining area subject to the following:
      1.   All alcoholic beverages shall be served in plastic cups. No glass
cups, containers, or bottles are permitted in the outdoor dining area except
bottles of wine purchased from a business with an outdoor dining license.
      2.   The hours of serving and consumption in the outdoor dining area
shall be the same as for the licensed facility.
      3.   All other requirements of the alcoholic beverage ordinance of the
village of North Utica, not in conflict with this subsection C, shall remain in
full force and effect. (Ord. 97-06, 6-4-1997; amd. Ord. 99-07, 6-16-1999; Ord.
2003-05, 3-12-2003; Ord. 2007-02, 2-14-2007; 2013 Code; Ord. 2014-20, 8-13-
2014; Ord. 2020-12, 5-27-2020)
3-2-19: BEER GARDENS:
The following shall apply to each beer garden:
   A.   No beer garden shall be operated during the Burgoo Festival.
   B.   All persons purchasing liquor for consumption in conjunction with the
beer garden may only purchase that beverage where the basic liquor license is
in operation.
   C.   Each such establishment shall be enclosed with a privacy fence six feet
(6') in height. The area shall be completely secured to prevent ingress or
egress without entrance through the area intended for that purpose. Each beer
garden shall have only one area for ingress and egress, which shall be located
jointly.
   D.   The beer garden shall be contiguous to the primary building from which
the basic liquor licensee operates said business.
   E.   The beer garden shall not possess a permanent roof structure. (Ord.
2009-15, 6-10-2009)
3-2-20: SALES TO CERTAIN PERSONS RESTRICTED:
No licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under
the age of twenty one (21) years or to any intoxicated person, except as
provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-16.1. (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978;
amd. Ord. 93-13, 12-1-1993; 2013 Code)
3-2-21: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Drinking Or Intoxication In Public:
      1.   No person shall, within the village, drink any alcoholic liquor on
any street, alley or any public place or in or upon any vehicle commonly used
for the transportation of passengers or in or upon any depot, platform or
waiting room of any public carrier.
      2.   No person shall be drunk or intoxicated upon any public street,
alley, public or private road or in any passenger coach, bus or in any public
place or building or at any public gathering such that said person is a danger
to himself or others.
   B.   Peddling Liquor: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the
village. (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978; amd. 2013 Code)
3-2-22: INVESTIGATIONS; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Authority: The president of the village board or his duly authorized
representative shall investigate any violation of this chapter, the making of
false statements in any application for license or the permitting of any
illegal, disorderly or immoral practices upon licensed premises and may suspend
or revoke the license covering such premises if, upon completion of a hearing
as provided in an act entitled "an act relating to alcoholic liquors" in force
January 31, 1934, the facts warrant such revocation.
   B.   Basis For Suspension Or Revocation: Any license issued under this
chapter may be suspended or revoked for any one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   Violation of the laws of the state or of any of the provisions of
this chapter.
      2.   The wilful making of any false statement as to a material fact in
application for a license.
      3.   Permitting any illegal, disorderly or immoral practices upon
licensed premises.
      4.   Violation of any of the provisions of the United States treasury
department relating to the possession and sale of intoxicating liquor or the
laws of the United States relating to the same.
   C.   Period Of Suspension: The period for which a license may be suspended
under this section shall be, for the first offense, not less than ten (10) nor
more than thirty (30) days; for the second offense, not less than fifteen (15)
nor more than forty five (45) days; and for the third and each subsequent
offense, not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days. (Ord.
78-12, 7-5-1978)
   D.   Period Of Revocation: Where a license is revoked under this chapter, no
new license shall be issued on the licensed premises for a period of at least
twelve (12) months thereafter. (Ord. 78-12, 7-5-1978; amd. Ord. 93-13, 12-1-
1993)
3-2-23: APPEALS:
An appeal of an order of action of the local liquor control commissioner, being
timely filed, shall be limited to a review of the official record of the
proceedings of the commissioner. A certified official record of the
proceedings, as taken and prepared by a certified court reporter or certified
shorthand reporter, shall be filed by the commissioner within five (5) days
after notice of the filing of such appeal to the Illinois state liquor control
commission. Such certified official record shall be the sole evidence presented
in the review before the Illinois liquor control commission and shall serve in
lieu of a trial de novo. (Ord. 93-13, 12-1-1993)
3-2-24: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.
78-12, 7-5-1978; amd. Ord. 93-13, 12-1-1993; 2013 Code)
ARTICLE A. BYOB ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-2A-1: Statute Authority
3-2A-2: Licenses Required; Fee
3-2A-3: Ineligibility For License
3-2A-4: Application For License
3-2A-5: Insurance Required (Rep. by Ord. 2017-24, 8-9-2017)
3-2A-6: Investigation Of Applicant; Approval Or Disapproval
3-2A-7: Number Of Licenses
3-2A-8: Term Of License; Proration Of Fee
3-2A-9: Change Of Location
3-2A-10: Transfer Of License
3-2A-11: Renewal Of License
3-2A-12: License To Be Posted; Duplicates
3-2A-13: Days And Hours Of Operation
3-2A-14: Vacated And Forfeited Premises
3-2A-15: Sanitary Premises
3-2A-16: Corking
3-2A-17: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-2A-18: Penalty
3-2A-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY:
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-42-10.1 allowing the license of a business operating as a public
accommodation. (Ord. 2009-10, 4-8-2009)
3-2A-2: LICENSES REQUIRED; FEE:
No person shall allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages in his
establishment without having first obtained a license so to do as provided by
this article and paid to the Village Clerk the license fee for such license,
which license shall be designated and classified as provided in this article.
The license fee for a BYOB license shall be three hundred fifty dollars
($350.00) per year, payable in advance on an annual basis. (Ord. 2017-19, 7-12-
2017)
3-2A-3: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   B.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   C.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal law or
the laws of the State.
   D.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   E.   A person whose license issued under this article has been revoked for
cause.
   F.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for a license upon a first application.
   G.   A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license.
   H.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within a
political subdivision.
   I.   A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a
foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation
Act to transact business in Illinois.
   J.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee.
   K.   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
to be issued. (Ord. 2009-10, 4-8-2009)
3-2A-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for BYOB license shall be made to the Village President in writing
upon a form prepared and furnished by the Village, signed: a) by the applicant,
if an individual; or b) by at least two (2) members of a partnership, if the
applicant is a partnership; or c) by the president and secretary thereof if the
applicant is a corporation, and verified by oath or affidavit of the signers.
The application shall contain the following information and statements:
   A.   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation, for profit, or a club,
the date of the incorporation, the object for which it was organized, the names
and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority interest of the
stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominees, the name and
address of such person.
   B.   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
   C.   The character of business of the applicant; and in case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
   D.   The length of time that applicant has been in business of that
character; or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued.
   E.   The location and description of the premises or place of business which
is to be operated under such license, and the name of the owner of the premises
if not owned by the applicant and the date of the termination of the lease held
by the applicant. If leased, a written permission statement from the owner is
required to be attached to the application.
   F.   A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a
similar or other license on premises other than described in this application.
   G.   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is
not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this article or in statute.
   H.   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof or by
the Federal government has been revoked, and the reason therefor.
   I.   The date of incorporation if an Illinois corporation, or the date of
becoming qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act to transact
business in Illinois if a foreign corporation.
   J.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
State of Illinois or of the United States or any ordinance of the Village in
the conduct of his business.
   K.   That the applicant is willing to show satisfactory proof of good moral
character and reputation. (Ord. 2009-10, 4-8-2009)
3-2A-5: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-24, 8-9-2017)
3-2A-6: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL:
The President of the Board of Trustees shall investigate the statements in each
application, and the character of the applicant and, within thirty (30) days
after any such application is referred to him, shall recommend or report in
writing the rejection or approval of such application. Such report or
recommendation shall be filed with the Village Clerk and be referred to the
Board of Trustees at its next regular or special meeting. Any rejection so made
by the President of the Board of Trustees shall be final, and no license shall
be granted by the Board of Trustees if rejected. (Ord. 2009-10, 4-8-2009)
3-2A-7: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
The number of licenses to be issued shall be three (3). (Ord. 2009-10, 4-8-
2009)
3-2A-8: TERM OF LICENSE; PRORATION OF FEE:
All licenses shall be for the term of one year and shall expire on June 30
following their issue. For every license issued on or after January 1 of any
calendar year, the license fee shall be one-half (1/2) of the annual amount
specified, but there shall be no further fractional division of license fees
payable under this article. (Ord. 2009-10, 4-8-2009; amd. 2013 Code)
3-2A-9: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A license as defined herein shall permit the possession of alcoholic liquor
only in the premises described in the application and license. Such location
may be changed only upon the written permit to make such change issued by the
Village President. (Ord. 2009-10, 4-8-2009)
3-2A-10: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year
after issuance unless sooner revoked. Any such license shall not be
transferable except upon written application and approval of the Village
President. (Ord. 2009-10, 4-8-2009)
3-2A-11: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Applications for renewals of licenses shall be filed with the Village
Clerk on or before June 1 of the calendar year. (Ord. 2009-10, 4-8-2009; amd.
2013 Code)
   B.   The Village Clerk shall report the names of all applicants for renewals
of licenses to the Board of Trustees at its next regular meeting and shall
present the signed application of the applicant, the amount of license fee
payable or tendered and whether or not any written complaint has been filed as
to the manner in which the applicant for such renewal of a license has carried
on the business authorized thereby.
   C.   All applications for renewal of licenses shall be referred to the
President of the Board of Trustees for recommendation as to rejection or
approval as in the case of applications for original licenses, and the
procedure upon such recommendation shall be as in the case of applicants for
original licenses.
   D.   An application for renewal of any license upon its expiration shall not
be granted if written complaint has been filed with the Village Clerk or
President of the Village Board of Trustees as to the manner in which the
applicant for such renewal has carried on the business authorized by such
license until hearing has been had on such complaint. The President of the
Board of Trustees shall act on the approval or rejection of such application
for renewal within five (5) days after the completion of the hearing on said
complaint. (Ord. 2009-10, 4-8-2009)
3-2A-12: LICENSE TO BE POSTED; DUPLICATES:
Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article shall,
immediately upon receiving such license, post and keep posted, while in force,
in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises the license so issued. Whenever
such license shall be lost or destroyed, a duplicate in lieu thereof shall be
issued by the Village Clerk upon the payment of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00).
(Ord. 2009-10, 4-8-2009)
3-2A-13: DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION:
No person issued a license under this article shall permit his or her
establishment to be opened for the possession of such liquors between the hours
of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day, except on
Sunday mornings when such establishment may remain open for the possession of
such liquors until two o'clock (2:00) A.M. (Ord. 2009-10, 4-8-2009)
3-2A-14: VACATED AND FORFEITED PREMISES:
The premises for which a license has been issued shall be operated as a going
business, and in the event said premises is closed for more than ninety (90)
days without specific prior authorization from the Village President, the said
license issued to said premises shall be declared vacated and forfeited. (Ord.
2009-10, 4-8-2009)
3-2A-15: SANITARY PREMISES:
All premises licensed under this article shall be kept in a sanitary condition
and shall be open to inspection by the Village President, Chief of Police or
any other authorized official of the Village. (Ord. 2009-10, 4-8-2009)
3-2A-16: CORKING:
The applicant must provide for the recorking of opened liquor and the resealing
of such in State approved tamperproof bags/containers. No alcoholic beverages
may be stored or kept on the premises during non-business hours. (Ord. 2009-10,
4-8-2009; amd. Ord. 2017-24, 8-9-2017)
3-2A-17: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Authority: The President of the Village Board or his duly authorized
representative shall investigate any violation of this article, the making of
false statements in any application for license or the permitting of any
illegal, disorderly or immoral practices upon licensed premises and may suspend
or revoke the license covering such premises if, upon completion of a hearing,
the facts warrant such revocation.
   B.   Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation: Any license issued under this
article may be suspended or revoked for any one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   Violation of the laws of the State or of any of the provisions of
this article.
      2.   The wilful making of any false statement as to a material fact in
application for a license.
      3.   Permitting any illegal, disorderly or immoral practices upon
licensed premises.
   C.   Period Of Suspension: The period for which a license may be suspended
under this section shall be, for the first offense, not less than ten (10) nor
more than thirty (30) days; for the second offense, not less than fifteen (15)
nor more than forty five (45) days; and for the third and each subsequent
offense, not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days. (Ord.
2009-10, 4-8-2009)
3-2A-18: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense,
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2009-10, 4-8-2009; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 3
AMUSEMENTS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: License And Compliance Required
3-3-3: Application For License; Investigation
3-3-4: License Fee
3-3-5: Liability Insurance
3-3-6: Term Of License; Nontransferability
3-3-7: License And Capacity To Be Posted
3-3-8: Persons On Duty
3-3-9: Conduct Of Business
3-3-10: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
3-3-11: Requirements For Specific Amusement Establishments
3-3-12: Additional Requirements
3-3-13: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BILLIARD CENTER: A place of amusement or entertainment in which one or more
persons are invited to play and participate in the game of billiards, including
pocket table billiards or snooker table billiards, or wherein one or more pool
tables or billiard tables are kept, used or operated for profit or in the
course of a business enterprise.
BOWLING ALLEY: A place of amusement or entertainment in which one or more
persons are invited to play and participate in the game of bowling or wherein
one or more bowling lanes are used or operated for profit or in the course of a
business enterprise.
GAME ROOM: A place of amusement or entertainment in which three (3) or more
mechanical amusement devices are kept or maintained for the use of the public,
operated for a profit or in the course of a business enterprise.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any musical device, pinball machine, novelty
machine, skill machine, pool machine, bowling machine or similar machine which
operates or may be operated for use as a game of skill, amusement or play and
for which a charge is made, whether coin operated, token operated, ticket
operated, time operated, operated by control of an operator or operated as an
enticement for the business enterprise.
OPERATOR: Any person, firm or corporation who keeps or allows billiard or pool
tables to be kept on premises owned by him or under his control where the same
may be played by members of the public legally upon such premises upon payment
of the charge therefor.
OWNER: Any person, firm or corporation who owns and places billiard or pool
tables by whatever arrangements on the operator's premises.
PUBLIC SKATING RINK: Any room, place or space in which skating, either on
roller skates or ice skates, is carried on and to which admission can be had by
the public by payment, either directly or indirectly, of a fee, or by payment
of a charge for any service auxiliary to skating, or by purchase, possession or
presentation of a ticket or token; but the term "skating" shall not be held to
apply to exhibitions or performances in which the persons paying for admission
do not participate.
THEATER: Any room, place or space for the showing of motion pictures, plays,
musicals, concerts or other entertainments to which admission can be had by the
public by payment, either directly or indirectly, of an admission price. (2013
Code)
3-3-2: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   License Required: No person shall engage in the following acts in the
village without having first obtained an amusement license:
      1.   Operate a theater.
      2.   Operate a billiard center.
      3.   Operate a bowling alley.
      4.   Own, operate, maintain, sell or keep for operation a mechanical
amusement device.
      5.   Conduct or operate a public skating rink.
   B.   Compliance With Provisions: The licensee, agent or employee shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter. (2013 Code)
3-3-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
   A.   All applications for an amusement license shall conform to the
following requirements:
      1.   Be made in writing to the village clerk, verified by the applicant
and accompanied by the license fee required.
      2.   State the name, age and address of the applicant and, if the
applicant is a corporation, the name of its officers and directors.
      3.   State the location of the place where the amusement device or
facility is to be located and operated.
      4.   State the number of amusement devices, alleys, tables, greens,
screens, etc., as may be applicable to the particular business to be conducted.
      5.   Include a detailed scale layout of the operation, showing the
location of the greens, tables, alleys, screens, lighting, fences, buildings,
structures and other equipment.
      6.   State the name(s) of the manager(s) hired to supervise the
particular operation.
      7.   Include such other and further information as may be required by the
village clerk.
   B.   The application for a license or renewal of a license shall be made
upon forms furnished by the village clerk and shall include the date and place
of conviction of any person named therein for any crime other than minor
traffic violations committed during the period of ten (10) years prior to the
date of application, including a statement of the crime of which such person
was convicted.
   C.   The chief of police shall investigate any and all applications for a
license and shall submit a report to the village. (2013 Code)
3-3-4: LICENSE FEE:
   A.   Fee Established; Exemptions: The annual fee for an amusement license
shall be ten dollars ($10.00). The fee provided for in this section may be
waived upon application to the board of trustees in the case of limited
performances or engagements by a nonprofit organization.
   B.   Fee Not Transferable Or Prorated: The fee provided for herein is not
transferable, nor may it be prorated; except, that the fee for theaters,
billiard tables and amusement devices shall be paid for the number of screens,
tables or machines available for use, and the licenses are valid for different
tables or machines as may be replaced or changed from time to time during the
year; provided, that the license fee is paid for the maximum number of machines
or tables used on the applicant's premises at any one time. (2013 Code)
3-3-5: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
Each licensee shall keep in force liability insurance of a minimum of seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000.00) combined single limit liability
coverage for injury to or death of any one person or persons or damages/
destruction of property in any one accident by a corporation or corporations
authorized to write insurance in the state during the license year. It shall
appear on such policy that the village shall be notified, in writing, at least
thirty (30) days prior to the cancellation of such policy of insurance. (2013
Code)
3-3-6: TERM OF LICENSE; NONTRANSFERABILITY:
Each license shall expire on December 31 next after its issuance and shall not
be transferable from one person to another. (2013 Code)
3-3-7: LICENSE AND CAPACITY TO BE POSTED:
Every entertainment license shall be conspicuously posted about the place for
which the license is issued and shall be exhibited to any person upon request.
All amusement facilities shall post the capacity limitation for their premises
in a conspicuous place. (2013 Code)
3-3-8: PERSONS ON DUTY:
There shall be on duty at all times that the operation of a billiard center,
bowling alley, mechanical or electronic amusement device, public skating rink,
theater or game room is open to the public an adult operator or manager who
understands the operation of all equipment used on the premises. It shall be
the duty of the licensee and his manager to remain on the premises at all times
and enforce the provisions of subsection 3-3-9A of this chapter. (2013 Code)
3-3-9: CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:
   A.   Code Of Conduct:
      1.   The licensee, under this chapter, shall follow and enforce the
following code of conduct for the licensed premises:
         a.   Truants from school shall not be permitted to enter or remain on
the premises.
         b.   No person violating any curfew law or ordinance shall be
permitted to enter or remain on the licensed premises.
         c.   No person soliciting to vice or any other unlawful purpose shall
be permitted to enter or remain on the licensed premises.
         d.   No person selling, transferring, giving, using or in possession
of any "controlled substance", as defined by Illinois Compiled Statutes, shall
be permitted to enter or remain on the premises or remain in the area directly
adjacent to the premises.
         e.   No person shall be permitted to harass, threaten or annoy any
persons.
         f.   No person shall loiter inside or outside a billiard center.
Persons not engaging in billiard or pool play or waiting their turn to play
shall be prohibited from the billiard center except in cases of an owner
sanctioned tournament or contest. Persons shall be prohibited from loitering on
the property outside the billiard center, including the parking lot.
      2.   The licensee under this chapter shall post in plain view a copy of
the above rules of conduct as well as a copy of the house rules and hours of
operation in a minimum of one inch (1") letters.
   B.   Maintenance Of Order: It shall be the responsibility of the licensee
under this chapter to maintain order on the licensed premises at all times.
(2013 Code)
3-3-10: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Alcoholic Beverages On Licensed Premises: No person shall, in any
licensed premises or in any anteroom, corridor, cloakroom, hallway or dressing
room thereof or in any room connecting therewith, drink any alcoholic
beverages; nor shall any licensee hereunder suffer or permit any person to
drink any alcoholic beverages in or on any licensed premises over which such
licensee has control.
   B.   Gambling In Billiard Centers:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any licensed
billiard center to permit the same to be used for gambling or for the making of
bets or wagers.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for the licensee or the owner or operator of a
billiard center to give any money, token, merchandise or any other thing of
value or any reward or prize in lieu of free games.
      3.   No person shall keep, maintain, sell or permit to be operated in his
billiard center any billiard table, pool table or other equipment which has
been converted into an automatic payoff device which shall discharge coins,
checks or other tokens to the operator or player of such table or equipment. No
person shall convert any billiard table, pool table or other equipment into an
automatic payoff device.
      4.   Any billiard or pool table which has been utilized in violation of
this subsection may be seized and destroyed in compliance with the provisions
of the state statutes relating to gambling devices. (2013 Code)
3-3-11: REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   Skating Rinks, Billiard Centers, Bowling Alleys And Amusement Centers:
      1.   Lighting: Every skating rink, billiard center, bowling alley and
place having mechanical amusement devices shall be illuminated while in public
use, and operation thereof while the lights are extinguished or turned so low
as to not give proper vision is hereby prohibited.
      2.   Open View: The operation of a skating rink, billiard center, bowling
alley and premises having mechanical amusement devices shall at all times be
conducted in open view of the public. Such amusements shall not be enclosed
from the public in private rooms.
      3.   Hours Of Operation For Billiard Centers; Minors:
         a.   A billiard center shall be closed by one o'clock (1:00) A.M. each
night and may not be open until nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on weekdays and
Saturdays or until twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays.
         b.   No one under the age of sixteen (16) shall be permitted on the
premises of a billiard center after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. except when
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; no one under the age of eighteen
(18) shall be permitted on the premises of a billiard center after ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. except when accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
   B.   Theaters:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to show or exhibit in a public
place or in a place to which the public is admitted any motion picture, whether
an admission is charged or not, without exhibiting a classification notice
therefor as provided in this subsection. The classification notice required in
this subsection shall designate the rating applied to the motion picture to be
exhibited. Such classification notice shall contain one of the ratings used by
the Motion Picture Association Of America, Inc.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to show or exhibit or cause to
be shown or exhibited to any person under the age of seventeen (17) any picture
designated R unless accompanied by a parent or adult guardian. It shall be
unlawful for any person to show or exhibit or cause to be shown or exhibited to
any person under the age of seventeen (17) any picture designated X.
      3.   Any person who admits a person not qualified to view a motion
picture under the provisions of this subsection to a performance of a picture
designated R or X shall be presumed to have violated the provisions of this
subsection. Such prima facie case of violation may be rebutted by a showing
that the motion picture in question has been improperly classified.
      4.   The rating provided by this subsection shall be that imposed upon
such motion picture by the Motion Picture Association Of America, Inc., if the
motion picture has been classified by that organization. In the event no
classification has been imposed by such motion picture organization, the person
or organization showing or exhibiting such motion picture shall be responsible
for designating the classification in accordance with standards prescribed by
the Motion Picture Association Of America, Inc., and shall restrict admission
to persons under the age of seventeen (17) in accordance with the standards set
forth in the ratings as provided in this subsection.
      5.   The notice of classification provided for in this subsection shall
be posted at or near the entrance of the theater, hall, room or place where any
motion picture is being exhibited, at such a place and in such a position that
it may easily be read by any person entering such theater, hall, room or place,
at any time when any such motion picture is being exhibited. Film ratings shall
be included in all advertising.
      6.   When motion pictures having a different rating are being shown
together as double or triple features, they shall all be assigned the rating of
the picture carrying the most restrictive rating.
      7.   No licensee shall display on the exterior of an indoor theater or
show or exhibit at any drive-in theater in such a manner that passersby view or
are likely to view any picture, photograph, drawing or similar visual
representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts
sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse. (2013 Code)
3-3-12: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The village may impose other reasonable restrictions or conditions as it deems
necessary to provide for public health, safety, and welfare. (2013 Code)
3-3-13: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
All licenses granted hereunder shall be revocable for cause at any time. Said
licenses may be suspended for such period as the board of trustees may
prescribe or may be revoked by the board of trustees, and such revocation or
suspension shall be made on reasonable hearing prescribed by the board of
trustees. "Cause" shall include any violation of this chapter. If there shall
be two (2) convictions for violations of this chapter, whether such violations
are the same or different provisions of this chapter, the second such
conviction shall be cause for revocation of the license after hearing
prescribed by the board of trustees. No refund fee shall be paid on revocation.
(2013 Code)
ARTICLE A. VIDEO GAMING
SECTION:
3-3A-1: Regulations
3-3A-2: Applicability Of Provisions
3-3A-3: Definitions
3-3A-4: License
3-3A-5: License Application Requirements
3-3A-6: Application Filing; Renewals
3-3A-7: License Fees
3-3A-8: License Revocation Or Suspension
3-3A-9: Limitation On Number Of Video Gaming Licenses
3-3A-10: Limitation On Number Of Video Gaming Terminals On Premises
3-3A-11: Prohibition
3-3A-12: Exceptions
3-3A-13: Licensed Establishments
3-3A-14: Seizure Of Unauthorized Gambling Devices And Gambling Funds
3-3A-1: REGULATIONS:
The village hereby formally declares that there shall be no village ordinance,
policy or regulation prohibiting the implementation within the village of
licenses in compliance with the Illinois video gaming act, 230 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq.; except, that such video gaming devices as may
be allowable under the Illinois video gaming act shall constitute amusement
devices with the village and are thus required to additionally be in compliance
with the licensing and regulatory provisions of such applicable village
ordinances, including, but not being limited to, the provisions therein in
reference to the number of amusement devices allowable and the license fee per
device required by such ordinances. (Ord. 2012-27, 8-8-2012)
3-3A-2: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided, shall apply to
all video gaming as hereinafter defined, whether specifically licensed or
regulated under other provisions of this code or other ordinances, or not.
(Ord. 2022-04, 2-10-2022)
3-3A-3: DEFINITIONS:
BOARD:         The Illinois Gaming Board.
COMMERCIAL
MOTOR          As defined in Section 18b-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/18b-101.
VEHICLES:
               Any business licensed by the State of Illinois to have or operate a video gaming
LICENSED       device in the Village, including any licensed fraternal establishment, licensed
ESTABLISHMENT: veterans establishment, licensed truck stop establishment and licensed large
               truck stop establishment as those terms are defined in the VGA, 230 ILCS 40/5.
LICENSED       The location where a qualified fraternal organization that derives its charter
FRATERNAL      from a national fraternal organization regularly meets.
ESTABLISHMENT:
               A facility located within three road miles from a freeway interchange, as
               measured in accordance with the Department of Transportation’s rules regarding
               the criteria for the installation of business signs: (i) that is at least a
LICENSED LARGE three-acre facility with a convenience store; (ii) with separate diesel islands
TRUCK STOP     for fueling commercial motor vehicles; (iii) that sells at retail more than
ESTABLISHMENT: 50,000 gallons of diesel or biodiesel fuel per month; and (iv) with parking
               spaces for commercial motor vehicles. The requirement of item (iii) of this
               definition may be met by showing that estimated future sales or past sales
               average at least 50,000 gallons per month.
               A facility (i) that is at least a three-acre facility with a convenience store;
LICENSED TRUCK (ii) with separate diesel islands for fueling commercial motor vehicles; (iii)
STOP           that sells at retail more than 10,000 gallons of diesel or biodiesel fuel per
ESTABLISHMENT: month; and (iv) with parking spaces for commercial motor vehicles. The
               requirement of item (iii) of this paragraph may be met by showing that estimated
               future sales or past sales average at least 10,000 gallons per month.
LICENSED       The location where a qualified veterans organization that derives its charter
VETERANS       from a national veterans organization regularly meets.
ESTABLISHMENT:
               Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion of cash, is available to
               play or simulate the play of a video game, including but not limited to, video
VIDEO GAMING   poker, line up and blackjack, as authorized by the Board utilizing a video
TERMINAL:      display and microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or
               credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that
               directly dispenses coins, cash or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
               (Ord. 2022-04, 2-10-2022)
 
3-3A-4: LICENSE:
   A.   No person, either as owner, lessee, manager, officer or agent, or in
any other capacity, shall operate or permit to be operated any video gaming
terminal, as defined herein, at any premises within the Village without first
having obtained a video gaming license from the Village. The license provided
for in this Article shall permit a licensee to operate video gaming terminals
at the specified establishment.
   B.   No applicant, including any person, either as owner, lessee, manager,
officer or agent, shall be eligible for a video gaming license from the
Village, nor shall an existing license holder be entitled to maintain a video
gaming license, unless each of the following requirements are met and continue
to be met:
      1.   The applicant holds the appropriate certificate or license from the
State of Illinois permitting video gaming and is in good standing with same;
      2.   The establishment must maintain customer seating outside of the
gaming area but within the premises at a ratio of at least five seats for each
permitted video gaming terminal;
      3.   The applicant is not in arrears in any tax, fee or bill due to the
Village or State of Illinois;
      4.   The applicant has completed and complies with all the application
requirements set forth in Section 4 of this Article and is not disqualified due
to a felony, gambling offense, or crime of moral turpitude; and
      5.   The establishment is located outside of a residential zoning
district.
   C.   The Village President shall be the approving authority for all
licenses. In the event a licensee or prospective licensee disagrees with any
action taken by the Village President, an appeal may be made directly to the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village at its next regularly scheduled
meeting after written notice of the action from which an appeal is made. (Ord.
2022-04, 2-10-2022)
3-3A-5: LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
The license applicant shall provide the following information to the Village on
a form provided by the Village:
   A.   The legal name of the establishment;
   B.   The business name of the establishment;
   C.   The address of the establishment where the video gaming terminals are
to be located;
   D.   The type of establishment, including whether it is classified as a
veteran, fraternal, regular truck stop, large truck stop or liquor
establishment and supporting documentation demonstrating the classification;
   E.   A floor plan, drawn to scale using a computer, detailing the overall
layout of the establishment, including the location and count of dining
seating, the location and count of video gaming terminals and seating for said
terminals, and other significant features of the establishment, including exit
locations, restrooms and other equipment. A high-resolution electronic copy of
the floor plan as well as a paper printed copy (no smaller than 11 inches by 17
inches) shall be submitted at the time of application; hand-drawn floor plans
and floor plans not including a scale will not be accepted;
   F.   The amount of time the establishment has been in business under the
ownership of the applicant at the location where video gaming is proposed to
take place;
   G.   The business office address of the establishment if different from the
address of the establishment;
   H.   In the case of a corporation, limited liability company or trust, the
name and address of an agent authorized and designated to accept service on
behalf of the licensee;
   I.   A phone number for the establishment;
   J.   An e-mail address for the establishment;
   K.   The name and address of every person owning more than a 5% share of the
establishment;
   L.   The name, address, phone number and e-mail address of any terminal
operator or distributor proposed to own, service or maintain video gaming
terminals at the establishment;
   M.   A copy of the establishment’s State of Illinois video gaming license;
   N.   In the case of a corporation, limited liability company or partnership,
a copy of the establishment’s state certificate of good standing;
   O.   A statement as to the number of video gaming terminals which the
establishment proposes to have on its premises (not to exceed five for all
establishments);
   P.   A statement that the establishment is not in arrears in any tax, fee or
bill due to the Village or State of Illinois;
   Q.   A statement that the establishment agrees to abide by all state and
federal laws and any local ordinance;
   R.   A statement that no manager or owner with more than 5% interest in the
establishment has ever been convicted of a felony, a gambling offense or a
crime of moral turpitude. In the event that an establishment cannot provide
such statement, the establishment may apply for a certificate of rehabilitation
from the Village President indicating that the individual who would disqualify
the establishment from obtaining the video gaming license has been
rehabilitated and is no longer a threat to violate the law. The Village
President may consider the nature of the offense, the length of time since the
offense, the length of time since release from custody and other factors to
determine if the individual has been rehabilitated such that he or she is no
longer likely to commit another offense;
   S.   If the application is for a new establishment based on the business
model of another existing location, information regarding the existing business
location must be provided, including the type of business, the gross receipts
as compared to any video gaming revenue for the prior 12-month period, proof of
the length of time the existing business has been operational and proof of
ownership verifying the applicant’s ownership rights. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-10-2022)
3-3A-6: APPLICATION FILING; RENEWALS:
   A.   Applications shall be processed by the Village Clerk on a first come,
first served basis. Every application shall be date and time stamped upon
filing. An application received in the mail shall be considered filed on the
date and time it is opened by the Village Clerk’s department.
   B.   Every video gaming license holder shall be required to file a renewal
application, which may contain the same or similar information as set forth in
Section 4. Renewal applications shall be due on or before July 1st unless that
day falls on a holiday, in which case the application may be received by the
Clerk on the following business day. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-10-2022)
3-3A-7: LICENSE FEES:
The license for a video gaming terminal operator’s license or a video gaming
terminal establishment license shall be $-0- annually.
The video gaming terminal registration fee shall be $250.00 per terminal
annually (August 1st through June 30th). The cost of these fees shall be shared
equally between the terminal operator and the applicable licensed
establishment, per Illinois law. However, the licensed establishment is
obligated to pay the Village in full by the due date.
The application fee is not subject to reimbursement or refund upon denial of a
license.
Said fees are not subject to proration or refund and are due prior to issuance
of the license.
All licenses required by this division shall be prominently displayed next to
the video gaming terminal. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-10-2022; amd. Ord. 2022-27, 8-11-
2022)
3-3A-8: LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
The Village President, at any time, may notify any licensee under this division
within five (5) business days of any charge of a violation of any of the
provisions of this Article in connection with the operation of any video gaming
terminal. After a hearing presided over by the Village President, the Village
President may order the revocation of the license upon a finding that the
violation has occurred, and the license shall thereupon be terminated. The
licensee may appeal the revocation as prescribed in Section
3-3A-4(F).
In the event of the revocation or denial of any license or registration under
this Section, such person shall not be issued any license provided for in this
Article for one calendar year following the revocation or any appeal thereof.
(Ord. 2022-04, 2-10-2022)
3-3A-9: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF VIDEO GAMING LICENSES:
There shall be no more than eleven (11) establishments licensed to operate
video gaming terminals in the Village at any given time, and no more than
seventy (70) total gaming terminals in the Village at any given time. (Ord.
2022-04, 2-10-2022; amd. Ord. 2022-27, 8-11-2022; Ord. 2022-32, 9-8-2022)
3-3A-10: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS ON PREMISES:
There shall be no more than six (6) video gaming terminals allowed and permits
issued therefore under this Article for each licensee at any one location,
other than a licensed large truck stop establishment.
There shall be no more than ten (10) video gaming terminals allowed and permits
issued therefore under this Article for each licensee at any licensed large
truck stop establishment. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-10-2022)
3-3A-11: PROHIBITION:
Except as otherwise excepted in this Article, it shall be unlawful for any
person to gamble within the corporate limits of the Village, or for any person
or entity which owns, occupies or controls an establishment within the Village
to knowingly permit others to gamble on the premises. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-10-2022)
3-3A-12: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to prohibit or make unlawful the
following activities or forms of gambling: the keeping, possession, ownership,
use or playing of a video gaming terminal in a licensed establishment, licensed
truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal establishment or licensed veterans
establishment, which is licensed by the Board to conduct or allow such specific
activities under the VGA, 230 ILCS 40/1, et seq. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-10-2022)
3-3A-13: LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS:
Any business, liquor or food licensee within the corporate limits of the
Village that allows gambling to occur on premises in violation of this Section
shall be subject to having his/her/its license immediately revoked for a period
of sixty (60) days. Any business, liquor or food licensee within the corporate
limits of the Village that allows gambling to occur on premises in violation of
this Article a second time shall have his/her/its license permanently revoked
and, thereafter, barred from obtaining any business, liquor or food license
within the Village. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-10-2022)
3-3A-14: SEIZURE OF UNAUTHORIZED GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING FUNDS:
Any gambling device which is not authorized by this Article shall be subject to
immediate seizure and confiscation by the Village. Any money or other thing of
value intrinsically related to acts of gambling not authorized by this Article
shall be seized and forfeited as contraband. Disposition of such gambling
devices and funds seized or confiscated shall be made in accordance with the
law. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-10-2022)
CHAPTER 4
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Peddlers And Transient Merchants
3-4-1-1: Definitions
3-4-1-2: License Required
3-4-1-3: Applications For Licenses; Fees
3-4-1-4: Conditions Of Licenses
3-4-1-5: Exemptions From Provisions
3-4-1-6: Revocation Of License
3-4-1-7: Penalty
3-4-2: Tag Day Provisions
3-4-3: Invitation And/Or Consent For Soliciting Or Peddling
3-4-1: PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS:
3-4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
FARMER'S MARKET: Any person selling farm or homegrown produce temporarily in
any place in the Village, and who, for the purpose of conducting such business,
occupies any lot, building, room, vehicle, or structure of any kind.
PEDDLER: Any person who goes from house to house, from place to place or from
street to street conveying or transporting for sale goods, wares or
merchandise, offering or exposing the goods, wares or merchandise for sale, or
making sales and delivering articles to purchasers; or any person who, for
himself or another, hires, leases, uses or occupies any vehicle or other place
or facility within the Village for the purpose of selling or offering for sale
any goods, wares or merchandise.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person engaging temporarily in retail or wholesale sale
of goods, wares or merchandise in any place in the Village, and who, for the
purpose of conducting such business, occupies any lot, building, room, vehicle
or structure of any kind. (Ord. 2017-15, 6-14-2017)
3-4-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of hawker,
peddler or transient merchant of any merchandise, article or thing without
having first secured a license therefor from the Village Clerk. (Ord. 2017-15,
6-14-2017)
3-4-1-3: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES; FEES:
   A.   Peddlers:
      1.   Application For License: Application for a peddler's license shall
be made to the Village Clerk and shall set forth:
         a.   The names and addresses of all persons who will engage in
peddling pursuant to the license to be granted;
         b.   A description of the goods, merchandise or services to be
peddled;
         c.   The dates and times during which such peddling will occur
pursuant to the license applied for; and
         d.   The applicant's certificate of registration number issued by the
State Department of Revenue, and other satisfactory evidence approved by
Village that sales made within the Village will be reported as taxable sales
within the Village by the applicant.
      2.   License Fees: The fee for a peddler's license shall be:
         a.   Daily License: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per person peddling
for a one day license. The total number to be annually issued for a one day
license shall not exceed three (3).
         b.   Summer License: Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a "summer
license fee" which is defined as from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M., May 1 until
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon, September 30. The total number to be annually
issued for a summer license shall not exceed three (3).
         c.   Thirty Day License: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a
thirty (30) day license, expiring at one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01)
A.M. on the thirtieth (30th) day from the issuance date, with the issuance date
being day one of the license period. The total number to be annually issued for
a thirty (30) day license shall not exceed three (3).
   B.   Transient Merchants:
      1.   Application For License: Application for a transient merchant's
license shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall set forth:
         a.   The name and address of the applicant and all persons who will be
employed by the applicant or the applicant's business during the period of the
license applied for;
         b.   A specific description of the goods, merchandise or services to
be offered for sale;
         c.   The exact location in the Village from which the business will be
conducted during the license period;
         d.   The applicant's State certificate of registration number issued
by the State Department of Revenue, and such other satisfactory evidence
approved by Village that sales made within the Village will be reported as
taxable sales within the Village by the applicant; and
         e.   The identity of the owner of the location from which the
transient merchant business will be conducted, and the application shall be
executed by the owner of the location as evidence of the applicant's
authorization to utilize the property, or in lieu thereof, the applicant may
submit a written lease or other written evidence approved by Village of the
applicant's authorization to conduct business upon the property. An owner of
property allowing a transient merchant or flea market to operate thereon is
responsible for the acts of those selling or soliciting on his/her property and
is punishable in the same manner as the license holder.
      2.   License Fees: The fees for transient merchant licenses shall be:
         a.   Daily License: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a one day
license. The total number to be annually issued for a one-day license shall not
exceed three (3).
         b.   Summer License: Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a "summer
license fee" which is defined as from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M., May 1 until
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon, September 30. The total number to be annually
issued for a summer license shall not exceed three (3).
         c.   Thirty Day License: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a
thirty (30) day license, expiring at one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01)
A.M. on the thirtieth (30th) day from the issuance date, with the issuance date
being day one of the license period. The total number to be annually issued for
a thirty (30) day license shall not exceed three (3).
   C.   Flea Markets:
      1.   Application For License: A property owner or landlord who is
providing sales space to ten (10) or more transient merchants shall submit a
flea market application to the Village Clerk setting forth:
         a.   The applicant's name and address;
         b.   The address of the flea market location, such location to be
approved by the Village;
         c.   The dates and times during which the flea market will be
operating; and
         d.   The applicant's State certificate of registration number issued
by the State Department of Revenue, and other satisfactory evidence that sales
made within the Village will be reported as taxable sales within the Village by
the applicant.
      2.   License Fees: The fees for flea market licenses shall be:
 
Number Of Participating Merchants Fee Per Weekend
   10 to 20                    $40.00
   21 to 40                    50.00
   More than 40                60.00
 
   D.   Cash Deposit/Bonds Prerequisite To Issuance: Before any license shall
be issued in the Village under this section, the applicant shall file with the
Village Clerk a bond with guarantees running to the Village in the sum of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) executed by the applicant, as principal, with good
and sufficient sureties upon which service of process may be made in the State.
Such bond shall be secured by a cash deposit or a surety bond of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) with the Village Clerk's Office. Such bond shall be
conditioned upon the undertaking that the applicant shall comply fully with all
of the sections of this Code and the provisions of the ordinances of the
Village and the statutes of the State regulating and concerning the sale of
goods, wares and merchandise, or laws requiring the payment of sales taxes or
other fees imposed by law, and payment of all fees or taxes owed by the
applicant and judgments rendered against the applicant for any violation of
this Code, the ordinances or statutes, or any of them, together with all
judgments and costs that may be recovered against him by any person for damage
growing out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced on any person
transacting such business with such applicant, whether such misrepresentations
or deceptions were made or practiced by the owners or by their servants, agents
or employees, either at the time of making the sale or through any
advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or circulated with reference
to the goods, wares and merchandise sold or any part thereof. Action on the
bond may be brought in the name of the Village to the use of the aggrieved
person or by the Village if for the collection of taxes or fees. Such bond must
be approved by the Village Attorney, both as to form and as to the
responsibility of the sureties thereon. The bond shall be in force and effect
for a two-year period after application. The Village Clerk shall retain such
deposit or bond for up to two (2) years for the benefit of any person who
suffers loss or damage as a result of the purchase of merchandise from such
person licensed under this section or as a result of the negligent or
intentionally tortuous act of the person licensed under this section. The
Village shall pay any portion of the bond or deposit to any person in
accordance with the order of a court without making an independent finding as
to the amount of the bond or deposit that is payable to that person. Any
balance of such deposit held by the Village after the expiration of a license
held by a person shall be refunded to the licensee, within two (2) years of
license expiration.
   E.   Waiver: The requirement of a license fee, cash deposit, and/or posting
of a bond may be waived by the Village if applicant is an accredited public
and/or private school district, or a registered youth organization or
charitable organization. (Ord. 2017-15, 6-14-2017)
3-4-1-4: CONDITIONS OF LICENSES:
   A.   Days And Hours Peddling Prohibited: No peddler shall operate under the
registration or license issued under this section
3-4-1 on Sundays or holidays. No peddler shall call at residences before nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after five o'clock (5:00) P.M., except at the prior
invitation or request of the occupant of the residence.
   B.   Sales Location Of Transient Merchants: Transient merchants shall submit
an IDOR St-2 (multiple site form) indicating the appropriate location code for
sales.
   C.   Signs, Debris And Hours: All peddlers, transient merchants, and those
participating in a farmers' market shall observe the following conditions of
their license:
      1.   All signage shall be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and
in compliance with the Village sign ordinance, section
10-15-1 et seq., of this Code.
      2.   Unless otherwise specifically provided in the license, at the close
of the licensed business day, the area of sale should be free of debris and all
of the seller items, including but not limited to vehicles and trailers,
removed from the premises.
      3.   Unless otherwise specifically provided in such license operating
hours are eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. until seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., daily for
transient merchant license holders.
   D.   No Alcohol: No license granted under this section shall permit a
license holder to offer, sell, or provide any alcoholic beverages.
   E.   Food/Health: Any license holder under this section must comply with all
County and State Health Code and food preparation/sale requirements,
regulations, and laws.
   F.   Records Of Sales; Collection Of Taxes: Each license holder not exempt
from remitting taxes on sales shall, if requested by the Village Clerk, certify
under oath to the Village Clerk the total amount of sales in the Village and
send a copy of the merchant's report of sales to the State under the Retailers
Occupation Tax Act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq. Such
information shall be delivered to the Village Clerk within fifteen (15) days
after any request. The Village Clerk shall be entitled to examine the records
of such merchant in order to verify the proper collection of such taxes.
   G.   Parking/Access: All transient merchant and flea market locations must
have adequate access points for entry/exit and parking for customers as
determined by the Chief of Police or his designee. Failure to provide such
shall be cause for denial of license or immediate revocation of such if already
issued.
   H.   Zoning: No transient merchant nor flea market licenses will be issued
for locations located in areas zoned residential under the Village zoning
ordinance.
   I.   Selling From Vehicles On Streets: No person shall allow a vehicle or
any form of conveyance to remain standing at one located on a street or other
public property for the purpose of the display for sale or for selling any
goods or services for longer than five (5) minutes at a time.
   J.   License Restriction In Congested Areas: The Village Board hereby
determines that, on certain dates, congestion in the Village or a part of the
Village will be too great to permit transient merchants or a particular type of
transient merchant to conduct sales within that area. The Chief of Police or
his designee may limit the number and type of transient merchant licenses in a
particular area based on projected traffic and pedestrian safety. In such
cases, the Village President may determine that all transient merchants or a
class thereof shall only sell goods in a particular area. The Chief of Police
or his designee may limit the number and type of licenses available for use in
the congested area. The Chief of Police or his designee may require sales to be
made by peddlers only from stationary locations on designated portions of the
Village's right-of-way or other conditions that serve to enhance public safety
in congested areas. The Chief of Police or his designee shall provide notice to
persons who apply for or who have transient merchant licenses that such license
is invalid for the times and places stated in the Chief of Police or his
designee's determination. Such notice shall inform such persons of the
conditions, if any, and procedure for requesting permission to sell in the
congested area. If more than the number of licenses determined by the Chief of
Police or his designee to be available for sales in a congested area are
requested, the Clerk shall conduct a lottery for the license use on that date
and times. No person shall engage in the business of transient merchant at a
time or location for which the Chief of Police or his designee has determined
that permits are limited or in violation of the terms of the congested area
conditions, unless such person's license has been validated for sales in a
congested area.
   K.   Display Of Certificate Or License: Each transient merchant or
charitable solicitor or his agents and employees shall at all times while
soliciting or canvassing within the Village carry upon his person the
registration certificate identification or license required by this chapter and
shall exhibit the certificate or license upon request to any law enforcement
officer or Village official. (Ord. 2017-15, 6-14-2017)
3-4-1-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
   A.   Peddlers: The provisions of this section
3-4-1 shall not apply to officers or employees of the Village, County, State
and Federal governments or subdivisions thereof, when on official business. No
peddler's license pursuant to this section
3-4-1 shall be required for any peddler who solicits only at businesses within
the Village, who solicits at residences within the Village only upon the
express invitation of the occupant thereof or who is engaged in peddling for
the purpose of fundraising for a governmental entity or for a church,
charitable institution or other not-for-profit organization; provided, that any
such entity or organization relying upon this exemption shall notify the Chief
of Police at least one week prior to any scheduled peddling activities of its
reliance upon this exception and shall provide such information and
substantiation thereof as requested by the Chief of Police.
   B.   Transient Merchants: The provisions of this section
3-4-1 shall not apply to:
      1.   Transient merchants participating in the LaSalle County Historical
Society Burgoo Festival and located within the festival area as designated by
the Village during the entire weekend of Burgoo Festival.
      2.   Persons who are engaged in selling farm, garden or similar produce
in the Village; provided, that the person is participating in a farmers'
market.
      3.   Temporary events sponsored or approved in advance by the Village
Board. (Ord. 2017-15, 6-14-2017)
3-4-1-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any licensed peddler, hawker or transient merchant who shall be guilty of any
fraud, cheating or misrepresentation, whether individually or through an
employee, while acting as a peddler, hawker or transient merchant in the
Village, or who shall barter, sell or peddle any goods or merchandise or wares,
other than those specified in the individual's application for a license, shall
be fined as provided in section
3-4-1-7 of this chapter, may have his license revoked by the Village President
for such offense, and is subject to forfeiture of the cash deposit and/or bond
provided for herein. (Ord. 2017-15, 6-14-2017)
3-4-1-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this section
3-4-1 shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. In addition, the Village may retain any cash deposit or recover on
any bond, and suspend and/or revoke a license of anyone who violates any
provision of this section for up to one year for a first offense and
permanently for a repeat offender. (Ord. 2017-15, 6-14-2017)
3-4-2: TAG DAY PROVISIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to go from house
to house soliciting funds or subscriptions or to publicly solicit, either in
person or by agent, upon the public street, sidewalks or any other public place
in the Village, subscriptions for charitable or religious or educational or
other organizations or purposes, whether presents or gifts of money or promises
are sought, without having first secured a permit therefor.
   B.   Applications For Permit: Applications for such permits shall be made to
the Clerk and shall be referred to the President and Board of Trustees, and no
such permit shall be issued except upon the order of the President and Board of
Trustees.
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.
2017-15, 6-14-2017)
3-4-3: INVITATION AND/OR CONSENT FOR SOLICITING OR PEDDLING:
   A.   Soliciting Or Peddling: It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon
the premises of another for the purposes of soliciting orders, selling or
peddling without the consent or invitation of the owner or occupant.
   B.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each violation. (Ord. 2017-15, 6-14-2017)
CHAPTER 5
JUNK DEALERS
SECTION:
3-5-1: License Required
3-5-2: Application For License; Fee
3-5-3: Lost Or Stolen Goods
3-5-4: Vehicle Requirements
3-5-5: Penalty
3-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the business of junk dealer or to
keep any junk shop, store or place for the purchase or sale of junk, rags, old
rope, paper or bagging, old iron, brass, copper or empty bottles without having
first secured a license therefor. (1966 Code § 245)
3-5-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
Applications for licenses shall be made in conformance with the provisions of
the ordinances relating to licenses. The fee to be paid for such license shall
be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year. (1966 Code §§ 246, 247; amd. 2013
Code)
3-5-3: LOST OR STOLEN GOODS:
Every keeper of a junk shop who shall receive or be in possession of any goods,
articles or things of value which may have been lost or stolen shall, upon
demand, produce such article or thing to any member of the police department
for examination. (1966 Code § 249)
3-5-4: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear
thereon, in legible characters, the name and address of the owner and
proprietor thereof. (1966 Code § 250)
3-5-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1966
Code § 251; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 6
SCAVENGERS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Permit Required
3-6-2: Application For Permit; Issuance
3-6-3: Permit Fee
3-6-4: Vehicle Requirements And Use Restrictions
3-6-5: Disposal Of Refuse
3-6-6: Penalty
3-6-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of scavenger or
the collection or disposal of animal, human or vegetable refuse or offal
without having first secured a permit therefor. (1966 Code § 274)
3-6-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; ISSUANCE:
Applications for such permits shall be made to the village clerk, and shall be
referred by him to the president and board of trustees. No such permit shall be
issued except on order of the president and board of trustees. (1966 Code §
275)
3-6-3: PERMIT FEE:
The annual fee for such permit shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). (1966
Code § 274)
3-6-4: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS AND USE RESTRICTIONS:
Any vehicle used by such scavenger in his business shall be watertight and
equipped with airtight covers for such portions as are used for the
transportation of refuse. It shall be unlawful for any such vehicle to be
driven over or through any street in the village during or on a Sunday. (1966
Code § 276)
3-6-5: DISPOSAL OF REFUSE:
It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or to store any refuse in
any place within the village limits, except with the permission of the
president and board of trustees. (1966 Code § 277; amd. 2013 Code)
3-6-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each and every day during or on which a violation occurs or is
permitted to continue. (Ord. 95-18, 9-6-1995; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 7
HOTELS AND MOTELS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: License Required
3-7-3: Application Fee/License Fee
3-7-4: License And Laws Posted
3-7-5: Building And Premises Requirements
3-7-6: Guests
3-7-7: Hotel And Motel Use Tax
3-7-8: Books And Records
3-7-9: Inspections
3-7-10: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-7-11: Penalties
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
 
       A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided and offered to the
       public for compensation and in which access to and from all rooms is made through
HOTEL: an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such,
       it is open to the public in contrast to an “apartment”, which is separately
       defined in this section.
       A.   An inn or group of cabins or rooms designed for occupancy by paying guests.
MOTEL: B.   A building or group of buildings in which lodging is provided to transient
       guests, offered to the public for compensation, and in which access to and from
       each room or unit is through an exterior door. (Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
 
3-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct or operate a hotel, motel or building or part thereof
used or held out to the public as a place where sleeping accommodations are
furnished for a period of one day or more without having first secured a
license therefor. (Ord. 95-16, 9-6-1995; amd. Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-7-3: APPLICATION FEE/LICENSE FEE:
   A.   An application for a license under this chapter shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this code relating to applications
for licenses 1 .
   B.   The applicant for a license under this chapter, at the time of
presenting plans and specifications to the clerk, shall deposit with the clerk
the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Said fee shall represent the
initial application fee and shall be non-refundable, even if the license is not
issued. An annual fee for a license issued pursuant to this section shall be
four hundred dollars ($400.00) and is valid for the calendar year of issuance.
The annual fee is not pro-rated. (Ord. 95-16, 9-6-1995; amd. Ord. 2020-02, 3-
12-2020; Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-30-5; 740 ILCS 90/0.01 et seq.
3-7-4: LICENSE AND LAWS POSTED:
   A.   License: The license required by this chapter shall be conspicuously
displayed in the office of the hotel or motel manager.
   B.   Laws: There shall be posted in each room of every hotel and motel, a
printed copy of the act of the general assembly relating to such buildings, to
be furnished by the state board of health. (Ord. 95-16, 9-6-1995; amd. 2013
Code; Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-7-5: BUILDING AND PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Sanitary Conditions; Lighting: All premises used for hotel or motel
purposes shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and all portions of
such premises that are open for use by guests or by the public shall be kept
lighted at all times they are so open to use.
   B.   Heat Requirements: All such premises shall be kept heated between
October 1 and May 1 to a temperature of not less than sixty eight degrees
Fahrenheit (68°F) between the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and ten
o’clock (10:00) P.M., and to a temperature of not less than fifty five degrees
Fahrenheit (55°F) at all other hours.
   C.   Bathrooms: Water closets and lavatories shall be available to all
guests using any hotel or motel. There shall be at least one bathroom equipped
with water closet, shower or tub and lavatory facilities for each unit on the
premises.
   D.   Exits And Fire Escapes:
      1.   No building shall be used for a hotel or motel unless it is
furnished with the number of exits and fire escapes required by the building
ordinances of the village for the construction of a new hotel or motel.
      2.   No person shall block or permit the blocking of any exit from any
premises used as a hotel or motel.
   E.   Insurance Required: Prior to obtaining a license, the owner shall
provide the village clerk with proof that liability insurance coverage in the
amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence
exists with respect to such establishment. (Ord. 95-16, 9-6-1995; amd. Ord.
2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-7-6: GUESTS:
   A.   Registry Required: Each hotel or motel proprietor shall keep or cause
to be kept a register of guests as required by state law. Such registration or
list shall be made available for inspection by any member of the police
department at any time.
   B.   Fugitives Prohibited: No person shall knowingly permit any fugitive
from justice to stay in any hotel or motel. (Ord. 95-16, 9-6-1995; amd. Ord.
2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-7-7: HOTEL AND MOTEL USE TAX:
   A.   Definition: A “hotel”, for purposes of the use tax set out in this
section, means any unit, building or buildings in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
The term includes inns, hotels, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging
houses, rooming houses, and apartment houses, resorts, villas, hostels,
boarding houses, condominiums, and timeshare rentals.
   B.   Tax Imposed; Rate: A use tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the
village in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a “hotel” (as
defined in subsection A of this section) at a rate of five percent (5%) of the
gross rental receipts from such renting, leasing or letting, excluding,
however, from gross rental receipts, the proceeds of such renting, leasing or
letting to permanent residents of that hotel. A resident shall be deemed to be
a permanent resident of a hotel for purposes of this section if the person has
a written contract for occupancy of a room for a period of time of not less
than thirty (30) days. The rate of the tax may be increased upon approval of
the Village Board of Trustees.
   C.   Payment And Collection Of Tax; Failure To Pay: For purposes of the
administration, enforcement and collection of the tax herein provided, the
following provisions shall govern:
      1.   The tax imposed by this section is imposed pursuant to the home rule
authority of the village. This tax is not imposed pursuant to 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-3-14, entitled “hotel rooms; tax on gross rental
receipts”.
      2.   Persons subject to the tax imposed by this section may reimburse
themselves for the tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax as
an additional charge to such other charges as imposed upon the guests or
occupants of the rooms.
      3.   Persons subject to the tax herein provided shall submit to the
office of the village clerk information on forms provided relative to the gross
rental receipts during the preceding calendar month. The forms shall be filed
with the village clerk on or before the thirtieth day of the month following
the month for which the information is provided. A payment of five percent (5%)
of the amount indicated as gross rental receipts shall be paid to the village
at the time of filing the required form. The village clerk is authorized to
enlist the services of existing village employees for purposes of
administrating and enforcing the collection of the tax herein imposed.
      4.   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the
rate of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per thirty (30) day period, or portion
thereof, from the day of delinquency shall be added and collected.
      5.   a.   If the tax due is not paid within thirty (30) days after the
date it becomes due, or after a final determination is made by the village
board for a disputed amount, such charges shall constitute a lien on the real
estate for which service is applied. Such lien may be perfected and enforced
against such owner, occupant, and/or any subsequent purchases, lienholders,
mortgages, and other transferees of such property.
         b.   The village clerk is hereby authorized to file a sworn statement
showing any such delinquency in the office of the county recorder of deeds, and
the filing of such statement shall be deemed notice of lien. The statement
shall contain the following:
            (1)   A description thereof;
            (2)   The amount of money due; and
            (3)   The date when such amount became delinquent.
         c.   Any such lien may be foreclosed as any other statutory lien, and
the court costs and related legal expenses for such proceedings shall be part
of the lien and paid by the owner, occupant, and any other person interested in
the property. The exercise of any remedy by enforcement for lien claims shall
not be exclusive of any other legal remedy to collect any amounts delinquent.
         d.   The village attorney is hereby authorized to institute such
foreclosure proceedings in the name of the village and any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which a bill has
remained unpaid for sixty (60) days after the due date.
      6.   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided,
the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the village clerk, bring or
cause to be brought any action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of
the village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
   D.   Disposition Of Revenues: All proceeds resulting from the imposition of
the tax under this section, including penalties, shall be paid into the village
treasury and shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate general fund
of the village. (Ord. 95-16, 9-6-1995; amd. Ord. 2006-26, 6-14-2006; Ord. 2008-
27, 8-13-2008; Ord. 2009-32, 10-14-2009; Ord. 2020-02, 3-12-2020; Ord. 2022-38,
12-15-2022)
3-7-8: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
   A.   Required: It shall be the duty of every person to keep accurate and
complete books and records to which the village clerk or her deputy or
authorized representative shall at all times have access, which records shall
include a daily sheet showing:
      1.   The number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the twenty four
(24) hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel rooms where such
shall occur; and
      2.   The actual hotel or motel tax receipts collected for the date in
question.
   B.   Inspections: The village clerk or any person certified as her deputy or
representative may enter the premises of any hotel or motel for inspection and
examination of books and records in order to effectuate the proper
administration of this chapter and to assure the enforcement of the collection
of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or
interfere with the village clerk or her duly authorized deputy or
representative in the discharge of her duties. (Ord. 95-16, 9-6-1995; amd. Ord.
2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-7-9: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Requirements: Every hotel or motel operated or maintained in the
village shall be inspected under and by authority of the chief of police or
his/her designee as frequently as may be necessary to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. Such inspection shall cover all matters
pertaining to the sanitary conditions of the rooms, beds and bedding, including
the ventilation of all rooms or occupied space, and also all rooms occupied by
the servants or other employees, to ascertain the condition of such rooms with
respect to light, heat, ventilation and general sanitation. Such investigation
is to be sufficiently accurate and complete as to convince the chief of police
or his/her designee whether the building and premises and parts thereof comply
in all respects with the provisions of this code, other ordinances of the
village and the laws of the state pertaining to such establishments.
   B.   Notice Of Violation: Notwithstanding the other provisions of this
section, whenever the chief of police or his/her designee finds unsanitary
conditions or other conditions in the operation of a hotel or motel which, in
his/her judgment, constitute a substantial hazard to the public health, he/she
may, without warning, notice or hearing, issue a written notice to the operator
citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and
specifying the time period within which such action must be taken; and if
deemed necessary for the protection of the health of the public, such order
shall state that the license is immediately suspended and that all hotel or
motel operations are to be immediately discontinued.
   C.   Compliance With Notice: Any person to whom such an order is issued
shall comply immediately therewith. Upon written petition to the village board,
such person shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. (Ord. 95-16, 9-6-
1995; amd. 2013 Code; Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-7-10: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Suspension; Reinstatement:
      1.   Licenses required by this chapter may be suspended temporarily by
the chief of police or his/her designee for failure of the holder to comply
with the requirements of any provision of this chapter.
      2.   Any person whose license under the provisions of this chapter has
been suspended may, at any time, make application for a reinspection for the
purpose of reinstatement of the license. Within ten (10) days following receipt
of a written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that, in
his opinion, the conditions causing suspension of the license have been
corrected, the chief of police or his/her designee shall make a reinspection.
If the applicant is complying with the requirements of this chapter, the
license shall be reinstated.
   B.   Revocation For Serious Or Repeated Violations:
      1.   For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements or
provisions of this chapter, or for interference by any person owning, having an
ownership interest in operating, managing, or controlling, or employed in a
hotel or motel or for interference in the performance of the chief of police or
his/her designee in enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the license
issued to such hotel or motel establishment may be permanently revoked after an
opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the village board.
      2.   Prior to such action, the village board shall notify the license
holder in writing stating the reasons for which the license is subject to
revocation and advising that the license shall be permanently revoked at the
end of ten (10) days following service of such notice, unless a request for a
hearing is filed with the village board by the license holder within such ten
(10) day period. A license may be suspended for cause pending its revocation or
a hearing relative thereto.
      3.   The hearing shall be conducted by the village board at a time and
place designated by the village board. Based upon the record of such hearing,
the village board shall make findings of fact and may sustain, modify or
rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. A written
report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the license holder. (Ord.
95-16, 9-6-1995; amd. 2013 Code; Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-7-11: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the first
offense and not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in
any one hundred eighty (180) day period. A separate and distinct offense shall
be regarded as committed each day upon which said person shall continue any
such violation or permit any such violation to exist after notification
thereof. The purposes of imposing these penalties is to ensure the integrity of
the collection process established pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 95-16, 9-6-
1995; amd. 2013 Code; Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
CHAPTER 8
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: License Required
3-8-3: Application For License; Deposit
3-8-4: Plans And Specifications
3-8-5: Insurance Required
3-8-6: License Fee And Renewal
3-8-7: Investigation Of Applicant; Approval Or Denial Of License
3-8-8: Registration With Taxing Authority; Use Tax
3-8-9: Display Of License
3-8-10: Retail Sales In Residential Zone Prohibited
3-8-11: Premises Restrictions
3-8-12: Suspension, Revocation Or Nonrenewal Of License
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section:
 
CHARGE:        Any form of remuneration such as cash, goods or services, barter, donations,
               forgiveness of indebtedness or like payment.
               A.   A residence providing overnight guestroom accommodations for a charge to
               the public in operation.
               B.   A home occupation within a single-family dwelling, wherein not more than
BED AND        three (3) rooms are rented and meals are served to transient travelers for
BREAKFAST      commercial purposes. Bed and Breakfast establishments may not be hotels, motels,
ESTABLISHMENT: vacation rental units, or food service establishments; provide, however that
               breakfast may be provided to the guests only.
               C.   No restaurant facility shall take place in such an establishment for the
               general public.
               The owner or the owner’s agent who is required by this chapter to reside in the
OPERATOR:      bed and breakfast establishment, or on contiguous property. (Ord. 88-11, 6-1-
               1988; amd. Ord. 99-03, 4-14-1999; 2013 Code; Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
 
3-8-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a bed and breakfast establishment as defined herein
without first having obtained a license from the village.
   A.   No Transfer: A bed and breakfast establishment license attaches only to
the property for which it is issued and is non-transferrable upon sale or other
transfer of ownership of the property. Upon such transfer of ownership, the new
owner of the property shall apply for a bed and breakfast establishment license
if it wishes to continue the use of the property as a bed and breakfast
establishment. (Ord. 88-11, 6-1-1988; amd. Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-8-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; DEPOSIT:
   A.   All applications for licenses to operate a bed and breakfast
establishment shall be made in writing to the village clerk and shall be
accompanied by the license fee for the period for which the application is
made. Such application shall disclose the correct name and address of the
applicant and shall describe accurately the property to be used and the nature
of its construction and shall have attached thereto a plan showing the
following:
      1.   A site plan depicting all existing conditions of and any proposed
modifications to buildings, walks, drives, parking, berming, planting, fencing,
signing and lighting;
      2.   Photographs of the proposed accessory buildings and lot; and
      3.   Proposed floor plan showing all rooms and the designation of room
usage, hallways and exits. Each floor shall have at least two (2) fire exits.
   B.   The applicant for a license under this chapter, at the time of
presenting plans and specifications to the clerk, shall deposit with the clerk
the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00). Said fee shall represent the
initial application fee and shall be nonrefundable, even if the license is not
issued. (Ord. 88-11, 6-1-1988; amd. Ord. 2020-02, 3-12-2020; Ord. 2022-38, 12-
15-2022)
3-8-4: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
No license shall be issued under this chapter to any bed and breakfast
establishment in the village, unless the plans and specifications shall conform
to the following:
   A.   Fire Prevention Devices: Smoke and fire detectors shall be installed in
each hallway or corridor on each floor of the house and in each guest sleeping
room. A fully charged fire extinguisher shall be prominently displayed in an
accessible location on each floor.
   B.   Bathroom Facilities: There shall be at least one bathroom for each five
(5) guests.
   C.   Comply With Regulations And Statutes: The bed and breakfast
establishment shall comply with all federal, state and county regulations and
statutes including, but not limited to, food preparation, cleaning and fire
safety. (Ord. 88-11, 6-1-1988; amd. Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-8-5: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Prior to obtaining a license, the owner shall provide the village clerk with
proof that liability insurance coverage in the amount of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence exists with respect to such
establishment. (Ord. 88-11, 6-1-1988; amd. Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-8-6: LICENSE FEE AND RENEWAL:
Each owner shall apply for a license each calendar year and shall pay an annual
license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). The annual fee is not pro-rated. (Ord.
88-11, 6-1-1988; amd. Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-8-7: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   The clerk shall, at once, transmit the application and attached papers
to the building inspector who shall cause an investigation to be made and shall
deliver the same, together with his findings, to the board of trustees.
   B.   If such application is granted by the board, the clerk shall thereupon
deliver to the applicant a written license signed by the village president and
attested by the clerk, all in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   The denial of any license or nonrenewal of a license may be appealed
consistent with the procedures set forth in the village zoning ordinance as it
relates to application for special use permits. (Ord. 88-11, 6-1-1988; amd.
2013 Code)
3-8-8: REGISTRATION WITH TAXING AUTHORITY; USE TAX:
   A.   Registration with the Illinois Department of Revenue and all other
applicable taxing authorities must be submitted to the village clerk within
ninety (90) days after approval of the license by the Board of Trustees.
   B.   Tax Imposed; Rate: A use tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the
village n the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a bed and
breakfast establishment (as defined in section
3-8-1) at a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross rental receipts from such
renting, leasing or letting, excluding, however, from gross rental receipts,
the proceeds of such renting, leasing or letting to permanent residents of that
bed and breakfast establishment. A resident shall be deemed to be a permanent
resident of a bed and breakfast establishment for purpose of this section if
the person has a written contract for occupancy of a room for a period of time
of not less than thirty (30) days. The rate of the tax may be increased upon
approval of the Village Board of Trustees.
   C.   Payment and Collection of Tax; Failure to Pay: For purposes of the
administration, enforcement and collection of the tax herein provided, the
following provisions shall govern:
      1.   The tax imposed by this section is imposed pursuant to the home rule
authority of the village. This tax is not imposed pursuant to 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-3-14, entitled “hotel rooms; tax on gross rental
receipts”.
      2.   Persons subject to the tax imposed by this section may reimburse
themselves for the tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax as
an additional charge to such other charges as imposed upon the guests or
occupants of the rooms.
      3.   Persons subject to the tax herein provided shall submit to the
office of the village clerk information on forms provided relative to the gross
rental receipts during the preceding calendar month. The forms shall be filed
with the village clerk on or before the thirtieth day of the month following
the month for which the information is provided. A payment of five percent (5%)
of the amount indicated as gross rental receipts shall be paid to the village
at the time of filing the required form. The village clerk is authorized to
enlist the services of existing village employees for purposes of
administrating and enforcing the collection of the tax herein imposed.
      4.   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the
rate of one and one-half percent (1 ½ %) per thirty (30) day period, or portion
thereof, from the day of delinquency shall be added and collected.
      5.   a.   If the tax due is not paid within thirty (30) days after the
date it becomes due, or after a final determination is made by the village
board for a disputed amount, such charges shall constitute a lien on the real
estate for which service is applied. Such lien may be perfected and enforced
against such owner, occupant, and/or any subsequent purchases, lienholders,
mortgages, and other transferees of such property.
         b.   The village clerk is hereby authorized to file a sworn statement
showing any such delinquency in the office of the county recorder of deeds, and
the filing of such statement shall be deemed notice of lien. The statement
shall contain the following:
            (1)   A description thereof;
            (2)   The amount of money due; and
            (3)   The date when such amount became delinquent.
         c.   Any such lien may be foreclosed as any other statutory lien, and
the court costs and related legal expenses for such proceedings shall be part
of the lien and paid by the owner, occupant, and any other person interested in
the property. The exercise of any remedy by enforcement for lien claims shall
not be exclusive of any other legal remedy to collect any amounts delinquent.
         d.   The village attorney is hereby authorized to institute such
foreclosure proceedings in the name of the village and any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which a bill has
remained unpaid for sixty (60) days after the due date.
      6.   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided,
the village attorney shall, upon the request of the village clerk, bring or
cause to be brought any action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of
the village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
   D.   Disposition of Revenues: All proceeds resulting from the imposition of
the tax under this section, including penalties, shall be paid into the village
treasury and shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate general fund
of the village. (Ord. 88-11, 6-1-1988; amd. Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-8-9: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The license shall be conspicuously displayed near the registration area within
the establishment. The license shall be in such form and shall include such
information as may be prescribed from time to time by the village board of
trustees. (Ord. 88-11, 6-1-1988; amd. Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-8-10: RETAIL SALES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONE PROHIBITED:
Any establishment located in a residential zone may not engage in retail sales
on the premises. (Ord. 99-03, 4-14-1999; amd. Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-8-11: PREMISES RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Sign Permitted: One nonilluminated sign shall be permitted, and shall
not include the words “hotel” or “motel”, shall be attached to the
establishment, and shall comply with the Village sign ordinance (Title 10,
Chapter 15) in all other aspects.
   B.   Location To Comply With Zoning Ordinance: The facility shall be
permitted in all residential and less restrictive zones, subject to application
of the owner and issuance of a conditional use permit for any nonconforming use
or structural modification not normally contemplated within that zoning
classification.
   C.   Water And Sewer Service: If the establishment is not serviced with
village water and sewer, the applicable service, which is not connected to the
village, shall be inspected every six (6) months at the expense of the owner.
If so, the results of those tests shall be in compliance with LaSalle County
health regulations regarding water and/or sewer quality. Those reports shall be
filed with the village clerk every six (6) months. (Ord. 88-11, 6-1-1988; amd.
2013 Code; Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-8-12: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR NONRENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any violation of this chapter by an owner or agent of any owner may result in a
suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of such a license as deemed appropriate by
the village board of trustees, after the owner or his agent has had an
opportunity to explain or refute the charges of noncompliance. (Ord. 88-11, 6-
1-1988; amd. Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
CHAPTER 9
OUTDOOR ADVERTISERS
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definition
3-9-2: License Required
3-9-3: Application For License; Fee
3-9-4: Consent Of Owner Required
3-9-5: Maintenance Requirements
3-9-6: Name Of Advertiser
3-9-7: Compliance With Village Regulations
3-9-8: Exemptions From Provisions
3-9-9: Penalty
3-9-1: DEFINITION:
The term "outdoor advertiser", as used in this chapter, shall mean and is
hereby defined to mean any person engaged in the business of placing, posting
or painting any sign, advertisement, notice or display in or on any place for
the purpose of outdoor advertising so that the resultant display is visible
from any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. (1966 Code § 256)
3-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any outdoor advertiser to do business in the village
without having first secured a license therefor as is herein required;
provided, that no license issued under this chapter shall be construed to
permit the use for advertising purposes of any structures, natural or
artificial, which are located in any public street, alley or other public
place. (1966 Code § 257)
3-9-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the village clerk
and shall be accompanied by a list of all places, including billboards or
natural structures, on which the applicant intends to place signs or
advertisements. This list shall be added to, from time to time, by the licensee
as a right to post or place advertisements or signs on additional places as
acquired. The annual fee for such license shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00). (1966 Code §§ 258, 259)
3-9-4: CONSENT OF OWNER REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to post any advertisement on any premises in the village
without the consent of the owner of such premises. Such consent must be in
writing and must be filed with the village clerk. (1966 Code § 261)
3-9-5: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Disposal Of Refuse:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in outdoor advertising
to permit any refuse resulting from his work to accumulate anywhere in the
village except by placing it in properly established refuse receptacles.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to permit any loose or flapping or combustible
materials to hang from or be attached to any billboard or signboard or other
place used for display or advertising purposes.
      3.   All refuse resulting from the operation of the outdoor advertising
business must be carefully gathered up and properly disposed of. (1966 Code §
262)
   B.   Control Of Vegetation: It shall be the duty of every outdoor advertiser
to keep all grass and weeds and other growths, except trees and ornamental
shrubbery, cut down so that the same shall not grow to a height greater than
ten inches (10") within six feet (6') of any billboard or signboard used by
him; provided, that this obligation shall extend only to the property
controlled by the advertiser. (1966 Code § 263)
3-9-6: NAME OF ADVERTISER:
It shall be unlawful for any outdoor advertiser to carry on his business unless
the name of such advertiser is attached, displayed or printed on all billboards
or signboards used by him or on any notice, placard or advertisement posted by
him in such lettering as to be visible from a distance of at least five feet
(5') from the notice or advertisement. (1966 Code § 266)
3-9-7: COMPLIANCE WITH VILLAGE REGULATIONS:
No person shall post or maintain any advertisement or sign on any poster panel,
billboard or signboard which does not fully comply with the ordinances of the
village. (1966 Code § 260)
3-9-8: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to apply to the posting
of signs or notices by order of any court or by any public officer in the
performance of his duties. (1966 Code § 267)
3-9-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1966
Code § 268; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 10
SOUND AMPLIFIERS
SECTION:
3-10-1: License Required
3-10-2: Application For License
3-10-3: License Fees
3-10-4: Investigation Of Applicant; Approval Or Denial Of License; Issuance Of
License
3-10-5: Use Restrictions
3-10-6: License Terms/Approval
3-10-7: Penalty
3-10-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any loudspeaker or amplifier
connected with any radio, phonograph, microphone or other device by which
sounds are magnified and made heard over any public street or public place
without having first secured a license therefor. (Ord. 2017-28, 9-13-2017)
3-10-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person desiring a license for the use or operation of such device shall
file an application therefor with the Village Clerk, upon a form provided by
the Village, setting forth the following:
   A.   The name, age, address, and phone number of the applicant in the case
of an individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share
in the profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation, for profit, or non-
profit, or a club, the date of the incorporation, the objects for which it was
organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a
majority interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or
his nominees, the name and address of such person.
   B.   The character of business of the applicant; and in case of a
corporation, the purpose for which it was formed.
   C.   The length of time that applicant has been in business of that
character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued.
   D.   The location and description of the premises or place of business which
is to be operated under such license, and the name, address, and telephone
number of the owner of the premises if not owned by the applicant, and the date
of the termination of the lease held by the applicant.
   E.   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is
not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter or any ordinance or statute.
   F.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
State of Illinois, of the United States, or any ordinance of the Village in the
conduct of the event. (Ord. 2017-28, 9-13-2017)
3-10-3: LICENSE FEES:
The fees for licenses to be granted under this chapter shall be as follows:
For the use or operation of any radio receiving set, talking machine, amplifier
or other similar device to be operated from a fixed location and not in a
moving vehicle, or from a moving vehicle along the streets a license/permit is
required. A daily license fee, for any day or part of day, is twenty five
dollars ($25.00), or an annual license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for which the licensee desires to be licensed hereunder. (Ord. 2017-28, 9-13-
2017)
3-10-4: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF LICENSE; ISSUANCE OF
LICENSE:
The Village Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief of Police, or his
designee, with a copy to the Village President. The Chief of Police, or his
designee, shall investigate the statements in each application, and the
character of such applicant, and no later than seven (7) days after any such
application is referred to him, shall approve or deny any such application. Any
denial so made by the Chief of Police, or his designee, shall be final, and no
license shall be granted if denied.
If approved, the license shall be issued upon the payment of the license fee,
as above provided, to the Village Clerk, and shall permit the use of any such
device subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter, any conditions
imposed on the license, and only upon the date specified on such license and no
other. (Ord. 2017-28, 9-13-2017)
3-10-5: USE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The allowed hours that a licensee can use or operate or employ any such
device within the Village limits are as follows: Monday through Saturday eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.; and on Sunday eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
   B.   No licensee shall use, operate or employ any such device within a
radius of two (2) blocks from any hospital or within the radius of two (2)
blocks from any place of worship while funeral services are being held there.
   C.   No licensee shall cause or permit to be emanated or emitted from any
such device any lewd, obscene, profane or indecent language or sounds or any
false representation of any matter, produce or project advertised thereby, the
sale of which is prohibited by any law, ordinance or statute.
   D.   This section shall not apply to radios in homes or in private pleasure
vehicles, when the same are operated in such manner as not to be audible at a
distance of fifty feet (50') from such vehicle nor to noise devices, bands or
other musical devices used in any public parade or procession which is operated
under a permit in accordance with the ordinances of the Village. (Ord. 2017-28,
9-13-2017)
3-10-6: LICENSE TERMS/APPROVAL:
A license may have conditions imposed upon such or be denied in its entirety by
the Chief of Police, or his designee, for any lawful reason, including but not
limited to the nature of the event, the character of the application, the date
and time of the event, traffic concerns, the surrounding area of the event
location, public safety concerns, and/or in the best interest of the public
health, safety, and general well-being of the community. (Ord. 2017-28, 9-13-
2017)
3-10-7: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter, as determined by the Chief of Police, or his
designee, may result in immediate revocation of the license. Additionally, any
person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.
2017-28, 9-13-2017)
CHAPTER 11
SPECIAL EVENT LICENSE ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-11-1: License Required; Subjects Of Licensing Authority
3-11-2: Applications
3-11-3: License Procedures/Fee
3-11-4: Investigations
3-11-5: Approval; Disapproval
3-11-6: Licenses Not Assignable; Unlawful Use
3-11-7: Location
3-11-8: Records And Standards
3-11-9: Inspections
3-11-10: Suspension, Revocation And Appeal
3-11-11: License Not To Preclude Other Licenses
3-11-12: Activities And Organizations Excluded
3-11-13: Prohibited Conduct
3-11-14: Penalty
3-11-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; SUBJECTS OF LICENSING AUTHORITY:
No person shall conduct, maintain, operate, carry on or manage any special
event, either individually or through an agent, employee, organization, or
partner, for which a license is required by this chapter, without first having
obtained a license for such special event.
A "special event" is defined as any activity in the village that is to be held,
in any part, on property owned, and/or maintained by the village that requires
any of the following:
   A.   Additional police protection;
   B.   Liquor license;
   C.   Special assistance of village maintenance department;
   D.   Installation of portable restrooms; and
   E.   Additional insurance coverage by the village.
The village retains the sole discretion to determine whether an activity is
considered a special event. Specifically, exempt activities include regular use
of the village parks by organized youth sports leagues. (Ord. 2013-05, 3-13-
2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
3-11-2: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all special event licenses required hereunder shall be made to
the village clerk in writing on a form provided for that purpose, except as
otherwise provided herein. The form to be utilized is attached as exhibit A to
the ordinance codified herein and may be modified from time to time by the
village clerk.
If the applicant is an individual (sole proprietorship), the application shall
contain the applicant's name, residence address and telephone number. If the
applicant is a partnership or other noncorporate business entity, or
organization, the application shall contain the name and residential address
and telephone number of each partner, principal, officer, or director. If the
applicant is a corporation, the application shall contain the name, residential
address and telephone number of each principal officer and the registered agent
thereof. If the applicant is an unincorporated association, the application
shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the spokesman,
chairman, or other leader of the association.
Each application also shall contain: a) a designation of the type or kind of
special event to be operated, b) the location or proposed location of the place
of the special event, c) the applicable fee to be paid, d) the number of the
certificate of registration required under the retailer's occupation tax act
(sales tax), service occupation tax act, and/or use tax act if applicable, e)
the employer identification number for the applicant, if applicable, and f)
such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of village
officials in the evaluation of such application, including proof of any
insurance policy or bond required by this chapter. (Ord. 2013-05, 3-13-2013,
eff. 4-1-2013)
3-11-3: LICENSE PROCEDURES/FEE:
All persons desiring to operate a special event, as listed in this chapter,
shall file with the village clerk an application for a license to operate the
special event in the village no later than thirty (30) days prior to the time
such person desires to commence operation in the village.
Each special event license issued by the village shall, in the absence of any
provision to the contrary, bear the signature of the village clerk or their
designee for purposes of this chapter. Each license issued shall be dated and
shall state to whom it is issued, for what purpose, the location, if any, at
which such event is to be conducted and the date when the license is to expire.
The required fee for each license issued shall be collected in full at the time
of application for a license.
The fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 2013-05, 3-13-2013, eff.
4-1-2013)
3-11-4: INVESTIGATIONS:
Subsequent to receipt of an application for a license where ordinances of the
village necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such
permit or license, the village clerk shall refer such application to the proper
officer or employee for making such investigation. The officer or employee
charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a
report thereon to the village clerk favorable or otherwise.
All investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the chief
of police or by some other officer or employee designated by the village. (Ord.
2013-05, 3-13-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
3-11-5: APPROVAL; DISAPPROVAL:
After due consideration of the information contained in the application, the
village clerk shall present the application to the village board to approve or
disapprove the application. Thereupon the village clerk shall notify the
applicant and issue a license as provided above if approved.
If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application, the village board shall determine that matters concerning the
application are unsatisfactory, he/she shall disapprove the application,
indicating the reasons therefor. Thereupon, the village clerk shall notify the
applicant that the application has not been approved and that no license will
be issued. (Ord. 2013-05, 3-13-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
3-11-6: LICENSES NOT ASSIGNABLE; UNLAWFUL USE:
No license may be assigned, sold, loaned, transferred, used as collateral or
otherwise encumbered. No person shall use or display any license certificate,
tag, badge or sticker which has been improperly acquired.
No person shall alter, deface, forge, or counterfeit any license, certificate,
plate, tag, badge or sticker issued by the village. (Ord. 2013-05, 3-13-2013,
eff. 4-1-2013)
3-11-7: LOCATION:
No license for the operation of a special event in the village shall be
construed to permit its operation in any location other than what is specified
in the license. (Ord. 2013-05, 3-13-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
3-11-8: RECORDS AND STANDARDS:
The village clerk shall maintain a record of all special event licenses issued
under this chapter. Subject to the terms and provisions of this chapter, upon
payment in full of the required license fee to the village, the village shall
issue a license tag or sticker or certificate or similar evidence of license
which shall be maintained by the operator in a conspicuous place.
No license for a special event in the village shall be issued if one or more of
the following conditions are determined to exist:
   A.   The special event does not comply with the provisions and terms of any
ordinance or regulation of the village.
   B.   The special event would be of a nature that the village deems is
unsanitary or unsafe or would constitute a public nuisance, so as to endanger
the public safety, health or welfare.
   C.   The license recipient is indebted to the village.
   D.   For any other reason deemed appropriate by the village board,
including, but not limited to, availability of village employees and proximity
in time to other licensed events. (Ord. 2013-05, 3-13-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
3-11-9: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the village president to determine whether or not all
licenses are in compliance with all applicable ordinance and regulatory
requirements during the period of the license. Whenever inspections of the
premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or
occupation are provided for or required by this chapter, or any ordinance, or
are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any
ordinance or regulation of the village, or to detect violations thereof, it
shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to
admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer, agent or
employee of the village who is duly authorized by the village president to make
such inspection at any reasonable time that such admission or entry is
requested. (Ord. 2013-05, 3-13-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
3-11-10: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND APPEAL:
When the conduct or operation of any special event, shall constitute a nuisance
in fact and a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general
welfare, or where the holder of any license shall have refused to allow an
inspection of his premises, the village president shall be authorized to
summarily order the cessation of the special event. (Ord. 2013-05, 3-13-2013,
eff. 4-1-2013)
3-11-11: LICENSE NOT TO PRECLUDE OTHER LICENSES:
The license required in this chapter shall be in addition to any vehicle
license, liquor license, building permit, inspection fees or any other fees or
charges that may be required by other village ordinances, whether now existing
or hereafter adopted. (Ord. 2013-05, 3-13-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
3-11-12: ACTIVITIES AND ORGANIZATIONS EXCLUDED:
The license fee requirements of this chapter may be waived for activities
sponsored or conducted by religious, educational, charitable, civic or
political organizations or institutions; or to governmental institutions or
agencies acting in either a governmental or proprietary capacity; or to any
franchised public utility; or to carriers regulated exclusively by the federal
government. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to diminish the authority
of the village to perform any of its necessary or ordinary regulatory
functions, nor shall any organization as described in this section be relieved
of the responsibility of filing an application and securing a license as is
otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2013-05, 3-13-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
3-11-13: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in, maintain, operate,
carry on or manage any special event, either by himself or through an agent,
employee, organization or partner, contrary to the standards and regulations
set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2013-05, 3-13-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
3-11-14: PENALTY:
Any person, corporation or organization, of any kind, violating the prohibition
of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day of
violation and each violating location shall be considered a separate offense
under this section. (Ord. 2013-05, 3-13-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
CHAPTER 12
VACATION RENTAL UNIT
SECTION:
3-12-1: Definitions
3-12-2:    License Required; License Term And Requirements; Exemptions
3-12-3:    Application; Notice; Standards And Procedures; Renewal Fees
3-12-4:    Requirements And Standards
3-12-5:    Penalty
3-12-6:    Revocation; Suspension; Procedures
3-12-7:    Size Of Dwelling Units
3-12-8:    Special Use Required
3-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
 
             1.   Type (A) Family: One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or
             adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
             2.   Type (B) Family: Two (2) unrelated persons and their children living together
             as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
             3.   Type (C) Family: A group of not more than three (3) unrelated persons living
             together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
             4.   Type (D) Family: A group of two (2) or more persons containing within it one
FAMILY:      (1) or more families, as defined in Subsections (a.) and (b.) of this definition,
             including a husband and wife married to one another and their children, as well as
             adults, living together in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit and
             management, in premises in which the adult occupants are affiliated with a bona fide
             not for profit corporation organized for religious or charitable purposes chartered
             by the State of Illinois.
             “Family” shall not be construed to mean a club, a lodge or a fraternity/sorority
             house.
SINGLE       A residential unit where the person or persons residing in the unit functions as a
HOUSEKEEPING family and are sufficiently stable and permanent so as to not be considered
UNIT:        transient.
             A dwelling unit or an allocated space or a portion thereof offered for rent for a
             period shorter than thirty (30) consecutive days to any person other than a member
             of the owner’s family, as those terms are defined in this chapter. The term
VACATION     “vacation rental unit” and/or “short-term vacation rental” shall not include hotels
RENTAL UNIT: or motels, and/or bed and breakfast establishments, licensed pursuant to other
             sections of the Village Code. The terms “vacation rental units” and/or “short-term
             vacation rental” shall have the same meaning herein. (Ord. 2020-01, 2-27-2020; amd.
             Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
 
3-12-2:  LICENSE REQUIRED; LICENSE TERM AND REQUIREMENTS; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to operate a vacation rental unit within the
Village of North Utica without a current, valid license issued pursuant to the
terms of this chapter.
   B.   Each license issued shall be valid for one (1) calendar year, unless
earlier revoked as provided herein, and subject to renewal.
   C.   Subsection (1.) of this section notwithstanding, no license shall be
required to the following:
      1.   A rental agreement executed pursuant to or in conjunction with a
contract to sell the dwelling unit containing the vacation rental.
      2.   Vacation rental guest(s) who is/are displaced from his/her/their own
dwelling unit so that it may be renovated and/or repaired. (Ord. 2020-01, 2-27-
2020; amd. Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-12-3: APPLICATION; NOTICE; STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES; RENEWAL FEES:
   A.   Applications: A property owner who seeks a vacation rental unit license
pursuant to this chapter shall submit a written application that contains all
information required for a registration statement pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Notice: Each application shall be accompanied by proof the applicant
mailed notice thereof to all owners, whose addresses appear on the current tax
assessment list, of real property located within a radius of two hundred fifty
feet (250') of the subject property, inclusive of public streets, alleys and
other public ways. The notice shall contain the applicant's name, the address
of the subject property, and that the applicant intends to seek a vacation
rental unit license from the Village of North Utica.
   C.   Standards And Procedures For License Approval: The application for
vacation rental units and/or short-term vacation rentals will be referred to
the Village Planning Commission for review and consideration as a special use
in those zoning districts where such is allowed as a Special Use. Such may be
approved with conditions or disapproved. An application for a vacation rental
unit and/or short-term vacation rental license shall be evaluated upon findings
of fact with respect to each of the standards set forth below:
      1.   The proposed vacation rental unit will not cause a negative
cumulative effect when its effect is considered in conjunction with the effect
of other vacation rentals in the immediate neighborhood.
      2.   The vacation rental unit will not have a substantial adverse impact
on the use, enjoyment, or property values of adjoining properties.
      3.   The proposed vacation rental unit will comply with all the rules and
regulations contained herein.
      4.   The proposed vacation rental unit is not likely to have an adverse
effect upon the public health, welfare, or safety.
      5.   The conditions, standards, and requirements for granting a special
use pursuant to section
10-10-1 et. seq. of the Village Zoning Ordinance are satisfied.
      6.   No application for a ground-floor unit in the C-l, Central Business
District, will be considered for approval.
   D.   For applicants seeking a license in the C-l, Central Business District,
(Section
10-8A-3), or in C-2, General Commercial District, (Section
10-8B-3), and the C-3, Highway Commercial District, (Section
10-8C-3), only the applicant may seek an administrative approval in lieu of a
special use. Administrative approval shall require the same application and all
standards and requirements of this chapter shall apply. Administrative approval
is to be granted only by the Village President, or his/her designee in his/her
absence. If the Village President or his/her designee fails to approve any
application within fifteen (15) days of its receipt by the village, then it is
deemed denied and the applicant may seek a special use.
The granting of an administrative approval shall not be considered a precedent
for future applicants as such determination is made on a case-by-case basis.
   E.   Regardless of its finding on any or all of the foregoing standards, the
Village Board of Trustees may deny a vacation rental license upon a finding
that such denial is in the public interest.
   F.   Renewal: If a vacation rental unit license was issued for the prior
year, the approval for a renewal license shall be obtained from the Village
Clerk or his/her designee, provided the previously issued license was not
revoked or suspended, and the vacation rental did not receive citations(s) from
the village zoning enforcement officer or any police officer during said prior
calendar year. Every renewal application shall satisfy all requirements set
forth in this chapter.
   G.   Application Fee/License Fee: The annual fee for a license issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per unit. In addition,
an application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per unit shall be charged
upon application. The annual fee is not pro-rated and is valid of the calendar
year of issuance.
   H.   No Transfer: A vacation rental unit license attaches only to the
property for which it is issued and is non-transferrable upon sale or other
transfer of ownership of the property. Upon such transfer of ownership, the new
owner of the property shall apply for a vacation rental license if it wishes to
continue the use of the property as a vacation rental unit.
   I.   Registration with Taxing Authority; Use Tax:
      1.   Registration with the Illinois Department of Revenue and all other
applicable taxing authorities must be submitted to the village clerk within
ninety (90) days after approval of the license by the Board of Trustees.
      2.   Tax Imposed; Rate: A use tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in
the village n the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a bed and
breakfast establishment (as defined in section
3-8-1) at a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross rental receipts from such
renting, leasing or letting, excluding, however, from gross rental receipts,
the proceeds of such renting, leasing or letting to permanent residents of that
bed and breakfast establishment. A resident shall be deemed to be a permanent
resident of a bed and breakfast establishment for purpose of this section if
the person has a written contract for occupancy of a room for a period of time
of not less than thirty (30) days. The rate of the tax may be increased upon
approval of the Village Board of Trustees.
      3.   Payment and Collection of Tax; Failure to Pay: For purposes of the
administration, enforcement and collection of the tax herein provided, the
following provisions shall govern:
         a.   The tax imposed by this section is imposed pursuant to the home
rule authority of the village. This tax is not imposed pursuant to 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-3-14, entitled “hotel rooms; tax on gross rental
receipts”.
         b.   Persons subject to the tax imposed by this section may reimburse
themselves for the tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax as
an additional charge to such other charges as imposed upon the guests or
occupants of the rooms.
         c.   Persons subject to the tax herein provided shall submit to the
office of the village clerk information on forms provided relative to the gross
rental receipts during the preceding calendar month. The forms shall be filed
with the village clerk on or before the thirtieth day of the month following
the month for which the information is provided. A payment of five percent (5%)
of the amount indicated as gross rental receipts shall be paid to the village
at the time of filing the required form. The village clerk is authorized to
enlist the services of existing village employees for purposes of
administrating and enforcing the collection of the tax herein imposed.
         d.   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the
rate of one and one-half percent (1 ½ %) per thirty (30) day period, or portion
thereof, from the day of delinquency shall be added and collected.
         e.   (1)   If the tax due is not paid within thirty (30) days after
the date it becomes due, or after a final determination is made by the village
board for a disputed amount, such charges shall constitute a lien on the real
estate for which service is applied. Such lien may be perfected and enforced
against such owner, occupant, and/or any subsequent purchase, lienholders,
mortgages, and other transferees of such property.
            (2)   The village clerk is hereby authorized to file a sworn
statement showing any such delinquency in the office of the county recorder of
deeds, and the filing of such statement shall be deemed notice of lien. The
statement shall contain the following:
               (A)   A description thereof;
               (B)   The amount of money due; and
               (C)   The date when such amount became delinquent.
            (3)   Any such lien may be foreclosed as any other statutory lien,
and the court costs and related legal expenses for such proceedings shall be
part of the lien and paid by the owner, occupant, and any other person
interested in the property. The exercise of any remedy by enforcement for lien
claims shall not be exclusive of any other legal remedy to collect any amounts
delinquent.
            (4)   The village attorney is hereby authorized to institute such
foreclosure proceedings in the name of the village and any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which a bill has
remained unpaid for sixty (60) days after the due date.
         f.   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided,
the village attorney shall, upon the request of the village clerk, bring or
cause to be brought any action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of
the village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
      4.   Disposition of Revenues: All proceeds resulting from the imposition
of the tax under this section, including penalties, shall be paid into the
village treasury and shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate
general fund of the village.
   J.   Business License: The owner of a vacation rental unit property must
possess a valid business license pursuant to Title
3-1-1 of the Village Code. The business license must be renewed annually where
the owner desires to use the property as a vacation rental unit. A vacation
rental license may be denied or revoked if the owner of the vacation rental
property does not have a valid business license.
   K.   Insurance / Annual Inspection / Safety Requirements: Prior to obtaining
a vacation rental license, the owner shall provide the clerk with proof that
liability insurance coverage in the amount of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence exists with respect to such vacation rental
unit.
Vacation rental unit properties are subject to inspection annually, or at any
time for cause. Vacation rental unit licenses may be limited, suspended,
revoked or not renewed by the licensing official if all conditions and
requirements of the vacation rental unit license, the Village Code, and all
State and Federal laws are not satisfied.
All vacation rental units shall have installed working smoke detectors, carbon
monoxide detectors, and any other safety warning systems as required by
Illinois law and/or the Chief of the Utica Fire Protection District and/or
Village Chief of Police.
   L.   Administration:
      1.   The village shall prescribe forms and make reasonable rules and
requirements in accordance for, without limitation, application requirements,
the inspection of all vacation rental unit properties, the verification of the
capacity and safety of such vacation rental unit properties and administration
and enforcement of the requirements of this Title and the Village Code.
      2.   Applicants must pay their license fee at the time of application,
whether initial or for any renewal.
   M.   Licensee Duties: It shall be the duty of the fee title owner of the
vacation rental unit to ensure the following:
      1.   Obtain a renewal of the vacation rental unit license annually, if
the property remains a vacation rental unit.
       2.   Cause the vacation rental to comply with the Village Code
continuously and without interruption.
      3.   Promptly notify the licensing official upon any change of local
contact.
   N.   Local Contact: All vacation rental unit licenses shall include the
telephone numbers of two (2) local responsible contact persons capable of
physically responding to issues that may arise at the vacation rental unit
property within one (1) hour of the initial attempt to contact the vacation
rental unit property owner. The local contacts must have physical access to the
vacation rental unit property and shall be authorized to make decisions
regarding the vacation rental unit property on behalf of the property owner.
Additionally, the two (2) contact telephone numbers shall be posted in a
prominent location within the vacation rental unit.
   O.   Address/License Number Display: Every vacation rental unit license
shall be issued a unique number. The vacation rental unit license number shall
be displayed in all advertisements for the vacation rental unit property.
Advertisements for the vacation rental property shall include any act,
regardless of medium, of drawing the public’s attention to the vacation rental
unit property in order to promote the availability of the vacation rental unit
property.
Additionally, the local street address and unit number of the vacation rental
unit shall be prominently displayed so as to be visible from the street.
   P.   Parking Required: All vacation rental unit properties must keep and
maintain adequate off-street parking approved in conjunction with special use
approval for the vacation rental unit property and made available for year-
round use by vacation rental unit tenants.
   Q.   Maximum Occupancy: The maximum occupancy of any vacation rental unit
property is ten (10) people. Occupancy may be adjusted by the village following
physical inspection of the vacation rental unit property. The basis for the
occupancy determination shall be an allowance of two (2) occupants per
legitimate bedroom plus two (2) additional occupants. Any increase above four
(4) people in a vacation rental unit property shall include an on-site parking
space for each two (2) additional occupants (or part thereof) in addition to
any parking required by the Village Code. Such parking requirements shall be in
addition to any other parking requirements that may be imposed.
   R.   Renter Requirements: Each vacation rental unit property shall
prominently display on site and available to all renters the rules and
regulations of the village that apply to the occupancy of the vacation rental
unit property. Such information shall include information pertinent to the
neighborhood where the vacation rental property is located including, but not
limited to, parking restrictions, restrictions on noise and amplified sound,
trash disposal, storage and collection schedule and any other information as
required by the licensing official.
   S.   Severability: If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, word or other
provision of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid, such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
sections, sentences, clauses, phrases, words or other provisions of this
chapter, or the validity of this chapter as an entirety, it being the
legislative intent that this chapter shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity
of any section, sentence, clause, phrase, word or other provision. (Ord. 2020-
01, 2-27-2020; amd. Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022)
3-12-4: REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS:
   A.   No vacation rental unit operator and/or short-term vacation rental
operator shall:
      1.   Rent or lease any vacation rental unit for any period of time
shorter than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours;
      2.   Rent or lease any vacation rental unit more than once within any
consecutive twenty-four (24)-hour period measured from the commencement of one
rental to the commencement of the next;
      3.   Advertise an hourly rate or any other rate for a vacation rental
unit based on a rental period of fewer than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours;
      4.   Serve or otherwise provide any food or beverage to any guest; and/or
      5.   Cause or permit, by action or failure to act, the vacation rental
unit or its use to suffer from and/or create any violation of any provisions of
the Village Code or State of Illinois or Federal law.
   B.   Every vacation rental unit shall be subject to inspection by members of
the Utica Police Department, its zoning enforcement officer, the Utica Fire
Protection District, and the LaSalle County Health Department.
   C.   Every vacation rental unit operator shall keep a register in which
shall be entered the name of every guest and his/her arrival and departure
dates. Such register shall be maintained for at least a five (5) year period.
The operator shall make said register freely accessible to any officer of the
Village Police Department and/or the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
   D.   Every vacation rental unit operator shall post, in a conspicuous place
within the vacation rental, the name and telephone number of the operator's
authorized agent.
   E.   Any kitchen in a vacation rental unit shall be cleaned and sanitized
between guests and all food and beverages shall be discarded. All dishes,
utensils, pots, pans and other cooking utensils shall be cleaned and sanitized
between guests.
   F.   The operator of every vacation rental unit shall change supplied bed
linens and towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of
any room to any new guest. The operator shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner. (Ord. 2020-
01, 2-27-2020)
3-12-5: PENALTY:
   A.   Any owner, tenant or other person who shall be found to have violated
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense punishable
as follows:
      1.   The fine for a first violation is to be not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00).
      2.   The fine for a second violation and each subsequent violation is to
be not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00).
   B.   Each day a provision of this chapter is found to have been violated
constitutes a separate violation subject to the fine schedule set forth herein.
   C.   Any fines shall be debts due and owing to the village that the village
may collect by any means allowed by law, including, but not limited to, filing
a lien against the vacation rental or the premises containing the vacation
rental.
   D.   The fines provided for herein shall not be construed as limiting the
power of a court of competent jurisdiction or an administrative hearing officer
to impose other penalties and/or remedies as provided for by applicable
legislation. The village may seek injunctive relief to enforce this chapter. In
addition, a licensee found to have violated any provision of this chapter may
be subject to license revocation, suspension, or non-renewal regardless of
whether a first violation or a multiple violation.
   E.   All reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred by the village in
enforcing this chapter may be added to the amount of any fine and penalty.
(Ord. 2020-01, 2-27-2020)
3-12-6: REVOCATION; SUSPENSION; PROCEDURES:
   A.   The village zoning enforcement officer and/or Chief of Police may
revoke or suspend a license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter for
any of the following reasons:
      1.   If the owner of the relevant vacation rental unit or his/her agent
violates any of the term of this chapter, other applicable village ordinances,
or laws of the State of Illinois, or United States;
      2.   If illegal activity has occurred on the site, or if a disturbance or
disruption has occurred upon neighboring properties, and/or the rental unit is
determined to constitute a nuisance in violation of the Village of North Utica
Code and/or any State or Federal laws that may be applicable have been
violated.
      3.   If village zoning enforcement officer and/or Chief of Police deems
the vacation rental unit, or the premises wherein it is located, to be a vacant
building, as defined therein; and/or
      4.   If the village or other governmental agency condemns the vacation
rental unit or the premises wherein it is located.
   B.   Not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to a revocation hearing for
a license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter, the village zoning
enforcement officer and/or Chief of Police, or their designee, shall send, via
First Class U.S. Mail, a notice of revocation hearing to the owner or his/her
authorized agent and the address provided on the most recent license
application. Notice shall be sufficient if sent to the address of the
authorized agent indicated on the license application. Said notice shall
include the following:
      1.   Description of the vacation rental, sufficient for identification;
      2.   A statement that the license is subject to revocation;
      3.   A statement of the reasons for the revocation;
      4.   The date and time upon which a revocation hearing shall occur; and
      5.   The location for said revocation hearing.
   C.   If the village zoning enforcement officer and/or Chief of Police has
reason to believe that immediate suspension of the license is necessary to
prevent the threat of immediate harm to the village or neighborhood, the
village zoning enforcement officer and/or Chief of Police may, upon the
issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without
notice or hearing, order the license suspended for not more than ten (10) days.
The village zoning enforcement officer and/or Chief of Police may extend the
suspension during the pendency of a hearing upon a written determination that
doing so is necessary to prevent the aforesaid harm to the village or
neighborhood.
   D.   Hearings shall be conducted by the Village President.
   E.   Within fifteen (15) calendar days after the close of the hearing, the
Village President shall issue a writing decision that shall constitute a final
determination for purposes of judicial review pursuant to the Illinois
Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., as amended. In reaching a
decision, the Village President may consider any of the following:
      1.   The nature of the violation;
      2.   The nature and extent of the harm caused by the licensee's action or
failure to act;
      3.   The factual situation and circumstances surrounding the violation;
      4.   Whether or not the action or failure to act was willful; and
      5.   The record of the licensee with respect to violations.
   F.   A licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible to
reapply for a new license for two (2) years from the date of revocation. (Ord.
2020-01, 2-27-2020)
3-12-7: SIZE OF DWELLING UNITS:     
No dwelling unit which contain less than six hundred (600) square-feet of
living space shall be permitted. (Ord. 2020-01, 2-27-2020)
3-12-8: SPECIAL USE REQUIRED:    
Vacation rental unit licenses shall only be permitted upon receipt of a special
use as provided for in section
10-10-1, unless an application meets the requirements for and receives
administrative approval under section
3-12-3 of this chapter. Vacation rental units are allowed as a special use or
by administrative approval where allowed, only in the zoning districts listed:
   A.   R-R Rural Residential District (Section
10-7D-3), subject to additional restrictions of at least five (5) acres in
size.
   B.   C-l Central Business District (Section
10-8A-3) but not on ground floor;
   C.   C-2 General Commercial Districts (Section
10-8B-3);
   D.   C-3 Highway Commercial Districts (Section
10-8C-3). (Ord. 2020-01, 2-27-2020)
CHAPTER 13
RAFFLES
SECTION:
3-13-1: Definitions
3-13-2: License Required
3-13-3: Application for License
3-13-4: Restrictions on Issuance of Licenses
3-13-5: Conduct of Raffles
3-13-6: Limitations on Licenses
3-13-7: Raffles Manager; Bond
3-13-8: Records
3-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
             A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who have joined
BUSINESS:    together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and civic interests of
             the community.
             An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite
CHARITABLE:  number of the public. The services rendered to those eligible for benefits must
             also confer some benefit on the public.
             An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic
EDUCATIONAL: instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to schools and
             institutions of learning which compare favorable in their scope and intensity
             with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
             An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of
FRATERNAL:   which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to
             the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring
             for those that otherwise would be cared for by the government.
             An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of
LABOR:       the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the development of a higher
             degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET          The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for
PROCEEDS:    prizes, local license fees and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a
             result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT:   An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-profit basis
             with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the operation.
             A style of raffle which allows the holder of a winning raffle ticket the
             opportunity to select or have selected on their behalf a card from a deck of up
             to 54 playing cards, one of which represents the winning jackpot card. The
             selection of the playing card by the winning raffle ticket holder shall be in
             accordance with rules established by the organization licensed pursuant to this
PROGRESSIVE  chapter but must be based upon an element of chance by an act or set of acts on
RAFFLE:      the part of the persons conducting or connected with the raffle. The playing card
             selected by or on behalf of the holder of a winning raffle ticket may also be
             designated as a winning prize valued at less than the jackpot for such
             progressive raffle in accordance with the rules established by the licensed
             organization. For illustrative purposes only, games commonly known as “queen of
             hearts raffle” would be classified as a progressive raffle.
             A form of lottery, as defined in Chapter 38, Section 28-2(b), ILCS of the
             “Criminal Code of 11661" 1  conducted by an organization licensed under this
             chapter in which:
             A.   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
             represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
RAFFLE:      some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
             chance.
             B.   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other
             method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of
             persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance
             shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest.
RELIGIOUS:   Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the purpose of
             religious worship.
             An organization or association comprised of members which are substantially
VETERANS:    veterans and spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of
             which is to promote the welfare of its membership and to provide assistance to
             the general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit.
 
(Ord. 2022-33, 9-8-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 5/28-2
3-13-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct
raffles or changes within the Village of North Utica unless the person, firm,
or corporation has a valid license issued in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
   B.   Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable,
labor, business, fraternal, educational, veterans’ or other bona fide not-for-
profit organizations that operate without profit to their members and which
have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately
before making application for a license and which have during that entire five
(5) year period engaged in carrying out their objects, or to a nonprofit fund-
raising organization that the licensing authority determines is organized for
the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual
or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of
an illness, disability, accident or disaster and such organizations are located
within the corporate boundary of the Village, or to any law enforcement
agencies and statewide associations that represent law enforcement officials.
(Ord. 2022-33, 9-8-2022; amd. Ord. 2024-30, 8-8-2024)
3-13-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for such licenses shall be made to the Village President or his/her
designated representative, signed by the applicant or its duly authorized
representatives and verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the
following information and statements:
   A.   Names, ages and addresses of the applicant in the case of an individual
or in such other case by the duly authorized representatives of the applicant,
the date of incorporation of any corporation, the date of formation of any
club, the objects for which a club or corporation was formed, the names and
addresses of the officers and directors of any club, the name and address of
the local representative of any church.
   B.   The character of business of the applicant and in the case of a
corporation the objects for which it was formed.
   C.   The location and description of the premises or place of business at
which the winning chances will be determined.
   D.   The intended distribution of the net proceeds of the raffle.
   E.   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the
time of determination of winning chances and the method by which the winning
chance will be determined and whether raffle chances will be sold via the
internet.
   F.   A sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the
respective licensee organization signed by the presiding officer and secretary
of that organization.
   G.   A sworn statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony
that would impair the applicant’s ability to engage in the licensed activity
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter, other ordinances of the Village, laws of the State
of Illinois or of the United States of America.
   H.   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof or by
the federal government has been revoked and the reasons therefor.
   I.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
State of Illinois or of the United States or any ordinances of this Village in
the conduct of the raffle.
   J.   A statement that the applicant will not allow gambling devices or
gambling on the premises where the drawing will be held, except for the use or
operation of such video gaming terminals for which a video gaming terminal
permit has been issued and which is lawfully operated within a licensed
establishment, in accordance with the provisions of Village Code. (Ord. 2022-
33, 9-8-2022)
3-13-4: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSES:
No such license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who is not a good moral character and reputation in the
Village.
   B.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law which would impair the person’s ability to engage in the licensed activity.
   C.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   D.   A person or organization whose license issued under this chapter has
been revoked for cause.
   E.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   F.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate, more than 5% of the stock
of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than residence within the Village.
   G.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter.
   H.   A person or organization whose place of business is conducted by a
manager or agent, unless said manager or agent possesses the same
qualifications required of the licensee.
   I.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of this chapter or shall have forfeited bond to
appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
   J.   A person or organization who does not own the premises upon which the
raffle drawing will be conducted or does not have a lease or rental agreement
thereon for the full period for which the raffle drawing will be conducted.
   K.   A person who is not an owner, director, officer, employee or member of
the licensee.
   L.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by
any part of Subsection (a)(3) through (a)(10) of Section 28-1, or as proscribed
by Section 28-3 of the Criminal Code of 11661, approved July 28, 11661, as
heretofore or hereafter amended as contained in Illinois Compiled Statutes
11661, Chapter 38, Section 18-1, 28-3 1  or as proscribed by a statue replaced
by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions.
   M.   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period.
   N.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20% of the stock of such
corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp for the current tax period.
   O.   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period.
   P.   Any organization in which a person defined in Subsection A, B, C, D, E,
G, I, O, or P of this section is to participate in the management or operation
of a raffle as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 2022-33, 9-8-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See 720 ILCS 5/28-1 and 720 ILCS 5/28-3.
3-13-5: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
   B.   No person except a bona fide director, officer, employee or member of
the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of
the raffle. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for managing or
participating in the management of the raffle. Sponsoring organization any
contract with third parties who, acting at the direction of and under the
supervision of the sponsoring organization, provide bona fide services to the
sponsoring organization in connection with the operation of a raffle and may
pay reasonable compensation for such services. Such services include the
following: a) advertising, marketing and promotion; b) legal; c) procurement of
goods, prizes, wares and merchandise for the purpose of operating the raffle;
d) rent, if the premises upon which the raffle will be held is rented; e)
accounting, auditing and bookkeeping; f) website hosting; g) mailing and
delivery; h) banking and payment processing; and i) other services relating to
the operation of the raffle.
   C.   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle.
   D.   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance
or chances in a raffle provided that the rent is not determined as a percentage
of receipts or profits from the raffle.
   E.   Raffle chances may be sold, and winning chances may be determined only
at those locations specified on the license.
   F.   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting
of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the
area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his/
her parents or guardian. (Ord. 2022-33, 9-8-2022)
3-13-6: LIMITATIONS ON LICENSES:
   A.   A license authorizes the licensee to conduct raffles as defined in this
chapter. Each such license is valid for one raffle. The Village will issue no
more than six (6) Progressive Raffle licenses per calendar year and only one
(1) Progressive Raffle shall be ongoing at any one time. No organization shall
be entitled to receive more than three (3) Progressive Raffle license in a
calendar year.
   B.   All raffle tickets which are sold off the premises upon which the
raffle is to be held shall contain the license number issued by the Village.
   C.   The license shall contain the following information:
      1.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by
the licensee in a single raffle. In no event shall the aggregate retail value
of all prizes or merchandise exceed the sum of $250,000 in a single raffle.
      2.   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by the licensee in a
single raffle. In no event shall the aggregate retail value of any prize or
merchandise exceed the sum of $250,000 in a single raffle.
      3.   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold by the licensee, provided that the licensee shall submit to the Village
President or his/her designated representative the aggregate retail value of
all of the prizes or merchandise to be awarded, the total number of chances
which may be issued or sold and the projected net proceeds as defined by this
chapter which shall be the basis in determining the maximum price which may be
charged for each raffle chance. Upon receipt of all of the foregoing
information, the Village President or his/her designated representative shall
review and approve the maximum price for each raffle chance, or in the event
the Village President or his/her designated representative does not approve the
price-per-raffle chance, he/she shall communicate the reason for such denial to
the person applying for the license within 10 days of receipt of application
for the proposed license.
      4.   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or
sold.
   D.   Progressive raffles shall be considered a single raffle for purposes of
licensing pursuant to this chapter, notwithstanding the fact that such
progressive raffles may provide for up to 54 scheduled drawings. Progressive
raffles shall be subject to the following limitations:
      1.   All applications for progressive raffles shall include a copy of the
rules which shall be applicable to the conduct of such progressive raffles.
      2.   In the event that the jackpot has not been awarded by the end of the
51st week following the first drawing, one additional drawing event will take
place during the 52nd week at which time winning raffle chances will be
selected until the card representing the jackpot is selected.
      3.   The first drawing of a winning raffle chance must take place within
60 days of the date of issuance of the license issued pursuant to this chapter.
      4.   Drawings of winning raffle chances shall take place at the location
identified in the license.
      5.   No signage advertising or otherwise making known the availability of
the raffle within the licensed establishment may be visible from the exterior
of the building at which the raffle drawing will take place, or the exterior of
the building occupied by the licensed organization.
      6.   No organization shall be issued more than one license to conduct a
progressive raffle during any twelve-month period.
      7.   In the event that the jackpot for a progressive raffle is awarded
prior to the conclusion of the 52nd week following the first drawing, a
licensee may conduct additional, consecutive progressive raffles under its
current license provided that: 1) the initial progressive raffle and all
subsequent consecutive progressive raffles conducted pursuant to the license be
complete by not later than the conclusion of the 52nd week following the first
drawing of the initial progressive raffle; and 2) the aggregate value of all
prizes to be awarded in connection with the initial progressive raffle and all
subsequent consecutive progressive raffles does not exceed $250,000.
      8.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no location within the
Village may be utilized for drawings related to more than one progressive
raffle within any twelve-month period.
      9.   Any licensee receiving a license pursuant to this chapter shall be
responsible for ensuring that traffic within the property upon which a
progressive raffle drawing is held shall be safely conducted and in such a
manner so that it will not unreasonably interfere with the normal flow of
traffic upon the public street from which traffic enters to and exits from such
property, as reasonably determined by the Village’s Police Chief or the Chief’s
designee. To the extent that the normal flow of traffic is adversely impacted
by drawings conducted upon such property, the licensee shall reimburse the
Village for any additional costs incurred by the Village to assist in
addressing such traffic flow.
   E.   Except as is provided in Subsection C(3), the Village President or his/
her designated representative shall have 30 days in which to approve or
disapprove the license applied for. In the event the Village President or his/
her designated representative shall fail to take action within the 30-day
period, in the event they would disapprove the license applied for, or in the
event they would fail to approve the maximum price charged for each raffle
chance pursuant to Subsection C(3), the applicant shall have the right upon
written receipt to appeal that decision to the Village Board of Trustees at the
next regularly scheduled Board meeting. The Village Board of Trustees shall
have the right to review the application and approve or deny issuance of the
license applied for.
   F.   The Village President or his/her designated representative may revoke
any licenses issued by the Village if it is determined that the licensee has
violated any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 2022-33, 9-8-2022; amd. Ord. 2024-30, 8-8-2024)
13-3-7: RAFFLES MANAGER; BOND:
Operation and conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single
raffles manager designated by the person or organization making application for
a license. The manager shall give a fidelity bond in an amount not less than
the anticipated gross receipts for each raffle. The bond shall be in favor of
the organization and conditioned upon his/her honesty in the performance of
duties. The bond shall also provide that notice be given in writing to the
Village of North Utica not less than 30-days prior to its cancellation. The
Village President or his/her designated representative is authorized to waive
the requirement for a bond by including a waiver provision in the license
issued, provided that the license containing such waiver provision shall be
granted only by affirmative vote of the members of the licensed organization.
(Ord. 2022-33, 9-8-2022)
13-3-8: RECORDS:
   A.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount
and date of payment.
   B.   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to a license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the State
of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffle shall not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   C.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to
its membership or, if the organization does not have members, to its governing
board, and to the Village of North Utica, its gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as
required in this section.
   D.   Records required by this section shall be preserved for 3-years, and
organizations shall make available their records relating to operation of
raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places. (Ord. 2022-33, 9-
8-2022)
TITLE 4
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL HEALTH AND SANITATION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Burials
4-1-2: Acts Affecting Public Health
4-1-3: Drinking Cups
4-1-4: Penalty
4-1-1: BURIALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish a cemetery within the village
limits. It shall be unlawful for any person to bury any person within the
village limits except in an established cemetery or as authorized and permitted
by the village zoning ordinance. (1966 Code § 532; amd. 2013 Code)
4-1-2: ACTS AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH:
It shall be unlawful to commit or do any act which endangers the public health
or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public. (1966 Code § 534)
4-1-3: DRINKING CUPS:
It shall be unlawful to maintain any common drinking cup or cups, dipper or
other similar utensil for the use of more than one person in any public hall,
theater, store or other place frequented by the public. (1966 Code § 535)
4-1-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each and every day during or on which a violation occurs or is
permitted to continue. (Ord. 95-18, 9-6-1995; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Nuisances Prohibited
4-2-2: Nuisances Enumerated
4-2-3: Abatement Procedures
4-2-4: Penalty
4-2-1: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence of any
nuisance on any property under his control. (2013 Code)
4-2-2: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
The following acts, conduct and conditions are hereby declared and defined to
be nuisances, and when committed, performed or permitted to exist by any
person, within the village limits, are hereby declared to be unlawful and
prohibited:
   A.   Common Law Nuisances: Any act or offense which is a nuisance according
to the common law of the state, or declared or defined to be a nuisance by the
ordinances of the village. In addition, the village officials shall be
authorized to abate any nuisance which, while not specifically defined within
this chapter, shall constitute the unreasonable, unwarrantable, or unlawful use
by a person of property, real or personal, or from his own improper, indecent
or unlawful personal conduct which works an obstruction or injury to a right of
another, or of the public, and produces such material annoyance, inconvenience,
discomfort, or hurt that the law will presume an actionable nuisance. Nuisances
may be abated which are public or which are both public and private in nature.
   B.   Animal Carcasses; Offal:
      1.   To cause the carcass of any animal or any offal, filth or noisome
substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place under his
ownership or control to the prejudice of others.
      2.   To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or the
carcass of any animal in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well or common
sewer, street or public highway.
   C.   Polluting Water: To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water
of any spring, river, stream, pond or lake, to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   D.   Stagnant Water: To permit foul or stagnant water to stand upon any
premises to the prejudice of others.
   E.   Garbage Accumulation; Putrid Or Offensive Conditions: To deposit or
permit to remain upon any premises, or public street or alley, slops or animal
or vegetable matter of any kind which is or is likely to become putrid or
offensive.
   F.   Obstructing Public Ways: To obstruct or encroach upon public highways,
private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places, and ways to burying
places.
   G.   Offensive Businesses: To erect, continue or use any building or other
place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by
occasioning noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or
dangerous to the health of individuals, or of the public.
   H.   Unauthorized Advertisements: To advertise wares or occupation by
painting notices of the same on, or affixing them to, fences, walls, windows,
building exteriors, utility poles, hydrants, other public or private property,
or on rocks or other natural objects, without the consent of the owner, or if
in the highway or other public place, without permission of the proper
authorities.
   I.   Dumping And/Or Burning Ashes, Junk Vehicles, Miscellaneous Waste: To
dump, abandon, deposit, dismantle or burn upon any public property or right of
way, highway, park, or street ashes, junk, junked or wrecked motor vehicles or
parts thereof, or miscellaneous waste.
   J.   Junk Storage: To store, keep, or maintain outside of a closed building
any junk; refuse; used appliances; used or dilapidated furniture; bathroom
fixtures; tires; old iron or metal; used lumber, bricks, blocks or other
building salvage materials; parts; and machinery or equipment not in an
operable condition, where such matter is an actual danger or detriment to life,
safety, health or peaceful enjoyment of the property of surrounding property
owners. (2013 Code)
   K.   Dangerous Premises:
      1.   To permit any building, structure, place, pile, or area to remain in
such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health in any way.
      2.   To collect refuse or materials which are potentially explosive.
      3.   To collect metal, or metal containing items for processing,
disassembling, burning or rendering. (Ord. 95-18, 9-6-1995)
   L.   Animals:
      1.   Animal Pests: To store or place any materials in a manner which may
harbor mosquitoes, flies, insects, rodents, nuisance birds, or other animal
pests that are offensive, injurious, or dangerous to the health of individuals
or the public.
      2.   Offensive Animal Houses: To suffer or permit any premises where any
animal is kept to become nauseous, foul or offensive to any person, family or
neighborhood.
      3.   Noisy, Offensive Animals: To keep any animal, bird or fowl,
including pets of any kind, which causes frequent or long, continued noise or
which creates odors or unsightly appearance of surroundings, or which disturbs
the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity.
   M.   Noisy, Offensive Conditions: To produce or permit to be produced,
whether on public or private property, any loud, excessive, frequent,
continuous or offensive noise to the disturbance of the peace or quiet of any
person residing in the vicinity. (2013 Code)
4-2-3: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
The chief of police or his/her designee is hereby given power to abate any such
nuisance that may be found in the village in the following manner:
   A.   Notice To Abate; Summary Abatement: The chief of police or his/her
designee shall give the owner of the premises on which a nuisance exists or the
individual responsible for a nuisance seventy two (72) hours to abate the
nuisance. If the owner or the individual responsible for the nuisance fails to
abate the nuisance, the chief of police or his/her designee is hereby empowered
to go onto said premises for the purpose of abating the nuisance.
   B.   Liability For Costs: The owner of the premises or individual
responsible for the nuisance is hereby made liable for cost of the abatement of
said nuisance. The chief of police or his/her designee shall submit to the
owner or the individual responsible for the nuisance a statement of the costs
incurred in abating the nuisance.
   C.   Suit To Collect Costs: If the owner or the individual responsible for
the nuisance fails or neglects to pay the village abatement costs, suit shall
be instituted against the owner or individual responsible in the name of the
village and against the owner or individual responsible in any court of
competent jurisdiction to recover the costs of abating the nuisance, together
with the costs of such suit. (2013 Code)
4-2-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each and every day during or on which a violation occurs or is
permitted to continue. (Ord. 95-18, 9-6-1995; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 3
PLANTS, WEEDS AND TREES
SECTION:
4-3-1: Weeds And Tall Grasses
4-3-2: Deposit Of Yard Waste On Public Property Prohibited
4-3-3: Trees On Private Property
4-3-4: Penalty
4-3-1: WEEDS AND TALL GRASSES:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle,
cocklebur, wild lettuce, smartweed, dog fennel, wild carrot, wild parsnip,
hogweed, dandelion, or other weeds of a like kind or grass of any description
in excess of six inches (6") high found growing in any lot or tract of land in
the village are hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit any such weeds or grass to grow or remain in any such place.
(Ord. 2006-75, 11-8-2006)
   B.   Notice To Remove: It shall be the duty of the chief of police, or any
other officer appointed by the chief of police, to serve or cause to be served
a notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which weeds or plants
are permitted to grow in violation of this section and to demand the abatement
of the nuisance within five (5) days. Notice shall be deemed sufficient if
delivered to an adult resident occupying the premises that is in violation of
this section. If the property is vacant, notice shall be deemed sufficient if a
copy of the notice is mailed to the last known address of the owner of the
property and a copy of the notice is posted on the property. The notice to
remove may provide that the clippings are required to be bagged or otherwise
removed from the property and legally disposed of. (Ord. 2015-12, 6-10-2015)
   C.   Nuisance Abatement By Village; Costs To Owner: If the person served a
removal notice pursuant to subsection B of this section does not abate the
nuisance within five (5) days, the village may proceed to abate such nuisance,
keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be
charged and paid by such owner or occupant.
   D.   Lien Provisions:
      1.   Charges for such weed removal shall be a lien on the premises. The
village clerk shall file a statement of lien claim with the county recorder of
deeds within sixty (60) days after the expense or cost of cutting is incurred
if the expense or cost has not been paid by such date. The statement shall
contain a legal description of the premises, the expense and cost incurred, the
date the weeds were cut, and a notice that the village claims a lien for the
amount.
      2.   Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the
premises, if his/her address is known; provided, however, that failure of the
clerk to record such lien claim or to mail such notice, or the failure of the
owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien
for such charges as provided in subsection D3 of this section.
      3.   Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed cutting charges or fines
shall be sold for nonpayment of the lien, and the proceeds of such sale shall
be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as in the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in equity in the name
of the village. (Ord. 2006-75, 11-8-2006)
4-3-2: DEPOSIT OF YARD WASTE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
It shall be considered a violation of this chapter to intentionally cause the
clippings of weeds and/or grass described in this chapter to be deposited onto
any public property, including, but not limited to, a prohibition on causing
such clippings to be deposited on village roadways, sidewalks, and/or in sewer
drains. (Ord. 2015-12, 6-10-2015)
4-3-3: TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Authority To Trim, Preserve Or Remove: The superintendent of public
works shall have the authority and it shall be his duty to order the trimming,
preservation or removal of trees or plants upon private property when he shall
find such action necessary to public safety or to prevent the spread of disease
or insects to public trees and places.
   B.   Spraying For Dutch Elm Disease: The following shall apply in spraying
trees for the control or elimination of the infection commonly known as Dutch
elm disease:
      1.   For protection of bird life, if spraying is done during the spring
dormant season, only methoxychlor may be used.
      2.   Spray shall not be applied when wind velocities are greater than
five (5) miles per hour or when temperatures are below freezing, and there also
should be no rain or snow falling.
      3.   Feeding stations, watering places and other objects which attract
birds must be protected from spray drafts.
      4.   Wherever possible, mist blowers should be used for application of
the spray. Where access for mist blowers is not possible and a hydraulic
sprayer must be used, methoxychlor only may be applied.
      5.   Methoxychlor spray solutions shall contain two (2) pounds of actual
methoxychlor per gallon. It shall be mixed with a solvent with a toxicity not
exceeding that of xylene. Solution strength shall be twelve percent (12%)
solution for mist blower application and two percent (2%) for hydraulic sprayer
application. (Ord. 2006-75, 11-8-2006)
4-3-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each offense. Each day of violation is deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 2006-75, 11-8-2006)
CHAPTER 4
NOISE POLLUTION
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Near Schools, Hospitals And Places Of Worship
4-4-3: Sources Of Noise
4-4-4: Noise Prohibited
4-4-5: Enforcement Standards
4-4-6: Exemptions From Provisions
4-4-7: Penalty
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL PURPOSE: Shall mean and include the use, operation, or maintenance
of any sound amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business,
or any goods, or any services, or for the purpose of attracting the attention
of the public to or advertising for, or soliciting patronage or customers to or
for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition, or event, or for the
purpose of demonstrating any such sound equipment.
EMERGENCY WORK: Work necessitated by an emergency situation to protect persons
and/or property and/or work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity and/or work required to protect persons
or property from an imminent exposure to danger.
MOTOR VEHICLES: Shall include, but not be limited to, minibikes and go-carts.
NOISE: Any sound which may be heard seventy five feet (75') or more beyond the
property line of the property from which the sound originates.
NONCOMMERCIAL PURPOSE: The use, operation, or maintenance of any sound
equipment for other than a commercial purpose. Noncommercial purpose shall mean
and include, but shall not be limited to, philanthropic, political, patriotic,
and charitable purposes.
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT: Any machine or device for the amplification of the
human voice, music, or any other sound. Sound amplifying equipment shall not
include standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of
the vehicle in which the automobile radio is installed. Sound amplifying
equipment shall not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or
horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety
purposes.
SOUND TRUCK: Any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle regardless of motive
power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, or attached
thereto, any sound amplifying equipment. (Ord. 2004-37, 12-8-2004)
4-4-2: NEAR SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS AND PLACES OF WORSHIP:
It shall be unlawful for any person to create any noise on any street,
sidewalk, or public place adjacent to any school, institution of learning, or
place of worship while the same is in use or adjacent to any hospital or care
home, which noise unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution
or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital or care home,
provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets, sidewalk or public
place indicating the presence of a school, place of worship, hospital or care
home. (Ord. 2004-37, 12-8-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
4-4-3: SOURCES OF NOISE:
   A.   Radios, Television Sets, And Similar Devices:
      1.   Use Restriction: It shall be unlawful for any person within any
residential zone of the village to use or operate any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, television set, sound amplifying equipment, or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound (between the
hours of 9:00 P.M. of one day and 7:00 A.M. of the following day) in such a
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighboring residents or
any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.
      2.   Prima Facie Violation: Any "noise", as defined herein, shall be
deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this
subsection.
   B.   Peddlers And Hawkers: It shall be unlawful for any person within the
village to sell anything by outcry within any area of the village zoned for
residential uses. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to
prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food, and beverages at licensed
sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and other similar licensed public
entertainment events.
   C.   Drums: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any drum or other
instrument or device of any kind for the purpose of attracting attention by the
creation of noise within the village. This subsection shall not apply to any
person who is a participant in a school band or duly licensed parade or who has
been otherwise duly authorized to engage in such conduct.
   D.   Animals: No person shall keep or maintain, or permit the keeping of,
upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by such person any animal or
fowl otherwise permitted to be kept which, by any sound, cry, or behavior,
shall cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal
sensitiveness in any residential neighborhood.
   E.   Mechanical Devices: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any
machinery, equipment, pump, fan, air conditioning apparatus, or similar
mechanical device in any manner so as to create any noise which would cause the
noise level at the property line of any property to exceed the noise level, as
defined herein.
   F.   Construction Of Buildings And Projects: It shall be unlawful for any
person within a residential zone, or within a radius of five hundred feet
(500') therefrom, to operate equipment or perform any outside construction or
repair work on buildings, structures, or projects or to operate any pile
driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or
other construction type device, except to perform emergency work, between the
hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. of 1 day and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the
next day in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness
residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance.
   G.   Vehicle Repairs: It shall be unlawful for any person within any
residential area of the village to repair, rebuild, or test any motor vehicle
(between the hours of 9:00 P.M. of 1 day and 7:00 A.M. of the next day) in such
a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in that area
is caused discomfort or annoyance. (Ord. 2004-37, 12-8-2004)
4-4-4: NOISE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make or continue, or cause to
be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the
peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to
any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. (Ord. 2004-
37, 12-8-2004)
4-4-5: ENFORCEMENT STANDARDS:
The standards, which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of
the provisions of this chapter exists, shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
   A.   The volume of the noise;
   B.   The intensity of the noise;
   C.   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
   D.   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;
   E.   The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;
   F.   The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;
   G.   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
   H.   The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise
emanates;
   I.   The time of the day or night the noise occurs;
   J.   The duration of the noise;
   K.   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and
   L.   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial
activity. (Ord. 2004-37, 12-8-2004)
4-4-6: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to emergency related sound as defined herein or to
athletic and/or special events as approved by the village. (Ord. 2004-37, 12-8-
2004)
4-4-7: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.
2004-37, 12-8-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 5
HOME KITCHEN OPERATIONS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Requirements
4-5-3: Inspections
4-5-4: Penalty And Enforcement
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BAKED GOOD(S): Baked good such as, but not limited to, breads, cookies, cakes,
pies, and pastries are allowed. Only high-acid fruit pies that use the
following fruits are allowed: apple, apricot, grape, peach, plum, quince,
orange, nectarine, tangerine, blackberry, raspberry, blueberry, boysenberry,
cherry, cranberry, strawberry, red currants or a combination of these fruits.
HOME KITCHEN OPERATION: Means a person who produces or packages non-potentially
hazardous baked goods in a kitchen of that person's primary domestic residence
for direct sale by the owner or a family member. A home kitchen operation does
not include a person who produces or packages non-potentially hazardous baked
goods for sale by a religious, charitable, or nonprofit organization for
fundraising purposes.
NON-HAZARDOUS BAKED GOOD: Is a baked good described above and more fully
described in section 4 of the Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act 1 .
(Ord. 2018-10, 3-22-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 410 ILCS 625/4(b)(1)(c).
4-5-2: REQUIREMENTS:
The following conditions must be met in order to qualify as a home kitchen
operation:
   A.   Monthly gross sales do not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   B.   The food is a non-potentially hazardous baked good.
   C.   A notice is provided to the purchaser that the product was produced in
a home kitchen.
   D.   The food package is affixed with a label or other written notice is
provided to the purchaser that includes:
      1.   The common or usual name of the food product; and
      2.   Allergen labeling as specified in Federal labeling requirements by
the United States Food and Drug Administration.
   E.   The food is sold directly to the consumer.
   F.   The food is stored in the residence where it is produced or packaged.
(Ord. 2018-10, 3-22-2018)
4-5-3: INSPECTIONS:
The Department of Public Health or the County Health Department or the Village
may inspect a home kitchen operation in the event of a complaint or disease
outbreak. (Ord. 2018-10, 3-22-2018)
4-5-4: PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any person in violation of this chapter will be subject to the fines as
specified in title 1, chapter 4, "General Penalty", of this Code.
   B.   The Village's legal counsel is authorized to institute any civil
proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this chapter to prosecute,
restrain, or correct violations of this chapter. The civil proceedings may be
in addition to any criminal or administrative proceedings authorized by this
section and this Code. (Ord. 2018-10, 3-22-2018)
TITLE 5
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Creation Of Department; Composition
5-1-2: Chief Of Police
5-1-3: Powers And Duties Of Department
5-1-4: Serving Processes
5-1-5: Serve As Witness
5-1-6: Conduct Of Members
5-1-7: Rules And Regulations
5-1-8: Part Time Police
5-1-1: CREATION OF DEPARTMENT; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a police department, an executive department of the
village. The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such
other members as may be provided from time to time by the president and board
of trustees. (1966 Code § 39; amd. 2013 Code)
5-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of
police chief. The chief shall be appointed by the president and board of
trustees. (1966 Code § 41)
   B.   Powers And Duties: The chief of police shall:
      1.   Keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of
his department as may be required by statute or ordinance.
      2.   Be responsible for the performance by the police department of all
its functions, and all persons who are members of the department shall serve
subject to the orders of the chief of police. (1966 Code § 42; amd. 2013 Code)
      3.   Be custodian of all lost, abandoned or stolen property in the
village. (1966 Code § 43)
5-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to see to
the enforcement of all ordinances of the village, of all statutes effective in
the village and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and to
arrest violators thereof.
   B.   Every member of the police department is hereby declared to be a
conservator of the peace. (1966 Code § 40)
5-1-4: SERVING PROCESSES:
The chief of police shall be authorized to serve writs, summonses and other
processes, but no patrol officers shall serve any summons or process except on
order of the chief of police or the village president. (1966 Code § 44)
5-1-5: SERVE AS WITNESS:
Every member of the police department shall appear as a witness whenever this
is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of a village ordinance or a state
or federal law, but no such member shall receive any witness fee for such
services on any action or suit to which the village is a party. All fees due
for such services shall, if paid, be turned over to the village treasurer.
(1966 Code § 46)
5-1-6: CONDUCT OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of every member of the police department to conduct
himself in a proper and law abiding manner and to avoid the use of unnecessary
force. (1966 Code § 45)
5-1-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the
guidance of the members of the department as he shall see fit. Such rules, when
approved by the president and board of trustees, shall be binding on such
members. (1966 Code § 47)
5-1-8: PART TIME POLICE:
   A.   Employment: The village may employ part time police officers from time
to time as is deemed necessary.
   B.   Duties, Restrictions And Training: A part time police officer shall
have all the responsibilities of a full time police officer and such specific
duties as delineated in the general orders of the village police department,
but the number of hours a part time officer may work within a calendar year is
restricted. Part time police officers shall not be assigned to supervise or
direct full time police officers. Part time police officers shall be trained in
accordance with the Illinois police training act 1  and the rules and
requirements of the ILETSB.
   C.   Hiring Standards: Any person employed as a part time police officer
must meet the following standards:
      1.   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
      2.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      3.   Pass a medical examination.
      4.   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      5.   Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
      6.   Possess no prior felony convictions.
      7.   Must have been honorably discharged if the individual has served in
the U.S. military.
   D.   Discipline: Part time officers shall be under the disciplinary
jurisdiction of the chief of police and shall serve at the discretion of the
village authorities. Part time officers shall not have any property rights in
said employment and may be removed by the village authorities at any time. Part
time police officers shall comply with all applicable rules and general orders
issued by the police department. (Ord. 2012-28, 8-8-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
SECTION:
5-2-1: Fireworks
5-2-2: Nitroglycerin And TNT
5-2-3: Storage Of Explosives
5-2-4: Fuel Tanks Installation
5-2-5: Burning Restrictions
5-2-6: Penalty
5-2-1: FIREWORKS:
   A.   Prohibitions Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell,
keep, expose for sale, loan or give away any explosive composition or any
substance, or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by
explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, which shall include blank
cartridges, toy cannons in which explosives are used, the type of balloons
which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes,
skyrockets, roman candles, bombs or other fireworks of like construction and
any fireworks containing any explosive compound; or any tablets or other device
containing any explosive substance, or containing combustible substances
producing visual effects anywhere in the village. (1966 Code § 541; amd. 2013
Code)
   B.   Possession, Discharge Of Fireworks: It shall be unlawful for any person
to be in possession of or to discharge anywhere in the village any of the
articles enumerated in subsection A of this section; provided, however, that
the president and board of trustees may issue a permit for the discharge of
fireworks and for pyrotechnical displays as provided in subsection C of this
section. (1966 Code § 542)
   C.   Displays Of Fireworks:
      1.   Permitted; Rules And Regulations: Pyrotechnic and consumer displays
of fireworks are allowed within the village; provided, that there is compliance
with Illinois law and the rules of the office of the state fire marshal (OSFM).
The rules of the OSFM are attached to the ordinance codified herein as exhibit
A and incorporated herein. The village police, public health and safety
committee may establish additional rules and regulations regarding fireworks
displays.
      2.   Permit Required: The applicant for a display must obtain a permit
from the village president or his designee. (Ord. 2006-28, 6-14-2006)
5-2-2: NITROGLYCERIN AND TNT:
It shall be unlawful to keep or store any nitroglycerin or the explosive
commonly known as TNT in the village in any quantities, excepting for medicinal
or laboratory purposes, and for such purposes, no more than one-fourth (1/4)
pound shall be stored in any one building or premises. (1966 Code § 544)
5-2-3: STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES:
All explosives must be kept or stored in accordance with the rules of the state
fire marshal, subject to the provisions of this chapter. (1966 Code § 545)
5-2-4: FUEL TANKS INSTALLATION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to install or maintain any fuel oil, gas or liquid
gas tanks unless such tanks and all equipment connected therewith are installed
and maintained in accordance with the regulations of the state fire marshal or
any other state agency having jurisdiction thereof. (1966 Code § 610)
   B.   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each violation. (Ord. 79-08, 6-5-1979; amd. 2013 Code)
5-2-5: BURNING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Outdoor And Indoor Burning Generally:
      1.   Outdoor Burning: No person, firm, corporation, or entity shall burn
any wood, trash, paper, rubbish, construction debris, or garbage out of doors
anywhere in the village, except as specifically authorized by this section or
any ordinance of the village. This subsection A1 shall not prohibit the use of
an outdoor fire for cooking or a recreation bonfire. The burning of tree limbs,
branches or brush is subject to subsection C of this section.
      2.   Indoor Burning: No person, firm, corporation, or entity shall burn
any trash, paper, rubbish or garbage anywhere indoors in the village except in
an incinerator complying with all applicable laws and ordinances.
   B.   Approval Required:
      1.   Except as otherwise permitted within this section, no person shall
kindle or maintain any fire that contains wood, trash, paper, rubbish,
construction debris or garbage or authorize any such fire to be kindled or
maintained on any public or private real property without first obtaining
approval of the fire chief (or his designee) of the fire district having
jurisdiction over the area of the intended fire, and the Illinois environmental
protection agency (IEPA), if required. Satisfactory evidence of said approval
(s) shall be supplied to the village president and/or village clerk prior to
the start of the fire.
      2.   There shall be no charge for the permit.
      3.   During construction or demolition of buildings or structures, no
waste materials or rubbish shall be disposed of by burning on the premises or
in the immediate vicinity without complying with this section.
   C.   Open Burning: The open burning of leaves, tree limbs, branches, or
brush within the village limits is prohibited except as follows:
      1.   Time Established: The open burning shall be permitted only during
the period from September 15 through December 15 and from April 1 through April
30. During said period of times, the open burning shall be permitted only
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
      2.   Where Permitted:
         a.   The open burning is not permitted on public rights of way
including, but not limited to, sidewalks, roadways, alleys and all paved areas
of village property without prior written approval of the board of trustees.
         b.   No person shall burn any materials unless such a fire is located
at least twenty feet (20') from any structure.
      3.   Fires To Be Attended: A responsible adult shall constantly attend
any fire resulting from the open burning until such fire is extinguished.
   D.   Fires Near Buildings, On Public Ways: It shall be unlawful to build or
light any bonfire so close to any structure as to endanger such building or
structure or on any public street or sidewalk pavement. Determination of a
danger shall be made by the fire chief (or his/her designee) of the fire
district having jurisdiction over the area and/or the village police chief or
his/her designee.
   E.   Authority To Restrict Burning: The fire chief, or his/her designee, of
the fire district having jurisdiction over the area, and/or the chief of the
police department, or his/her designee, may prohibit any and all bonfires and
all outdoor burning of leaves, brush, trash, papers, rubbish and garbage when
conditions or circumstances make such fires hazardous in his/her sole
determination.
   F.   Exemptions From Provisions: Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
prohibit the use of wood in stoves used for cooking, the use of wood in
fireplaces or decorative fires or the use of wood in fireplaces or stoves
designed for heating.
   G.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 2015-20, 8-12-2015)
5-2-6: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1966
Code § 546; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Disorderly Conduct
5-3-2: Disturbing Assemblies
5-3-3: Unlawful Assemblies
5-3-4: Advertisements
5-3-5: Offenses Relating To Morals And Decency
5-3-5-1: Gambling
5-3-5-2: Prostitution
5-3-5-3: Profanity
5-3-5-4: Indecent Conduct
5-3-5-5: Bathing In Public
5-3-5-6: Indecent Publications
5-3-6: Offenses Involving Public Peace And Safety
5-3-6-1: False Alarms, Calls Or Reports; Misuse And Abuse Of 911
5-3-6-2: Throwing Missiles
5-3-6-3: Discharging Firearms
5-3-6-4: Assault, Battery, Fighting
5-3-6-5: Placement Of Scaffolds, Ladders And Tools
5-3-6-6: Articles On Window Ledges
5-3-6-7: Obstruction Of Stairways Or Exits
5-3-6-8: Vagrants; Loitering
5-3-7: Penalty
5-3-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of disorderly conduct or of
any conduct tending toward a breach of peace. The causing or making of any
unnecessary loud noise and shouting or yelling shall be considered disorderly
conduct. (1966 Code § 586)
5-3-2: DISTURBING ASSEMBLIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or
gathering in the village. (1966 Code § 592)
5-3-3: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES:
It shall be unlawful to collect, gather or be a member of any disorderly crowd,
or any crowd gathered together for any unlawful purposes. (1966 Code § 597)
5-3-4: ADVERTISEMENTS:
   A.   Unlawful Advertising:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful business or article
in the village. (1966 Code § 596)
      2.   a. It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display any
advertisement of an obscene or immoral character or any advertisement tending
to promote or cause a riot or breach of the peace, or any advertisement of any
unlawful gathering, or advertisements of unlawful sales. (1966 Code § 264)
         b.   Any person violating the provisions of subsection A2a of this
section shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each and every day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (1966 Code § 268; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Damage To Signs:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to disfigure or mutilate in any way any lawful
sign or advertisement in the village. (1966 Code §§ 265, 596)
      2.   Any person violating any provisions of this subsection shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1966
Code § 268; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Distributing Samples: It shall be unlawful for any person, by himself
or his agents or servants, to distribute, cast, throw or place, or cause to be
distributed, thrown, cast or placed, in or along any of the streets, alleys or
other public places in the village or upon the porches or yards of private
residences therein or within any dwelling or building in the village, any
samples of merchandise or medicinal preparations for the purpose or with the
intent of advertising or making known in a general or promiscuous manner any
business, occupation, proposition, medical treatment, medicine or any other
article whatsoever. (1966 Code § 603)
   D.   Posting Bills: It shall be unlawful to post any bills or advertisements
on any public property without the authority of the president and board of
trustees, and it shall be unlawful to post any bill or advertisement on any
property without the written consent of the owner thereof. (1966 Code § 601)
5-3-5: OFFENSES RELATING TO MORALS AND DECENCY:
5-3-5-1: GAMBLING:
   A.   Gambling Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to gamble or attend any
gambling resort or to make any bet, lottery or gambling hazard or to buy or
sell any chances or tickets in any gambling game, arrangement or device. (1966
Code § 577)
   B.   Gambling Devices: It shall be unlawful to possess any gambling device
or paraphernalia with the intent to use the same for an unlawful purpose, and
any such device or paraphernalia kept with such intent may be confiscated by
any member of the police department. (1966 Code § 578)
   C.   Gambling Houses: It shall be unlawful to maintain or patronize any
establishment maintained for a gambling house or resort anywhere in the village
or within three (3) miles thereof. (1966 Code § 579; amd. 2013 Code)
   D.   Advertising: It shall be unlawful to advertise any gambling house or
resort in any street, alley or other public place within the village. (1966
Code § 580)
5-3-5-2: PROSTITUTION:
   A.   Practicing Prostitution: It shall be unlawful for any person to
practice prostitution in the village. (1966 Code § 582)
   B.   Soliciting: It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit on any
street, alley or other public place in the village for the purpose of inducing
any person to engage in prostitution or any unlawful sexual intercourse of any
kind. (1966 Code § 583)
   C.   House Of Prostitution: It shall be unlawful to maintain, frequent or
patronize any house of ill fame or house of prostitution in the village. (1966
Code § 584)
5-3-5-3: PROFANITY:
It shall be unlawful to use profanity in any street, alley or other public
place in the village. (1966 Code § 588)
5-3-5-4: INDECENT CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any indecent or immoral act.
(1966 Code § 589; amd. 2013 Code)
5-3-5-5: BATHING IN PUBLIC:
It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe at any public place or in any
place open to the public view unless such person is adequately garbed in a
bathing suit. (1966 Code § 600)
5-3-5-6: INDECENT PUBLICATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale or to circulate, pass
from one person to another or expose in any public place or anywhere in view of
a store or place frequented by the public any immoral, indecent or obscene
publications, printed or written pictures or other representation.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to keep any such publications, printed or written
matter, picture or other representation in any place frequented by, or where it
may come into the possession of, minors, or to disclose or expose any such
material to minors. (1966 Code § 604)
5-3-6: OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY:
5-3-6-1: FALSE ALARMS, CALLS OR REPORTS; MISUSE AND ABUSE OF 911:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly:
   A.   Transmit in any manner to the fire protection district a false alarm of
fire knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable
ground for believing that such fire exists; or
   B.   Transmit in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a
bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission
that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or explosive is
concealed in such place; or
   C.   Transmit in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public
employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at
the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing
that such an offense has been committed; or
   D.   Call the number "911" for the purpose of making a false alarm or
complaint and report false information which could result in the emergency
response of any public safety agency; or
   E.   Call the number "911" for any nonemergency purpose or reason, after
having been notified, either verbally or in writing, that such calls are not to
be made on the "E9-1-1" line. (2013 Code)
5-3-6-2: THROWING MISSILES:
It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or propel any missile on any street, alley
or public place, and it shall be unlawful to throw or deposit any glass, nails,
tacks or other similar article on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public
place in the village. (1966 Code § 595)
5-3-6-3: DISCHARGING FIREARMS:
   A.   Prohibited Generally: It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms or
air guns in the village; provided, that this section
5-3-6-3 shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from
discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty nor to any citizen
discharging a firearm when lawfully defending his person or property. (1966
Code § 599)
   B.   Exemption For Bad News Duck Club: The Bad News Duck Club is allowed to
hunt at the club which lies within the village limits. This variance is granted
conditioned upon no blinds facing the north, and the shooting or discharging of
any firearms or air guns toward the north being prohibited. (Per minutes dated
10-2-1979)
5-3-6-4: ASSAULT, BATTERY, FIGHTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any assault or battery or to
fight in any public place in the village. (1966 Code § 590)
5-3-6-5: PLACEMENT OF SCAFFOLDS, LADDERS AND TOOLS:
Any scaffolds or ladders placed in such a position that they overhang or can
fall onto any public street, alley or other public place in the village shall
be firmly and properly constructed and safeguarded, and it shall be unlawful to
place or leave any tools or articles on any such place in such a manner that
the same can fall into any such street, alley or other public way from a
greater height than four feet (4'). (1966 Code § 605)
5-3-6-6: ARTICLES ON WINDOW LEDGES:
It shall be unlawful to place any movable article on any window ledge or other
place abutting on a public street, alley or other place at a height above four
feet (4') from the ground, in such a manner that the same can be or is in
danger of falling onto such sidewalk, street, alley or other public place.
(1966 Code § 606)
5-3-6-7: OBSTRUCTION OF STAIRWAYS OR EXITS:
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any stairway,
aisle, corridor or exit in any office building, factory, hotel, school, church,
theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public hall or any building used by two
(2) or more tenants or families in such a manner that it interferes with the
free use of such stairway, aisle, corridor or exit. (1966 Code § 608)
5-3-6-8: VAGRANTS; LOITERING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any mendicant or vagrant to frequent any
depot, store, theater, street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place or
any place frequented by the public in the village. Any person found sleeping in
any of the above mentioned places, and who has no established domicile or
residence shall be considered a vagrant. (1966 Code § 609)
   B.   Any person found loitering continuously in public places or being idle
or dissolute and going about begging shall be guilty of disorderly conduct.
(Ord. 78-15, 8-1-1978)
5-3-7: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each violation. (Ord. 79-08, 6-5-1979; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-4-1: Definitions
5-4-2: Special Permits
5-4-3: Authority To Prohibit Animals Posing Health Hazards
5-4-4: Livestock And Fowl
5-4-5: Bees
5-4-6: Horses
5-4-7: Domestic Animals And Birds
5-4-8: Wild And Vicious Animals
5-4-9: Housing And Containment
5-4-10: Animal Bites; Rabies Control
5-4-11: Treatment Of Animals
5-4-12: Penalties
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
CAT: Any feline, regardless of age or sex.
DANGEROUS DOG: A. Any individual dog anywhere other than upon property of the
owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its
owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical
injury or death to a person or a companion animal; or
   B.   A dog that, without justification, bites a person and does not cause
serious physical injury.
DOG: Any canine, regardless of age or sex.
KENNEL: Any facility housing four (4) or more dogs or cats.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which has previously attacked or bitten any person
or which has behaved in such a manner that the person who harbors the animal
knows or should reasonably know that the animal is possessed of tendencies to
attack or bite persons.
VICIOUS DOG: A. A dog that, without justification, attacks a person and causes
a serious physical injury or death; or
   B.   Any individual dog that has been found to be a "dangerous dog" upon
three (3) separate occasions.
WILD ANIMAL: Any live monkey or ape, raccoon, skunk, fox, snake or other
reptile, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other animal or any bird of
prey which can normally be found in the wild state. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4-2: SPECIAL PERMITS:
The keeping of animals, birds or fowl otherwise prohibited by this chapter may
be permitted by applying for a special permit from the village board of
trustees. Such permit may be issued to permit circus performances or other
public exhibition or entertainment events. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4-3: AUTHORITY TO PROHIBIT ANIMALS POSING HEALTH HAZARDS:
The chief of police shall have the power to issue an order prohibiting the
keeping of any animal, fowl, or bird which is deemed to pose a health hazard to
the general public. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4-4: LIVESTOCK AND FOWL:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall keep within the
village any cattle, cows, horses, sheep, swine, goats, chickens, ducks,
turkeys, geese, or other livestock. However, this chapter shall not apply to
livestock brought into the village for the purpose of being immediately shipped
out of the village. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4-5: BEES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any hive,
stand or box where bees are kept or keep any bees in or upon any premises
within the corporate village limits unless the bees are kept in accordance with
the following:
      1.   If bee colonies are kept within fifty feet (50') of any exterior
boundary of the property on which the hive, stand, or box is located, a barrier
that will prevent bees from flying through it, no less than five feet (5')
high, shall be installed and maintained along the exterior boundary. The
barrier may be either a plant or artificial.
      2.   Fresh, clean water in facilities for bees shall be provided on the
premises.
      3.   The bees and equipment shall be kept in accordance with state law.
   B.   Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to prohibit the
keeping of bees in a hive, stand or box located or kept within a school or
university building for the purpose of study or observation. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-
14-2011)
5-4-6: HORSES:
   A.   Minimum Area: A minimum of four (4) acres in a total area shall be
required to keep, maintain, tether, confine or house horses anywhere in the
village. It shall be unlawful for any more than two (2) horses to be upon a
four (4) acre parcel. Should the owner of horses desire to keep more than two
(2) horses within the village, the owner shall provide at least two (2)
additional acres for each horse to be maintained, kept tethered or confined
within the village.
   B.   Fence Requirements: Any such animals shall be kept within a fenced area
designed and intended as an enclosure for horses. The fences used cannot be
electric fences. The fenced area shall be secure and adequate for said purpose.
(Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
   C.   Location: The fenced area, at its nearest point, shall not be closer
than two hundred fifty feet (250') from any residence, public property, place
of worship or any building within the village owned by any person other than
the owner of such animals. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
   D.   Conditions Of Area:
      1.   The area shall be kept in good repair and shall not be allowed to
become unsightly.
      2.   Any person owning or having charge or care and custody of any horse
or place where horses are kept shall keep the same, together with all barns,
sheds, outhouses, pens or other buildings connected therewith, in a clean, good
condition and so provide so that no nauseous effluvia or smells shall arise or
emanate therefrom. No nauseous or filthy matter of any kind shall be allowed to
remain in or about said premises. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4-7: DOMESTIC ANIMALS AND BIRDS:
   A.   Housing:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place, maintain or
continue any pen, coop, yard or other building in violation of the village
zoning ordinance or upon any lot or ground in the village for the purpose of
confining or housing any domestic animal or bird unless the pen, coop, yard or
other building is at least twenty five feet (25') distant from any dwelling,
house, apartment, hotel, restaurant, food or drinking establishment, rooming
house, school, place of worship, or any building wherein people are employed
and unless the floor of such building or coop is constructed of such material
and in such a manner that it can be kept clean and sanitary at all times. (Ord.
2011-23, 9-14-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
      2.   All coops and other buildings wherein domesticated animals and birds
are kept shall be provided with flytight bins or other tightly closed
receptacles for manure, of dimensions sufficient to contain all accumulations
of manure to prevent its becoming a nuisance. No manure shall be allowed to
accumulate on the floor or on the adjacent ground.
   B.   Injuring Or Killing Birds: It shall be unlawful for any person to
injure or destroy any kind of bird or throw stones, shoot at or use any
implement with the intention of killing or injuring any bird within the
village.
   C.   Pigeon Control:
      1.   Nuisance Declared: Pigeons being allowed by their owners to roost or
linger on the property or buildings of others pose a health hazard in addition
to offending aesthetic senses by pigeon contamination. Such lingering or
roosting is declared to be a public nuisance.
      2.   Complaints: Whenever a verified complaint of at least two (2)
citizens is presented to the police department alleging that a person is
allowing pigeons to linger upon the property of the complainants, the police
department shall inform the owner of such pigeons that a petition has been
received and shall cite the owner of the pigeons for the violation alleged in
the petition. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4-8: WILD AND VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept on his
premises any wild or vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes,
whether gratuitously or for a fee. This subsection shall not be construed to
apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, or circuses.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept any
wild animal as a pet, unless a permit is granted by the state department of
natural resources.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious animal
within the village. Any animal which is found off the premises of its owner may
be seized by any police officer or humane officer and upon the establishment,
to the satisfaction of any court of competent jurisdiction, of the vicious
character of the animal, it may be killed by a police officer or humane
officer. However, this subsection shall not apply to animals under the control
of a law enforcement or military agency, nor to animals which are kept for the
protection of property; provided, that such animals are restrained by a leash
or chain, cage, fence or other adequate means to prevent contact with the
general public or with persons who enter the premises with the actual or
implied permission of the owner or occupant.
   D.   The licensing authority may issue a temporary permit for the keeping,
care and protection of any infant animal native to this area which has been
deemed to be homeless. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4-9: HOUSING AND CONTAINMENT:
   A.   Houses: All pens, yards, runs, or other structures wherein any animal
is kept shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned and kept in good
repair.
   B.   Fences: Fences which are intended as enclosures for any animal shall be
securely constructed, be adequate for the purpose, be kept in good repair, and
not be allowed to become unsightly. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4-10: ANIMAL BITES; RABIES CONTROL:
   A.   Report Of Animal Bite: Anyone having knowledge or reason to believe
that any animal in the village has bitten a person shall report within twenty
four (24) hours, so far as is known, the name and address of the owner of the
animal and the circumstances of the animal bite. Such report concerning bites
shall be made to the police department.
   B.   Confinement Of Domesticated Animal: Whenever any domesticated animal
has bitten a person, it shall be confined in such place as the police
department may direct and for such period of observation as may be necessary,
unless such animal is too vicious and dangerous to be impounded safely, in
which case, it may be killed and its head shipped to the state laboratory of
hygiene for rabies examination.
   C.   Destruction Of Wild Animal: Whenever a wild animal has bitten a person,
it shall be killed, avoiding damage to the head (brain) area, and shipped to
the state laboratory of hygiene under refrigeration, but not frozen, for rabies
examination. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4-11: TREATMENT OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Cruelty: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously
inflict unnecessary or needless cruelty, torture, abuse; cruelly beat, strike
or abuse any animal; or by an act, omission or neglect cause or inflict any
unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering, injury or death to any animal,
whether such animal belongs to such person or to another; except, that
reasonable force may be employed to drive away vicious or trespassing animals.
Any unwanted animals should be delivered to a licensed veterinarian.
   B.   Food, Water And Shelter:
      1.   Definitions: For the purposes of this subsection, the following
definitions shall apply:
       SHADE: Protection from the direct rays of the sun during the months of
June through September.
      SHELTER: As it applies to dogs, means a moistureproof structure of
suitable size to accommodate the dog and allow retention of body heat, made of
durable material with a solid floor raised at least two inches (2") from the
ground and with the entrance covered by a flexible, windproof material. Such
structure shall be provided with a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding to
provide insulation and protection against cold and dampness.
      2.   Necessary Provisions: It shall be unlawful for any person in charge
of any animal to fail, refuse, or neglect to provide such animal with food,
potable water, shade or shelter; to cruelly or unnecessarily expose any such
animal in hot, stormy, cold or inclement weather; or to carry any such animal
in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4-12: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first offense. A second offense within one
calendar year after the first offense shall yield a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). A third and all subsequent offenses within one calendar year from
the first offense shall yield a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for each offense and a maximum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. For purposes of this chapter each day an offense
occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011; amd. 2013
Code)
ARTICLE A. DOGS AND CATS
SECTION:
5-4A-1: Rabies Vaccination Of Dogs
5-4A-2: Number Restricted
5-4A-3: Running At Large; Animals Prohibited On Certain Premises
5-4A-4: Disturbances
5-4A-5: Presence On, Injury To Property Of Another
5-4A-6: Excrement Removal Required
5-4A-7: Impoundment And Disposition
5-4A-8: Dangerous Dogs
5-4A-9: Vicious Dogs
5-4A-10: Kennels
5-4A-1: RABIES VACCINATION OF DOGS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of each dog owner to have his dog inoculated with
an avianized antirabies vaccine, or any similar vaccine, by a licensed
veterinarian every one or three (3) calendar year period pursuant to state
requirements.
   B.   Dogs under four (4) months of age are not required to be vaccinated.
   C.   Any dog for which a veterinarian licensed by the state issues a
certificate to the effect that the proposed inoculation will be harmful shall
be exempt from the inoculation prescribed by this section.
   D.   The certificate of inoculation shall include the following:
      1.   The name and address of the owner of the dog;
      2.   The date of vaccination;
      3.   The tag number;
      4.   The breed, color, age and sex of the dog; and
      5.   Such other information as may be required. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4A-2: NUMBER RESTRICTED:
   A.   Unlimited Number; Nuisance Declared: The keeping of an unlimited number
of dogs and cats in the village for a considerable period of time detracts from
and, in many instances, is detrimental to the healthful and comfortable life
for which such areas were created. The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs
and cats is, therefore, declared to be a public nuisance.
   B.   Number Limited: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep more than
three (3) dogs and cats within the village; except, that a litter of pups or a
litter of kittens or a portion of a litter may be kept for a period of time not
exceeding five (5) months from birth. This subsection shall not apply to any
establishment wherein dogs or cats are kept for breeding, sale, sporting
purposes or boarding. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4A-3: RUNNING AT LARGE; ANIMALS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN PREMISES:
   A.   Running At Large:
      1.   Definition: For the purpose of this subsection, the term "running at
large" shall be defined to be the presence of a dog or cat at any place except
upon the premises of the owner of such dog or cat, unless such animal is on a
leash and under the control of a person physically able to control it.
      2.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing
any dog or cat to permit the dog or cat to run at large.
   B.   Prohibitions On Certain Premises:
      1.   Cemeteries: No dog or cat shall be permitted in any cemetery.
      2.   Parks And Swimming Areas: No dog or cat shall be allowed in any park
or any swimming area open to the public in the village. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-
2011)
5-4A-4: DISTURBANCES:
   A.   Prohibited; Nuisance Declared: It shall be unlawful for any person
knowingly to keep or harbor any dog which habitually barks, howls, or yelps or
any cat which habitually cries or howls to the great discomfort of the peace
and quiet of the neighborhood or in such manner as to materially disturb or
annoy persons in the neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such dog
or cat is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
   B.   Complaints: Action on petitions complaining of vicious or barking dogs
or crying cats shall be in accordance with the following:
      1.   Whenever any person shall complain to the police department that a
dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps or a cat which habitually cries or
howls is being kept by any person in the village, the police department shall
notify the owner of the dog or cat that a complaint has been received and that
the person should take whatever steps necessary to alleviate the howling,
yelping or crying.
      2.   If the warning given to the person alleged to be keeping a dog or
cat as set forth in subsection B1 of this section is ineffective, a verified
complaint of at least two (2) citizens not from the same family may be
presented to the police department alleging that a vicious dog or a dog which
habitually barks, howls or yelps or a cat which habitually cries or howls is
being kept by any person within the village. The police department shall inform
the owner of such dog or cat that a petition has been received and shall cite
the owner of the dog or cat for the violation alleged in the petition. (Ord.
2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4A-5: PRESENCE ON, INJURY TO PROPERTY OF ANOTHER:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing a dog or cat
to permit such dog or cat to go upon any sidewalk, parkway, or private lands or
premises without the permission of the owner of such premises.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing a dog or cat
to permit such dog or cat to break, bruise, tear up, crush or injure any lawn,
flowerbed, plant, shrub, tree or garden in any manner whatsoever. (Ord. 2011-
23, 9-14-2011)
5-4A-6: EXCREMENT REMOVAL REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit a dog or cat to be on
property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such person, unless such
person has in his immediate possession an appropriate device for scooping
excrement and an appropriate depository for the transmission of excrement to a
receptacle located upon property owned or possessed by such person. This
section shall not apply to a person who is visually or physically disabled.
(Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
5-4A-7: IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION:
   A.   Impoundment: Whenever any police officer or other person designated by
the chief of police shall find any dog or cat "running at large", as defined in
subsection 5-4A-3A1 of this article, he shall, if possible, pick up and impound
such animal in such place as the chief of police may direct.
   B.   Notice Of Impoundment: Whenever any impounded dog or cat shall bear an
identification mark such as a collar, license tag, or identification tag, the
owner shall be notified forthwith. Notice of impounding shall be given by the
person or officer in the possession of the dog or cat to the owner of the dog
or cat, if known, within twenty four (24) hours of impoundment.
   C.   Length Of Impoundment; Destruction; Rabies Suspects:
      1.   Any dog or cat impounded shall be held for a period of seven (7)
days. After such dog or cat has been so impounded for a period of seven (7)
days without having been reclaimed by its owner or anyone in behalf of the
owner, the dog or cat may be destroyed under the direction of any licensed
veterinarian.
      2.   There shall be no required holding period before returning any
impounded dog or cat to the owner, unless such dog or cat is suspected of
having rabies, in which case, the impounded dog or cat shall be held for a
period of ten (10) days. At the end of ten (10) days, the impounded dog or cat
shall be disposed of unless the owner thereof shall reclaim such dog or cat and
pay the required veterinary fees, and the owner may be subject to the penalty
of section
5-4-12 of this chapter for allowing such dog or cat to be running at large.
   D.   Method Of Destruction: The destruction of any impounded dog or cat by
any police officer or any person designated by the chief of police under this
article shall be by means of a manner prescribed by any licensed veterinarian.
(Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4A-8: DANGEROUS DOGS:
After investigation, a dog may be determined to be dangerous by the chief of
police or his/her designee. If a dog is determined dangerous after following
the procedure required by law, the owner shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00)
and required to spay or neuter the dog. On a case by case basis, the chief of
police may require adult supervision of the dog when on public property,
muzzling of the dog when on public property, adequate fencing/leashing when on
private property, and/or proof of adequate insurance. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4A-9: VICIOUS DOGS:
After investigation and the procedures required by law, a dog may be determined
to be a vicious dog. Upon such determination, the owner is required to comply
with all of the requirements of a dangerous dog (section
5-4A-8 of this article) and, in addition, have the vicious dog microchipped,
erect an approved enclosure/fence and comply with all other legal requirements.
(Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
5-4A-10: KENNELS:
In the areas where kennels are permitted, no kennel shall be located closer
than one hundred feet (100') to the boundary of the nearest adjacent
residential lot. Kennels shall be allowed only in districts zoned to allow same
under the village zoning ordinance. The keeper of a kennel shall obtain a
license from the village clerk before commencing operations and shall pay an
annual license fee. (Ord. 2011-23, 9-14-2011)
CHAPTER 5
MINORS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Curfew
5-5-2: Tobacco Products
5-5-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Age And Hour Restrictions: It is unlawful for a person less than
seventeen (17) years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly,
building, place, street or highway unless accompanied and supervised by a
parent or legal guardian, unless engaged in a business or occupation which the
laws of the state authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to
perform or unless in attendance at, or while traveling directly home from,
school, place of employment, place of worship or a not for profit community
organization sponsored activity between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Saturday and Sunday and between eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., Sunday to Friday inclusive.
   B.   Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian: It shall be unlawful for anyone
having legal care and custody of any person, as described herein, to allow or
permit such person to go upon any public street, alley or other public place in
the village in the nighttime as restricted in subsection A of this section,
except in the case of emergency as allowed by Illinois law. (Ord. 99-21, 11-10-
1999; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Authority To Detain Minor: Every member of the police force, while on
duty, is hereby authorized to detain any minor wilfully violating the
provisions of subsection A of this section until the parent or guardian of the
minor shall take him or her into custody, but such officer shall immediately,
upon taking custody of the minor, communicate with the parent or guardian.
   D.   Penalty: Whoever violates this section shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 99-21, 11-10-1999)
5-5-2: TOBACCO PRODUCTS:
   A.   Definitions: Unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms, as used in this section, shall be construed according to the definitions
given in this subsection:
    RETAILER: Any person, firm or corporation offering tobacco products for
sale at retail to members of the public and shall also include any private club
or organization which offers for sale to its members tobacco products.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping
tobacco or any finely cut, ground, powdered or leaf tobacco that is intended to
be placed in a person's mouth.
   VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service device,
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
tobacco products.
   B.   Sales Prohibited; Signs:
      1.   Sales Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any retailer or any other
person to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products to any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
      2.   Sign Requirements:
         a.   Every retailer shall post signs at or near every display of
tobacco products offered for sale for the purpose of informing members of the
public or members of the club or organization of the restriction upon sale of
tobacco products to persons under eighteen (18) years. Each sign shall be
plainly visible and shall state:
The sale of tobacco products to persons under 18 years of age is prohibited by
law.
         b.   The text of such sign shall be printed in red letters on a white
background, and such letters shall be at least one inch (1") and shall be
clearly legible.
   C.   Purchase, False Identification Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase tobacco products. It
shall be further unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years
to misrepresent his or her identity or age, or to use any false or altered
identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products.
   D.   Possession Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years to possess or use any tobacco products. Provided,
however, that the possession by a person under the age of eighteen (18) years
while under the direct supervision of the parent or natural or legal guardian
of such person, and in the privacy of the home of such parent or guardian,
shall not be prohibited.
   E.   Proximity To Certain Institutions: It shall be unlawful for any person
to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products within one
hundred feet (100') of any building utilized as a school, childcare facility or
for educational or recreational programs for persons under the age of eighteen
(18) years.
   F.   Free Distributions Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation in the business of selling or otherwise distributing,
promoting or advertising tobacco products, or any employee or agent of any such
person, firm or corporation, in the course of such person's, firm's or
corporation's business, to distribute, give away or deliver tobacco products
free of charge to any person on any right of way, park, playground or other
premises which is owned by the village, by any school district, by any park
district or any public library.
   G.   Penalty: Whoever violates this section shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 99-22, 11-10-1999)
CHAPTER 6
DISCRIMINATION IN HOUSING
SECTION:
5-6-1: Village Policy
5-6-2: Definitions
5-6-3: Prohibited Acts
5-6-4: Penalty
5-6-1: VILLAGE POLICY:
   A.   In furthering the policy of the state of Illinois as expressed in its
constitution and other laws; in order that the safety and general welfare,
peace and health of all the inhabitants of the village may be ensured, it is
hereby declared the policy of the village to assure equal opportunity to all
residents regardless of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
gender, creed, physical or mental disability, age, marital status, military
status, familial status, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge from the
military, and order of protection status to live in decent, sanitary,
healthful, standard living quarters.
   B.   It is the policy of the village that no owner, lessee, sublessee,
assignee, managing agent, or other person, firm or corporation having the right
to sell, rent, or lease (or otherwise control) any housing accommodation and/or
real property within the village, or any agent of these, shall refuse to sell,
rent, lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of
persons such housing accommodations and/or real property because of race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, gender, creed, physical or mental
disability, age, marital status, military status, familial status, sexual
orientation, unfavorable discharge from the military, and order of protection
status of such person or persons or discriminate against any person or persons
because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or
physical or mental handicap in the conditions, terms, privileges of the sale,
rental or lease of any housing accommodation and/or real property, or in the
furnishing of facilities and/or services in connection therewith. (Ord. 2000-
07, 5-3-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that will promote maximum
choice within the village's total housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic, and
economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation and racially inclusive
patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities. (Ord. 2000-07,
5-3-2000)
5-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following
terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed in this
section:
DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL STANDARD LIVING QUARTERS: Housing which is in
sound, clean, and weathertight condition in conformance with applicable local,
state, and national codes.
DISCRIMINATE; DISCRIMINATION: Any difference expressed in any way toward a
person or persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental or
financing for housing accommodation and/or real property in regard to such
sale, exchange, rental, lease or finance because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, gender, creed, physical or mental disability, age,
marital status, military status, familial status, sexual orientation,
unfavorable discharge from the military, and order of protection status of such
person.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any person, institution or business entity of any kind
which loans money to persons and receives as security for said loans a secured
interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is
used or occupied, maintained, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as a
home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings, or any real
estate so used, designed or intended for such use.
OWNER: Any person/persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or own any
beneficial interest in any real property or who hold legal or equitable title
to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property and/or housing accommodations.
REAL ESTATE BROKER: Any person, partnership, association, corporation and/or
agent thereof who, for a fee or other valuable consideration, offers, sells,
purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange
or rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or
collects rental for the use of a housing accommodation and/or real property of
another.
REAL PROPERTY: Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure or housing
accommodations within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2000-07, 5-3-
2000; amd. 2013 Code)
5-6-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sublessee, real
estate broker or salesman, financial institution or employee of the financial
institution, advertiser, or agent of any or all of the foregoing, to
discriminate against any person or persons because of their race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, gender, creed, physical or mental
disability, age, marital status, military status, familial status, sexual
orientation, unfavorable discharge from the military, and order of protection
status with regard to the sale, exchange or rental, or any dealing concerning
any housing accommodation and/or real property. In addition to the foregoing,
it shall also be unlawful for any real estate broker or employee thereof, owner
or other person, or financial institution dealing with housing or real property
in the village:
   A.   To discriminate against any person in the availability of or the price,
terms, conditions, or privileges of any kind relating to the sale, rental,
lease, or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real property in the
village or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection therewith.
   B.   To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated, any
notice, statement or advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to use any form
of application, for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of real property,
or to make any record of inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase,
rental or lease of such real estate, which expresses, directly or indirectly,
any discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
gender, creed, physical or mental disability, age, marital status, military
status, familial status, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge from the
military, and order of protection status of any person.
   C.   To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing loans,
accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the
purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of
any housing accommodation and/or real property.
   D.   To solicit for sale or lease, or listing for the sale or lease, of any
housing accommodation and/or real property on the grounds of loss of value
because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person
or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, gender, creed, physical or mental disability, age, marital status,
military status, familial status, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge
from the military, and order of protection status.
   E.   To distribute or cause to be distributed written material or statements
designed to induce any owner or any housing accommodation and/or real property
to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or prospective
change in the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, gender,
creed, physical or mental disability, age, marital status, military status,
familial status, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge from the military,
and order of protection status of persons in the neighborhood.
   F.   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or the
anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any housing accommodation and/or
real property for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale or
listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, gender, creed,
physical or mental disability, age, marital status, military status, familial
status, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge from the military, and order
of protection status in the area will or may result in the lowering of property
values in the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located.
   G.   For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent or
otherwise deal with such owner's housing accommodations and/or real property
with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion, national origin
or ancestry, gender, creed, physical or mental disability, age, marital status,
military status, familial status, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge
from the military, and order of protection status.
   H.   For an owner to refuse to sell, rent, or otherwise deal with any
housing accommodation and/or real property because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, gender, creed, physical or mental disability, age,
marital status, military status, familial status, sexual orientation,
unfavorable discharge from the military, and order of protection status of the
proposed buyer or tenant. (Ord. 2000-07, 5-3-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
5-6-4: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. This section shall in no way abrogate or
impair the right of the village to specifically enforce, by any legal means,
any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2000-07, 5-3-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 7
LOCAL - STATE OF EMERGENCY
SECTION:
5-7-1: Definitions; Declaration; Regulations
5-7-2: Effective Date Of Declaration; Termination
5-7-3: Posting Of Declaration
5-7-4: Village Board Of Trustees To Meet
5-7-1: DEFINITIONS; DECLARATION; REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
           A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering,
           standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
CURFEW:    property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the
           village except officials of any governmental unit and persons
           officially designated to duty with reference to said civil
           emergency.
           (1) A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual
           force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by
           immediate power to execute by three (3) or more persons acting
           together without authority of law; or (2) Any natural disaster,
           epidemic, or manmade calamity, including outbreak of disease, flood,
EMERGENCY: conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion, or eminent
           threat of any of those events within the corporate limits of the
           village, resulting in or threatening the death or injury of persons
           or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary
           measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and
           welfare.
 
   B.   Declaration: Whenever an emergency, as defined in subsection (a) of
this section exists, the Village President is authorized to declare the
existence of a local state of emergency by means of a written declaration of
the Village President, under oath, setting forth the facts which constitute the
emergency, describing the nature of the emergency and declaring that a local
state of emergency exists in accordance with the definitions set forth in this
section. This declaration must be filed with the Village Clerk as soon as
practicable after issuance.
   C.   Orders Authorized And Regulations Related Thereto:
      1.   All actions reasonably necessary to respond to the emergency;
      2.   Order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the
village or to the village as a whole, as the Village President deems advisable,
and applicable during such hours of the day or night as the Village President
deems necessary in the interest of public safety and welfare;
      3.   The power to hire temporary village employees, to appoint temporary
village officials, and to expend funds as necessary;
      4.   Order restrictions on ingress or egress to parts of the village to
limit the occupancy of any premises;
      5.   To make provision for the availability and use of temporary
emergency housing;
      6.   Temporarily suspend, limit, cancel, convene, reschedule, postpone,
continue, or relocate all meetings of the Village Board of Trustees, and any
village committee, commission, board, authority, or other village body as
deemed appropriate by the Village President;
      7.   Require closing of business establishments and special events;
      8.   Temporarily close any and all streets, alleys, sidewalks, bike
paths, public parks or public ways;
      9.   Temporarily suspend or modify, for not more than sixty (60) days,
any regulation or ordinance of the village, including, but not limited to,
those regarding health, safety, and zoning. This period may be extended upon
approval of the Village Board of Trustees;
      10.   Suspend or limit burning of any items or property within the
village limits;
      11.   Direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population
from any stricken or threatened areas within the village if the Village
President deems this action is necessary for the preservation of life,
property, or other disaster or emergency mitigation, response or recovery and
to prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destination in connection with
an evacuation;
      12.   Approve application for local, state, or federal assistance;
      13.   Establish and control routes of transportation, ingress or egress;
      14.   Control ingress and egress from any designated disaster or
emergency area or home, building or structures located therein;
      15.   Approve the transfer, the direction, personnel, or functions of
village departments and agencies for the purpose of performing or facilitating
emergency or disaster services;
      16.   Accept services, gifts, grants, loans, equipment, supplies, and/or
materials whether from private, nonprofit, or governmental sources;
      17.   Require the continuation, termination, disconnection, or suspension
of natural gas, electrical power, water, sewer, communication or other public
utilities or infrastructure;
      18.   Close or cancel the use of any municipally owned or operated
building or other public facility;
      19.   Declare, issue, enforce, modify and terminate orders for quarantine
and isolation of persons or animals posing a threat to the public;
      20.   Exercise such powers and functions in light of the exigencies of
emergency or disaster including the waiving of compliance with any time
consuming procedures and formalities, including notices, as may be prescribed
by law; and
      21.   Issue any and all such other orders or undertake such other
functions and activities as the Village President reasonably believes is
required to protect the health, safety, and welfare of persons or property
within the village or otherwise preserve the public peace or abate, clean up,
or mitigate the effects of any emergency or disaster. (Ord. 2020-04, 3-17-2020)
5-7-2: EFFECTIVE DATE OF DECLARATION; TERMINATION:
   A.   The Declaration of Emergency shall be effective from the date and time
designated in the declaration upon the signing of the declaration by both the
Village President and either one (1) sitting Trustee of the Village Board of
Trustees or any officer authorized to give oaths.
   B.   The time of the emergency designated in the declaration shall expire
not later than the adjournment of the first regular meeting of the Village
Board of Trustees following the declaration or within seven (7) days of the
declaration, whichever is sooner, unless such continuation or renewal is
approved by the Village Board of Trustees.
   C.   The issuance of a Declaration of Emergency shall, unless sooner
activated, also cause the activation of the village's Disaster Management Plan.
   D.   No person shall disobey any order contained in the Declaration of
Emergency. (Ord. 2020-04, 3-17-2020)
5-7-3: POSTING OF DECLARATION:
Upon issuance of a Declaration of Emergency as authorized herein, the Village
President or his designee shall notify the local news media and shall cause a
copy of the declaration declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted
at Village Hall. (Ord. 2020-04, 3-17-2020)
5-7-4: VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES TO MEET:
The Village President, upon issuance of a Declaration of Emergency, shall call
for an emergency special meeting of the Village Board of Trustees. The
emergency special meeting shall take place as soon as reasonably possible, and
if reasonably possible, take place within twenty-four (24) hours after the
Declaration of Emergency. The agenda for the special meeting shall relate to
the emergency response of the village and related matters. The notice of such
emergency special meeting may be delivered to the Village Board of Trustees by
phone, in person, or electronic means. (Ord. 2020-04, 3-17-2020)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: State Traffic Code Adopted
6-1-2: Definitions
6-1-3: Vehicle Classifications
6-1-4: Speed Limits
6-1-5: U-Turns
6-1-6: Bicycles, Skates And Toy Vehicles
6-1-1: STATE TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, all of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions,
provisions and sections of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., as amended, are hereby adopted by the village. Any
and all violations thereof shall be considered violations of this title, and
each such violation shall subject the violator thereof to penalty provisions
under this title. (2013 Code)
6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this title the following terms are used, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ALLEY: A highway of less than twenty feet (20') total width used primarily for
delivery service.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: That closely built up business portion of the village.
CROSSWALK: That portion of the roadway included within the prolongation of the
sidewalk lines at street intersections.
DRIVER: Any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles of the police or fire department; ambulances; any
vehicle conveying a village official or employee in response to an emergency
official call.
EXPLOSIVES: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used
or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains any
oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by
percussion, or by detonator of any of the compound or mixture may cause such a
sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructible effects on contiguous objects or of
destroying life or limb.
FARM TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing plows, moving machines and other implements of husbandry.
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS: Any liquid which has a flashpoint of seventy degrees
Fahrenheit (70°F) or less, as determined by Tagliabue or equivalent closed cup
test device.
IMPROVED HIGHWAY: A roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam or gravel.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation of the property lines
of two (2) or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not such streets
cross.
LANED HIGHWAY: A street, the roadway of which is divided into three (3) or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicle traffic.
LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
METAL TIRE: Every tire, the surface of which in contact with the roadway is
wholly or partly of metal or other hard, nonresilient material.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is
propelled by electric power obtained from overhead wires, but not operated upon
rails.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
PARK: To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for a period of time greater
than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading or unloading of persons.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PNEUMATIC TIRE: Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the
load.
PROPERTY LINE: The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots or
property abutting thereon.
PUBLIC BUILDING: A building used by the village or by any park district, school
district, the state or by the United States government.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The closely built up residence portion of the village.
ROAD TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles
and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any
part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street designed or ordinarily used for vehicular
traffic.
SAFETY ZONE: That portion of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of
pedestrians, suitably marked or elevated.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and
operated for the transportation of children to or from school or privately
owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or
from school.
SEMITRAILERS: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons
or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some
part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another
vehicle.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line or roadway and the
adjacent property line designated for pedestrian use.
SOLID TIRE: Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not
depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
STREET: Every way set aside for public travel except footpaths.
SUBURBAN DISTRICT: That portion of the village other than closely built up
business and residence districts.
TRAFFIC: Vehicles, streetcars, pedestrians and draft or herded animals using
any street for travel.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying passengers or
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part
of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, including bicycles, but not including
perambulators or toy vehicles. (1966 Code §§ 293–327; amd. 2013 Code)
6-1-3: VEHICLE CLASSIFICATIONS:
For the purpose of this title, motor vehicles shall be divided into the
following divisions:
   A.   First: Vehicles which are designed for carrying not more than seven (7)
persons.
   B.   Second: Those vehicles which are designed and used for pulling or
carrying freight and also vehicles designed and used for carrying more than
seven (7) persons. (1966 Code § 328)
6-1-4: SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   Reasonable And Proper Speed:
      1.   No person shall drive a vehicle of the first division, as described
in section
6-1-3 of this chapter, upon any public highway at a speed greater than is
reasonable and proper, having regard to the traffic and the use of the way, or
so as to endanger the life or limb or injure the property of any person. If the
rate of speed of any motor vehicle of the first division through the business
district of the village exceeds twenty five (25) miles per hour, or if the rate
of speed of any such motor vehicle while operated upon any public highway where
the same passes through the residence district of the village exceeds twenty
five (25) miles per hour, such rates of speed shall be prima facie evidence
that the person operating such motor vehicle is running at a rate of speed
greater than is reasonable and proper, having regard to the traffic and use of
the way, or so as to endanger the life or limb or injure the property of any
person.
      2.   The speed of all vehicles of the second division, as described in
section
6-1-3 of this chapter, shall always be reasonable and safe and be governed as
near as may be by the general requirements of state law, but such speed shall
not exceed the rate of speed as prescribed and limited by the laws of the state
in relation to said vehicles of the second division.
   B.   Hazardous Conditions: The fact that the speed of a vehicle is lower
than the prima facie limits shall not relieve the driver from the duty to
decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching
and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions, and
speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person
or vehicle or on entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and
the duty of all persons to use care. (1966 Code § 355; amd. 2013 Code)
6-1-5: U-TURNS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such
vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be
made in safety and without backing into traffic or otherwise interfering with
traffic. (1966 Code § 345)
   B.   No driver of any motor vehicle shall make a U-turn upon Mill Street
within the limits of the village. (Ord. 66-01, 4-5-1966; amd. 2013 Code)
6-1-6: BICYCLES, SKATES AND TOY VEHICLES:
   A.   Prohibited Use: It shall be unlawful and no person shall operate, ride,
or use in-line skates, roller skates, skateboards, bicycles, or toy riding
vehicles on:
      1.   Any sidewalk or public area within the village on or adjacent to:
         a.   Mill Street between Canal Street and Grove Street; and
         b.   All park shelters located anywhere on public property within the
village, or the concrete immediately surrounding said shelters.
      2.   Any public or private property where a sign has been posted at the
entrance or displayed prominently on the property prohibiting the use of in-
line skates, roller skates, skateboards, bicycles, and/or toy riding vehicles.
      3.   Any place in the village in such a manner as to be dangerous to
persons or property.
   B.   Reflective Clothing Required At Night: No person shall operate, ride,
or use in-line skates, roller skates, skateboards, bicycles, or toy riding
vehicles on any public right of way or public property in the village,
including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, and parks, during the
nighttime after sunset and before sunrise without wearing reflective clothing
or reflective items. Such reflective clothing shall be adequate to reflect
brightly the headlights from a motor vehicle, and the wearer shall have at
least one item of reflective clothing visible from in front and one visible
from in back. In lieu of any item of reflective clothing, the wearer may wear
any device or decoration that is adequate to reflect such lights brightly.
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be subject to
punishment of a fine not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (Ord. 2005-40, 10-12-2005)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: General Parking Restrictions
6-2-2: Loading Zones
6-2-3: Towing Illegally Parked Vehicles
6-2-1: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Vehicles For Sale; Peddling Merchandise: It shall be unlawful to park
any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to
park any vehicle upon any business street from which vehicle merchandise is
peddled. (1966 Code § 380)
   B.   Alleys: No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner
or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. (1966 Code § 382)
   C.   Bus Stands: No vehicle, other than a bus, shall be parked in a place
designated as a bus loading zone. (1966 Code § 383)
   D.   Mailboxes: No person shall stand or park any motor vehicle on the
curbside, within ten feet (10') of a mailbox, between the hours of nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. and three thirty o'clock (3:30) P.M., Monday through Saturday,
except on days designated as federal holidays.
   E.   Private Property: No motor vehicle shall be parked on private property
without the consent of the owner of the private property. Every vehicle parked
in violation of this subsection is hereby declared to be a nuisance which may
be abated by any police officer by removing and impounding such vehicle.
   F.   Vehicles Of Certain Length Or Height: No person shall stand or park any
motor vehicle whose wheelbase exceeds one hundred thirty eight inches (138"),
or whose overall length exceeds two hundred twenty six inches (226"), or whose
maximum height exceeds eighty three inches (83"), or a semitruck, truck,
semitrailer, trailer, mobile home, recreational vehicle, boat or airplane or
any part thereof on any street for a longer period than is necessary for
reasonably expeditious loading or unloading of such vehicle, semitruck, truck,
semitrailer, trailer, mobile home, recreational vehicle, boat or airplane,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Every vehicle or semitruck,
truck, semitrailer, trailer, mobile home, recreational vehicle, boat or
airplane parked in violation of this subsection is hereby declared to be a
nuisance which may be abated by any police officer by removing and impounding
such vehicles. (Ord. 99-20, 11-10-1999)
   G.   Semitrucks, Tractors And Trailers: No person shall park, stop, or leave
standing: 1) any semitrailer; 2) any semitractor; 3) any vehicle with more than
two (2) axles; or 4) any vehicle or trailer greater than twelve feet (12') in
length in any residential district or in the C-1 central business district or
on any public street or public parking lot; except, that such vehicles may be
parked for the minimum period of time necessary for delivering or picking up
materials or merchandise, and during the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M.
to two o'clock (2:00) P.M.
   H.   Near Driveways: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic control devices, in front
of or directly across from a public or private driveway on any street within
the village when such street is thirty feet (30') or less, measured from the
exterior face of the curbstone to the exterior face of the curbstone, or if no
curbstone is present, from the edge of the pavement to the edge of the
pavement. (Ord. 2006-74, 11-8-2006)
   I.   During Snow Removal:
      1.   Parking After Snowfall Of Two Inches Or More: It shall be unlawful
for any person to park any vehicle on any public street or public right of way
of the village at any time following a snowfall of two inches (2") or more
until the snow and ice on such public street or public right of way has been
plowed from curb to curb. However, no person shall be found in violation of
this subsection within the first twelve (12) hours after a snowfall of two
inches (2") or more to allow such person an opportunity to remove such vehicle
from the public street or public right of way.
      2.   Supervision Of Project And Towing Of Vehicles: The superintendent of
public works, or in his absence the village president, shall be in general
charge of all snow removal from the village streets. When it is necessary to
move or tow any parked vehicles from the village streets to facilitate snow
removal, by direction of the superintendent of public works, the police
department and all members thereof may have any automobile or other vehicle
parked in violation of this section removed or towed away by such commercial
towing service as is customarily hired by village. Automobiles and other
vehicles so removed or towed away shall be parked or stored in a safe place and
shall be restored to the owner or operator of such vehicle upon payment to the
commercial towing service of the actual cost of removal or towing and storage
of such vehicle.
      3.   Violation: Any vehicle parked in violation of any provision of this
subsection I shall be subject to an immediate tow as provided herein. Any
towing or storage fees imposed pursuant to subsection I2 of this section shall
be separate from and in addition to any fine or penalty imposed pursuant to
this section for the parking violation. (Ord. 2014-08, 3-12-2014, eff. 10-1-
2014)
6-2-2: LOADING ZONES:
During the time specified herein, it shall be unlawful for a driver of a
vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is
necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed three (3)
minutes, and for the driver to stand any freight carrying vehicle for a period
of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to
exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any of the following places:
   A.   In any public alley, during any hour of the day or night.
   B.   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb
before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time.
   C.   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time the
theater is open for business. (1966 Code § 381)
6-2-3: TOWING ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
   A.   Authority To Tow: The chief of police and all members of the police
department assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to remove and tow
away or have removed and towed away by any commercial towing service any
automobile or other vehicle illegally parked in violation of this chapter, or
in violation of section
6-1-1 of this title, or parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates
or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant or may
obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle, including, but not limited to,
snow removal vehicles. (Ord. 2006-74, 11-8-2006; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Storage And Reclamation; Costs: Vehicles so towed away for illegal
parking may be stored in a safe place, and possession thereof shall be returned
to the owner or operator of such vehicle upon payment of the actual towing and/
or storage fee charged for each twenty four (24) hours or fraction thereof that
the vehicle is stored. The owner and/or operator of the vehicle shall be
jointly and severally liable for all towing and storage costs.
   C.   Presumption Of Liability For Violation: The fact that an automobile
which is illegally parked is registered in the name of a person shall be
considered prima facie proof that such person was in control of the automobile
at the time of such parking.
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day of a violation is deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 2006-74, 11-8-2006)
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
SECTION:
6-3-1: Through Streets
6-3-2: Stop Streets
6-3-3: One-Way Streets
6-3-4: Parking Restrictions And Prohibitions
6-3-4-1: No Parking On Specific Streets
6-3-4-2: Limited Parking
6-3-1: THROUGH STREETS:
Every driver of a vehicle traversing any street intersecting with any through
street, as hereby or hereafter established, shall stop such vehicle before
entering upon the through street unless a go signal is given at such
intersection by a traffic officer or a traffic signal. The following streets
and parts of streets are hereby declared to constitute through streets:
   Clark Street.
   Division Street.
   Mill Street.
   West Street.
(1966 Code § 336)
6-3-2: STOP STREETS:
Stop signs shall be placed at the following locations:
   Church Street, northeast side, on Center Street.
   Church Street, southeast side, on Center Street.
   Vine Street and Canal Street to regulate north/south traffic.
   Vine Street and Church Street to regulate north/south traffic.
(Ord. 2003-58, 12-10-2003; amd. Ord. 2007-38, 11-14-2007)
6-3-3: ONE-WAY STREETS:
The following streets shall be one-way streets:
   West Grove Street, which will run in a westerly direction from North Clark
Street to North Division Street a distance of 368 feet.
(Ord. 1-01, 7-3-1973)
6-3-4: PARKING RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
6-3-4-1: NO PARKING ON SPECIFIC STREETS:
Parking is hereby prohibited at the following places:
   Illinois Route 178, also known as Clark Street, both sides, beginning at
Lincoln Street and extending southerly to the west entrance of Starved Rock
State Park during improvement and realignment of Illinois Route 178 until the
highway has resumed normal operation. Any person, firm, or corporation
violating the provisions of this paragraph shall be fined not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense. Each day of a violation is a separate offense.
   West Church Street, both sides, between Mill Street and North Division
Street.
(Ord. 13-01, 12-4-1973; amd. Ord. 2016-22, 8-17-2016)
6-3-4-2: LIMITED PARKING:
Parking on the following streets shall be as indicated:
   Mill Street
   No parking between Canal Street and Church Street between the hours of 1:00
A.M. and 6:00 A.M.
   No parking between the railroad tracks and Canal Street between and during
the hours of 2:00 A.M. to 7:00 A.M.
(Ord. 69-05, 8-12-1969; amd. Ord. 79-01, 2-6-1979, eff. 2-6-1979)
CHAPTER 4
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Right Of Way
6-4-2: Use Of Roadways
6-4-3: Pedestrian Control Signals
6-4-4: Standing On Sidewalk
6-4-5: Pedestrians With Disabilities
6-4-1: RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive into any
crosswalk without the exercise of due and proper care in view of the special
use made thereof by pedestrians.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle into any crosswalk while
there is in such crosswalk, upon the half of the roadway upon which such
vehicle is traveling, any pedestrian engaged in crossing the roadway until such
pedestrian shall have passed beyond the path of such vehicle, when the
pedestrian shall indicate his intention to cross.
   C.   The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering upon any crosswalk
when any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at such
crosswalk for the purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross. (1966 Code §
370)
6-4-2: USE OF ROADWAYS:
   A.   Pedestrian Crossings:
      1.   At no place shall a pedestrian cross any roadway other than by the
most direct route to the opposite curbing, and when crossing at any place other
than a crosswalk, he shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the
roadway. (1966 Code § 371)
      2.   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are
in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
      3.   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in the
central traffic district or in any business district. (1966 Code § 374)
   B.   Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways:
      1.   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any
pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
      2.   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction.
      3.   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle. (1966 Code § 375)
      4.   No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway other than in a
safety zone, if such act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. (1966
Code § 371)
6-4-3: PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS:
At intersections where traffic is directed by a police officer or by a stop and
go signal, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the roadway other
than with released traffic, if such crossing interferes with the lawful
movement of traffic. (1966 Code § 372)
6-4-4: STANDING ON SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk, except as
near as is reasonably possible to the building line or curb line, if such
standing interferes with the use of the sidewalk by other pedestrians. (1966
Code § 373)
6-4-5: PEDESTRIANS WITH DISABILITIES:
The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian with
clearly visible disabilities. (2013 Code)
CHAPTER 5
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
SECTION:
6-5-1: Interference With Driver
6-5-2: Lights
6-5-3: Size, Weight And Load
6-5-4: Noise Control
6-5-5: Emissions
6-5-6: Spilling Loads
6-5-1: INTERFERENCE WITH DRIVER:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is so loaded that the
operator does not have ready access to the mechanism operating the brakes of
such vehicle. (1966 Code § 390; amd. 2013 Code)
6-5-2: LIGHTS:
   A.   General Requirements: It shall be unlawful to operate or park on any
street, any vehicle not equipped with adequate lights conforming to the
requirements of the state law.
   B.   Vehicles Owned By Firefighters: Any motor vehicle owned or usually
operated by a volunteer firefighter may be equipped with not to exceed two (2)
lamps which shall emit a blue light without glare. One such lamp may be mounted
on the front and one may be mounted on the rear of any such vehicle; except,
that a flashing blue light may be used only when such firefighter is responding
to a fire call. (1966 Code § 392)
6-5-3: SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD:
   A.   Projecting Loads; Width, Length And Height:
      1.   The maximum width and height of any vehicle and its load shall not
exceed the limits expressed in the state traffic law.
      2.   No passenger type vehicle shall be operated on the streets with a
load extending beyond the lines of the fenders on the left side of the vehicle
nor extending more than six inches (6") beyond the line of the fenders on the
right side thereof.
      3.   No vehicle, unladen or with load, shall exceed a length of forty two
feet (42'), extreme overall dimensions.
      4.   No combination of vehicles coupled together shall consist of more
than two (2) units, and no such combination of vehicles, unladen or with load,
shall exceed a total length of forty five feet (45'); but such length
limitation shall not apply to vehicles operated in the daytime when
transporting pipes, poles, machinery or other objects which cannot be readily
dismembered, nor to such vehicles operated at nighttime by a public utility
when engaged in emergency repair work, but such loads carried at night shall be
clearly marked with sufficient lights to show the full dimensions of the load.
      5.   No part of the load of a vehicle shall extend more than three feet
(3') in front of the extreme front portion of the vehicle. (1966 Code § 388)
   B.   Weight: It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which, with its
load, exceeds seven thousand (7,000) pounds in weight on all streets in the
village, except as provided in subsection C of this section. (1966 Code § 396;
amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Richard Hallett Road:
      1.   Maximum Width, Length And Height Of Vehicle And Load: The maximum
width, length and height of any vehicle and its load on Richard Hallett Road
shall not exceed the limits expressed in the Illinois vehicle code.
      2.   Excess Weight, Including Load: It shall be unlawful to operate any
motor vehicle with a weight, including load, in excess of twelve (12) tons on
Richard Hallett Road. Motor vehicles not operating as through traffic, such to
include service vehicles, buses, delivery vehicles, farm vehicles, and
construction vehicles, either stored at a location that requires the roadway
for access or present for specific work are exempt from this provision. (Ord.
2005-41, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
6-5-4: NOISE CONTROL:
   A.   Unnecessary Noise: It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which
makes unusually loud or unnecessary noise. (1966 Code § 385)
   B.   Jake Braking Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle
with a weight, including vehicle and load weight, in excess of sixteen (16)
tons to cause excessive noise braking at locations within the village at any
time unless prior permission is received from the village police chief or his
designee. The village superintendent of public works shall install necessary
signage prohibiting such at locations determined in conjunction with the
village chief of police. Any person violating this subsection shall be subject
to punishment of a fine not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more
than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each offense. (Ord. 2012-17, 5-9-
2012)
6-5-5: EMISSIONS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits dense smoke or such an
amount of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the health of persons or as to
endanger the drivers of other vehicles. (1966 Code § 387)
6-5-6: SPILLING LOADS:
No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load spills or drops on any
street or alley in the village. (1966 Code § 397)
CHAPTER 6
ABANDONED, JUNK VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-6-1: Definitions
6-6-2: Abandonment Prohibited
6-6-3: Wrecked, Nonoperating Vehicle On Street
6-6-4: Nuisance Declared
6-6-5: Abatement, Reclamation And Disposal Procedures
6-6-6: Penalties
6-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE: Any vehicle not abandoned but dismantled in
whole or in part or otherwise rendered inoperative.
HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every alley, street, or
other way publicly maintained when any part thereof is opened to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
JUNKED VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is:
   A.   Inoperative, unlicensed, wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or
discarded; or
   B.   Remains unmoved for a continuous period of more than seven (7) days, if
the vehicle is located on private property; or
   C.   Remains unmoved for a continuous period of no more than two (2) days,
if the vehicle is located on public property.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PROPERTY: Any real property within the village which is not a street or
highway.
VEHICLE: A machine propelled by power, other than by human power, designed to
travel along the ground by the use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and to
transport persons or property or pull machinery. (Ord. 78-16, 8-1-1978; amd.
Ord. 88-23, 12-7-1988; Ord. 95-19, 10-4-1995)
6-6-2: ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED:
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the village and no person shall
leave any vehicle at any place within the village for such time and under such
circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been
abandoned. (Ord. 78-16, 8-1-1978)
6-6-3: WRECKED, NONOPERATING VEHICLE ON STREET:
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked
vehicle on any street or highway within the village. (Ord. 78-16, 8-1-1978)
6-6-4: NUISANCE DECLARED:
The location or presence of any junked vehicle on any lot, tract, parcel of
land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within
the village shall be deemed a public nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any
person (owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise) to cause or maintain
such public nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, rendering inoperable,
abandoning, not moving or discarding his vehicle, or to suffer, permit or allow
the same to be placed, located, maintained or exist upon private real property
within the village for longer than seven (7) days, or to allow the same to
exist upon public real property within the village for longer than two (2)
days; provided, that this section shall not apply to: a) a vehicle or part
thereof which is completely enclosed with a building in a lawful manner where
it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; b) a
vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private
property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or a
junkyard; or c) unlicensed inoperable vehicles stored on private property;
provided, however, that the vehicles and outdoor storage areas are maintained
in such a manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened
from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees or
shrubbery, or other appropriate means. (Ord. 95-19, 10-4-1995)
6-6-5: ABATEMENT, RECLAMATION AND DISPOSAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notice To Abate: Whenever such public nuisance exists in the village on
private property in violation hereof, the chief of police and/or his employees,
who shall administer this chapter, shall not give less than ten (10) days'
notice to the owner of the real property or the occupant, if any, of the
premises whereon such public nuisance exists to abate or remove the same,
stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property and that it must
be removed and abated within ten (10) days, and further, that a request for a
hearing must be made before expiration of said ten (10) day period by the
aggrieved person, such notice to be mailed, by certified or registered mail,
return receipt requested, to the owner, tenant, lessee, or the occupant of the
private premises whereupon such public nuisance exists. If the notice is
returned undelivered by the United States post office, official action to abate
said nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the
date of such return. (Ord. 95-19, 10-4-1995)
   B.   Hearing: A public hearing prior to the removal of the vehicle or part
thereof as a public nuisance from private property is to be held before the
village board of trustees, or official of the village as designated by the
board of trustees, when such a hearing is requested by the owner, tenant,
lessee, or occupant of the private premises, within ten (10) days after service
of notice to abate the nuisance. Any resolution or order requiring the removal
of a vehicle or part thereof shall include a description of the vehicle, and
the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if
available at the site. (Ord. 95-19, 10-4-1995; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Permission By Owner For Village To Abate: If, within ten (10) days
after receipt of notice from the chief of police and/or his employees, or his
duly authorized agent, to abate the nuisance, as herein provided, the owner,
tenant, lessee, or occupant of the premises shall give his written permission
to the chief of police and/or his employee, or his duly authorized agent, for
removal of the junked motor vehicle from the premises, the giving of such
permission shall be considered compliance with the provisions of this section,
although the owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant shall still be responsible for
damages to the village.
   D.   Failure Of Owner To Abate; Abatement By Village:
      1.   If such public nuisance is not abated by said owner, tenant, lessee,
or occupant after notice is given in accordance with this section, official
action, including, but not limited to, litigation, may be taken by the village
to abate such nuisance, remove the vehicle, or seek damages for the violation
of this chapter.
      2.   The chief of police and/or his employees, or his agent, may enter
upon private property for the purposes specified in this chapter to examine
vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of vehicles
and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be
a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. The village may apply to the circuit court
of LaSalle County to issue all orders necessary to enforce this chapter. (Ord.
95-19, 10-4-1995)
      3.   The chief of police or any member of his department designated by
him is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any
place within the village which reasonably appears to be in violation of this
chapter or lost, stolen, or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded until
lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with state statutes. The chief of
police shall be authorized to retain a towing service to remove and take
possession of any junked vehicle, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle. The
towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a
record of the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the owner, lienholder or any
other person legally entitled to possession thereof, or until it is disposed of
as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 95-19, 10-4-1995; amd. 2013 Code)
   E.   Towing Of Vehicles From Public Ways:
      1.   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is on a highway in the village
two (2) days or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by
order of the chief of police.
      2.   When an abandoned, unlicensed, unmoved, unattended, wrecked, burned,
junked or partially dismantled motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a
traffic hazard because of its position in relation to the highway, or its
physical appearance is causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal
from the highway by a towing service may be authorized by order of the chief of
police. (Ord. 95-19, 10-4-1995)
      3.   When a vehicle removal from either public or private property is
authorized by order of the chief of police, the last registered owner of the
vehicle will be responsible for all towing costs.
   F.   Records Of Impounded Vehicles: When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is
authorized to be towed away, the police department shall keep and maintain a
record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, year of manufacture, the
manufacturer's trade name, manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle
identification number, license plate year and number, and registration sticker
year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the
date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for
towing, and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.
   G.   Reclamation Of Vehicle: Any time before a motor vehicle or other
vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided herein, the owner,
lienholder or other person legally entitled to its possession may reclaim the
vehicle by presenting to the police department proof of ownership or proof of
the right to possession of the vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the
owner, lienholder or other person under this section until all towing,
processing and storage charges have been paid.
   H.   Sale Of Vehicles:
      1.   Owner Known:
         a.   Whenever an abandoned, junked, unlicensed, unmoved, lost, stolen,
or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle, seven (7) years of age or newer,
remains unclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled
persons to its possession for a period of thirty (30) days after notice has
been given as provided herein, the police department shall cause the vehicle to
be sold at public sale to the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of
the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days
prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At
least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the police department shall cause a
notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the
registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled persons. Such notice
shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps
must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.
         b.   In those instances where the certified notification specified
herein has been returned by the postal authorities to the police department due
to the addressee having moved, or being unknown at the address obtained from
the registration records of the state, the sending of a second certified notice
will not be required.
      2.   Owner Unknown: When the identity of the registered owner, lienholder
or other legally entitled persons to the possession of an abandoned, junked,
unlicensed, unmoved, lost or unclaimed vehicle of seven (7) years of age or
newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in this chapter, the
vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in the manner authorized
by this chapter without notice to any person whose identity cannot be
determined.
   I.   Disposal Of Vehicle As Junk: When an abandoned, junked, unlicensed, or
unmoved vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is impounded as specified
by this chapter, it will be kept in custody for a minimum of ten (10) days for
the purpose of determining identity of the registered owner, lienholder, or
other legally entitled persons and contacting the registered owner, lienholder,
or other legally entitled persons by the U.S. mail, public service or in person
for a determination of disposition and for an examination of the state police
stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the expiration
of the ten (10) day period, without the benefit of disposition information
being received from the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled
persons, the chief of police will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk
or salvage.
   J.   Report Of Vehicle Disposition: When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in
the custody of the police department is reclaimed by the registered owner,
lienholder or other legally entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at
public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this chapter, a report of
the transaction will be maintained by the police department for a period of one
year from the date of the sale or disposal. (Ord. 95-19, 10-4-1995; amd. 2013
Code)
6-6-6: PENALTIES:
Upon conviction for violation of any provisions of this chapter relating to the
maintaining of a public nuisance as described herein or in permitting or
allowing such public nuisance to exist, such violator shall be punished by a
fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00), and each day that such nuisance shall continue after the
time for abatement as herein set out shall constitute a separate offense.
Additionally, any reasonable attorney fees incurred by the village in
attempting to enforce this chapter shall be added to the amount of the penalty
set forth above. (Ord. 95-19, 10-4-1995; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 7
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
6-7-1: Obedience To Police And Fire Personnel; Directing Traffic
6-7-2: Traffic Tickets
6-7-3: Arrests
6-7-4: Penalty
6-7-1: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE PERSONNEL; DIRECTING TRAFFIC:
   A.   Members of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic in accordance with the provisions of this title, or in emergencies as
public safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction
of a police officer.
   B.   Except in case of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person not
authorized by the chief of police to direct or attempt to direct traffic. (1966
Code § 329)
   C.   The fire department officer in command, or any firefighter designated
by him, may exercise the powers and authority of a police officer in directing
traffic at the scene of any fire or where the fire department has responded to
any emergency call for so long as the fire department equipment is on the
scene, in the absence of or in assisting the police. (1966 Code § 330)
6-7-2: TRAFFIC TICKETS:
For offenses other than driving while intoxicated or reckless driving, police
officers, after making note of the license number of the vehicle (and the name
of the offender where possible), may issue a traffic ticket designated for
hearing such cases. Such officer may sign a complaint for the issuance of a
warrant if the offender does not appear at the time and place so specified.
(1966 Code § 403)
6-7-3: ARRESTS:
Any person arrested for a violation of this title shall be released upon proper
bail being furnished as required by statute. The police officer in command at
the station may, in the absence of a proper judge, prescribe the amount of bail
or bond in each instance; provided, that any arrested person may, at his
request, have the amount of such bond set by a proper judge as provided by
statute. (1966 Code § 402)
6-7-4: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any provisions of this title
shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (1966 Code § 14-8; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 8
GOLF CARTS, RECREATIONAL OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-8-1: Generally
6-8-2: Definitions
6-8-3: Requirements
6-8-4: Permits
6-8-1: GENERALLY:
Neighborhood vehicles ("golf carts"), recreational off highway vehicles "ROHV"
and all-terrain vehicles "ATV", as defined and qualified herein shall be
allowed on village streets under the conditions as stated herein. (Ord. 2013-
03, 2-13-2013)
6-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV): Any motorized off highway device designed to travel
primarily off highway, fifty inches (50") or less in width, having a
manufacturer's dry weight of nine hundred (900) pounds or less, traveling on
three (3) or more low pressure tires, designed with a seat or saddle for
operator use, and handlebars or steering wheel for steering control, except
equipment such as lawn mowers.
NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLE (GOLF CART): A self-propelled, electric powered, four (4)
wheeled motor vehicle (or a self-propelled, gasoline powered, 4 wheeled motor
vehicle with an engine displacement under 1,200 cubic centimeters) that is
capable of attaining in one mile a speed of more than twenty (20) miles per
hour, but not more than twenty five (25) miles per hour, and which does not
conform to federal regulations under title 49 CFR part 571.500.
RECREATIONAL OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE (ROHV): Can informally go by a variety of
other names (i.e., UTV), shall mean any motorized off highway device designed
to travel primarily off highway, sixty four inches (64") or less in width,
having a manufacturer's dry weight of two thousand (2,000) pounds or less,
traveling on four (4) or more nonhighway tires, designed with a nonstraddle
seat and a steering wheel for steering control, except equipment such as lawn
mowers.
VILLAGE STREETS: Any of the streets within the boundaries and under the
jurisdiction of the village. (Ord. 2013-03, 2-13-2013)
6-8-3: REQUIREMENTS:
All persons wishing to operate a neighborhood vehicle, ROHV, or ATV on the
village streets must ensure compliance with the following requirements:
   A.   Proof of current liability insurance meeting the minimum requirements
of Illinois law.
   B.   Must be certified by the village and the vehicles certified with the
village by the inspection of the police chief or designated representative.
   C.   No modification to the vehicle's muffler system that increases the
loudness of the vehicle's operation shall have been undertaken.
   D.   Must pay yearly permit fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for first
vehicle, twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each consecutive vehicle within
family (yearly permit then issued).
   E.   Must display village decal on the rear of the vehicle.
   F.   All drivers must be sixteen (16) years of age, with current, valid
state issued driver's license.
   G.   Neighborhood vehicles (golf carts) must be equipped with following:
      1.   Brakes and brake lights.
      2.   Tires.
      3.   Approved slow moving emblem on the rear of the vehicle 1 .
      4.   Headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of five
hundred feet (500') to the front which must illuminate when in operation.
      5.   Taillamp that emits a red light visible from at least one hundred
feet (100') from the rear which must be illuminated when in operation. (Ord.
2013-03, 2-13-2013)
      6.   Any additional requirements which may be required by the Illinois
motor vehicle code. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-11-2015)
   H.   Recreational off highway vehicles and all-terrain vehicles must be
equipped as follows:
      1.   Brakes and brake lights.
      2.   Tires.
      3.   Approved slow moving emblem on the rear of the vehicle 2 .
      4.   Headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of five
hundred feet (500') to the front which must illuminate when in operation.
      5.   Taillamp that emits a red light visible from at least one hundred
feet (100') from the rear which must be illuminated when in operation. (Ord.
2013-03, 2-13-2013)
      6.   Any additional requirements which may be required by the Illinois
motor vehicle code. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-11-2015)
   I.   All vehicles must obey all traffic laws of the state of Illinois and
the village of North Utica.
   J.   Must be operated only on village streets, except where specifically
prohibited.
   K.   May not be operated on Illinois Route 178 or any other state highway.
   L.   Must not be operated in excess of posted speed limit.
   M.   A person operating or who is in actual physical control of such
vehicles as described herein on a road while under the influence is subject to
sections 11-500 through 11-502 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes 3 .
   N.   May not be operated within the boundaries of all village parks.
   O.   Such vehicles may not be operated on streets and highways and roads
under the jurisdiction of the Illinois department of transportation except to
cross at designated streets. (Ord. 2013-03, 2-13-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/12-709.
2 1. 625 ILCS 5/12-709.
3 2. 625 ILCS 5/11-500 - 11-502.
6-8-4: PERMITS:
   A.   No person shall operate said vehicles without first obtaining a permit
from the village clerk as provided herein. Permits shall be granted for a
period of one year and renewed annually. Insurance coverage is to be verified
to be in effect by the police department or said designee when obtaining and
renewing a permit.
   B.   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the
village and shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name and address of applicant.
      2.   Name of liability insurance carrier.
      3.   The serial number, make, model and description of said vehicle.
      4.   Signed waiver of liability by applicant releasing the village and
agreeing to indemnify and hold the village harmless from any and all future
claims resulting from the operation of their said vehicle on the village
streets.
      5.   Photocopy of applicable liability insurance coverage card
specifically for the vehicle to be operated pursuant to the permit.
      6.   Such other information as the village may request.
   C.   No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be inspected by the chief of police (or designee)
to ensure that the vehicle is safe to operate on village streets and is in
compliance with this chapter and with the state of Illinois motor vehicle code.
      2.   A physically handicapped applicant must submit a certificate signed
by the physician, certifying that the applicant is able to safely operate a
qualified said vehicle on village streets.
      3.   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance with
the provisions of the Illinois statutes regarding minimum liability insurance
for passenger motor vehicles to be operated on the roads of the state of
Illinois.
   D.   The village may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a
finding that the holder thereof has violated any provision of this chapter or
there is evidence that permittee cannot safely operate a qualified said vehicle
on the designated roadways. (Ord. 2013-03, 2-13-2013)
CHAPTER 9
PEDICABS
SECTION:
6-9-1:    Definitions
6-9-2:    Licenses Required
6-9-3:    Application For License
6-9-4:    Pedicab Routing And Operations Schedules
6-9-5:    Operation Of Pedicab Businesses
6-9-6:    Insurance
6-9-7:    Issuance Of License
6-9-8:    Operation On The Streets Of The Village
6-9-9:    Denial, Suspension Or Revocation
6-9-10:    Annual License Fees
6-9-11:    Pedicab Vehicle Requirements
6-9-12:    Non-Transferability
6-9-13:    Violations Of Pedicab Driver
 
6-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
 
                           Any vehicle that is a manually operated bicycle-type
                           vehicle pulling a cart, and/or a bicycle type unit
PEDICAB:                   with a rear passenger seat, for two (2) passengers
                           equipped with handles and other equipment required
                           by State law by slow-moving vehicles to operate on
                           the street.
                           A license granted to a person and authorizing a
PEDICAB OPERATING LICENSE: person to operate a pedicab on the streets of the
                           village.
VILLAGE:                   The Village of North Utica, Illinois. (Ord. 2019-17,
                           6-13-2019)
 
6-9-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
The operation of any pedicab vehicle upon the streets of the village for
transporting persons for hire or as a contractual service is a violation of
this chapter unless operating in accordance with a valid license issued
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2019-17, 6-13-2019)
6-9-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for pedicab business licenses shall be made to the Village Clerk on
a form provided by the Village Clerk. In addition to other information required
by this chapter, the application shall contain the following information:
   A.   The name and address of the applicant.
   B.   The applicant's work or corporate history, limited liability company
history, or partnership history for the past five (5) years. If the applicant
is a corporation, limited liability company or partnership, the information
shall also be given for the chief administrative officer who will be in charge
of the Utica operations. The corporation shall list all its officers and
principal business operated by the entity. If the corporation or limited
liability company is a foreign entity, a copy of the certificate to do business
in the state shall be provided.
   C.   A list of all felony and misdemeanor convictions and/or order of court
supervision on misdemeanors by the applicant for the past ten (10) years.
   D.   A signed consent in regard to the Village of North Utica obtaining a
police background check and a credit check if deemed appropriate in the
discretion of the Chief of Police or the Village President.
   E.   Each pedicab shall be operated by the holder of a valid Illinois
driver's license and such must be carried while operating the pedicab.
   F.   A schedule of rates and charges to be made to passengers, which rates
shall not be changed without thirty (30) days prior notice to the Village
Clerk, with all rates to be subject to the approval of the Board of Trustee of
the Village of North Utica.
   The application shall be verified under oath and include a written agreement
by the applicant to operate the business, if licensed, strictly in accordance
with this chapter, and indemnify and hold harmless the village for all
judgments, liens and expenses arising out of the operations permitted by the
license. Additionally, in the event that the applicant is a corporation,
limited liability company and/or a partnership, the application shall be
cosigned jointly and severally by an individual principal of the entity. (Ord.
2019-17, 6-13-2019)
6-9-4: PEDICAB ROUTING AND OPERATIONS SCHEDULES:
   A.   Pedicab business shall operate only within the area of the village
located within the area bounded by: See Exhibit A attached to Ordinance 2019-17
and made a part hereof, and then only in the event of having authorization to
do so from the State of Illinois Department of Transportation, and also to
operate in and around that which is commonly known as the I & M Canal and/or
towpath within the Village of North Utica and then only with the appropriate
authorization, if necessary, from the State of Illinois Department of Natural
Resources; also as allowed within subsection B. below.
   B.   Additionally, pedicabs may be allowed to operate during special events
in different areas of the Village provided authorized in advance as to such
special events by the Village Board of Trustees of the Village of North Utica,
and approval of a proposed temporary route to be used by the pedicab business
during the special events. The Village Clerk shall then review the temporary
route with the Chief of Police and the Village President with the authority for
final authorization to be with the Village President in consultation with the
Chief of Police. The pedicab business in the village shall only operate during
such hours as may be approved from time to time by the Village Board of
Trustees. (Ord. 2019-17, 6-13-2019)
6-9-5: OPERATION OF PEDICAB BUSINESSES:
Pedicab businesses shall be operated only with the additional regulations given
in this chapter.
   A.   Each pedicab shall have a valid pedicab license issued pursuant to this
chapter and a copy of the pedicab license shall be displayed on all pedicabs
used in such business. The Village Clerk, upon issuance of the license, shall
issue that number of duplicates as requested in the application identifying
each pedicab identified in the application.
   B.   Each pedicab shall be operated by the holder of a valid Illinois
driver's license, and the operator who shall have such license on his/her
person at all times when operating such vehicle.
   C.   When carrying persons for hire or by contract, the vehicle shall be
operated only in the approved area of operations.
   D.   No pedicab vehicle shall be operated on a public street unless a valid
liability insurance policy as specified in this chapter is on file with the
Village Clerk.
   E.   It shall be the duty of the driver of the pedicab to inform any person
hiring the carriage of all the rates and charges before any service is
rendered, which shall be the same as those on file with the Village Clerk.
   F.   Drivers shall carry rate cards and exhibit them on demand.
   G.   Occupancy of the pedicab shall not exceed the rated seating capacity of
the vehicle, which typically will be two (2) adults and one (1) child.
   H.   No passenger shall be allowed to ride on any part of the vehicle when
in motion except seated inside the vehicle.
   I.   Drivers shall not solicit patronage in any manner so as to be an
annoyance or obstruct the movement of a person.
   J.   Drivers are prohibited from smoking while carrying passengers.
   K.   No person may drink any alcoholic liquor while such person is operating
a pedicab.
   L.   Additionally, each pedicab business application shall include the
names, home address, and date of birth, and also the following information
regarding any potential driver, all of which drivers shall have the following
indicated classifications:
      1.   Possesses a valid, current driver's license issued by the state.
      2.   Is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
      3.   Is free of defective vision, defective hearing, and any other
infirmities that would render him/her unfit for safe operation of a public
vehicle.
      4.   Is free of alcohol or drug addiction.
      5.   Has not, within the ten (10) years immediately preceding his/her
application, been convicted of any felony, or operating a motor vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol or a drug.
      6.   Has not received more than three (3) moving traffic violations in
the immediately preceding twelve (12) months or five (5) moving traffic
violations in the immediately preceding twenty-four (24) months of application.
      7.   Is not otherwise deemed in the appropriate exercise of discretion by
the Village Board of Trustees of the Village of North Utica as an appropriate
candidate for a pedicab license.
      8.   Has delivered to the Village Clerk a certificate signed by the
pedicab licensee or other sufficient evidence that such person is qualified to
operate a pedicab.
      9.   Has complied with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-17, 6-
13-2019)
6-9-6: INSURANCE:
   A.   Before any permit for a pedicab shall be issued, the owner shall file
with the Village Clerk an insurance policy issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in this state, providing insurance coverage for each
and every pedicab owned, operated or leased by the applicant with a minimum of
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for the injury or death of any one (1)
person; and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for the injury or death of any
number of persons in any one accident, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
for property damage resulting from any one accident, regardless of whether the
pedicab was being driven by the owner, his/her agent, employee, lessee or
permittee.
   B.   The policy shall contain a provision requiring the village to be named
as an additional insured for the sole purpose of the village being notified by
the insurance company of any cancellation, termination, or expiration of the
policy thirty (30) days prior to that event. The cancellation or other
termination of any insurance policy issued for or in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter shall automatically terminate any license issued for
the pedicab covered by such insurance policy unless another policy complying
with the provisions of this chapter shall be provided and in full force and
effect at the time of such cancellation or termination. (Ord. 2019-17, 6-13-
2019)
6-9-7: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:    
Upon receipt of the completed application for the pedicab business license,
approval of the route and operations schedule, filing of insurance as required,
and payment of the application and license fees, in the event that the Village
Board of Trustees within the appropriate discretion of the Board of Trustees
should deem it appropriate to issue a license and should vote to approve a
license, the Village Clerk shall issue a pedicab business license to the
applicant. (Ord. 2019-17, 6-13-2019)
6-9-8: OPERATION ON THE STREETS OF THE VILLAGE:
   A.   No pedicab shall be operated upon the streets of the village for
transporting person(s) for hire or by contract unless licensed by the Village
Clerk.
   B.   Each pedicab will be equipped with a fiberglass pole with an orange
flag attached to the rear of each cab as a warning/notice of the pedicab, or
such other warning/signal as may be approved jointly by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 2019-17, 6-13-2019)
6-9-9: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
   A.   Any violation of this chapter by the holder of a license issued
hereunder shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license by the
Village President.
   B.   Any denial of license application for either a pedicab business and/or
a pedicab operator may be appealed to the Circuit Court of LaSalle County under
the Administrative Review Act of the State of Illinois. (Ord. 2019-17, 6-13-
2019)
6-9-10: ANNUAL LICENSE FEES:
The annual fee for a pedicab business license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
Each additional pedicab shall be licensed for twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. 2019-17, 6-13-2019)
6-9-11: PEDICAB VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:      
Each pedicab shall be equipped with:
   A.   A functioning headlight capable of projecting a beam of white light for
a distance of five hundred (500) feet.
   B.   Functioning taillights mounted on the right and the left respectively
at the same level on the rear exterior of the passenger compartment. Taillights
shall be red in color and plainly visible from all distances within five
hundred (500) feet to the rear of the vehicle.
   C.   Hydraulic or mechanical disc brakes which are unaffected by rain or wet
conditions.
   D.   Spoke or wheel rim reflectors on each wheel of the pedicab.
   E.   A seatbelt for all passengers.
   F.   Turn lights.
   G.   A bell, horn, or other similar audible signaling device.
   H.   Such other equipment as required by rules and regulations promulgated
by the joint approval of the Chief of Police and the Village President. (Ord.
2019-17, 6-13-2019)
6-9-12: NON-TRANSFERABILITY:
   A.   A pedicab license decal is non-transferable.
   B.   Each license shall last from the date of issuance until the end of the
village fiscal year which ends on March 31 each year. Regardless of what date
the license is obtained, the fee in regard to obtaining the license remains the
same. (Ord. 2019-17, 6-13-2019)
6-9-13: VIOLATIONS OF PEDICAB DRIVER:
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any driver of a pedicab, while on
duty, to:
   A.   Drink any intoxicating liquor;
   B.   Use or be under the influence of any unlawful drugs;
   C.   Use any profane or obscene language; or
   D.   Disturb the peace in any way. (Ord. 2019-17, 6-13-2019)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Supervision
7-1-2: Construction Of Streets And Sidewalks
7-1-3: Maintenance
7-1-4: Driveways
7-1-5: Disturbing Surfaces
7-1-6: Barricades And Lights
7-1-7: Use Of Public Ways
7-1-8: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
7-1-9: Deposits On Streets And Sidewalks
7-1-10: Street Drainage
7-1-11: Penalty
7-1-1: SUPERVISION:
All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways shall be under the
supervision of the superintendent of public works. He shall have supervision
over all work thereon, and the cleaning thereof, and shall be charged with the
enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to such public places (except
traffic ordinances) and is hereby authorized to enforce such ordinances. (1966
Code § 97)
7-1-2: CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement
on any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, or to repair the
same, without having first secured a permit therefor.
   B.   Application For Permit: Applications for such permits shall be made to
the village clerk and shall state the location of the intended pavement or
repair, the extent thereof and the person who is to do the actual construction
work.
   C.   Issuance Of Permit: No such permit shall be issued except on order of
the president and board of trustees. (1966 Code § 98)
   D.   Bond: Each applicant shall file a bond, in an amount as recommended by
the village engineer, with sureties to be approved by the president and board
of trustees, conditioned to indemnify the village from any loss or damage
resulting from the work undertaken or the manner of doing same. (1966 Code §
99; amd. 2013 Code)
   E.   Specifications: All street and sidewalk pavements shall be made in
conformity with the specifications laid down from time to time by the president
and board of trustees. (1966 Code § 100)
7-1-3: MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Defects: It shall be the duty of every village officer or employee
becoming cognizant of any defect in any street, alley or sidewalk, or any
obstruction thereof, to report the same to the superintendent of public works
as soon as possible. (1966 Code § 103)
   B.   Repairs: All public street, alley and sidewalk pavements shall be in
good repair. Such repair work, whether done by the village or abutting owner,
shall be under the supervision of the superintendent of public works. (1966
Code § 102)
7-1-4: DRIVEWAYS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any
driveway in or across any public walk in the village where this necessitates
any interference with or change in the grade of any public sidewalk, curb or
parkway without having first obtained a permit therefor from the board of
trustees. Applications for such permits shall state the size, location and
materials to be used in such driveway, and it shall be unlawful to depart from
such specifications or vary from them without permission from the president and
board of trustees.
   B.   Fee: A fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be paid for such permit.
   C.   Maintenance: It shall be the duty of the person maintaining such
driveway to keep the same free from snow and ice or any obstruction and to keep
the same in good repair where the same crosses a public sidewalk. (1966 Code §
118)
7-1-5: DISTURBING SURFACES:
   A.   Excavations:
      1.   Permit Requirements: It shall be unlawful to make any excavation in
or tunnel under any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the
village without having first secured a permit therefor. Applications for such
permits shall be made to the village clerk and shall specify the intended
location and purpose of the excavation.
      2.   Bond: No person shall make any such excavation or tunnel without
first having secured and furnished the village with a copy of, or certificate
of, a bond or policy conditioned to indemnify and hold the village harmless
from any loss, damage or liability resulting from the work done or any acts or
omissions in connection therewith.
      3.   Restoration Of Excavated Area: Any such person making any such
excavation shall refill the same properly and shall restore the surface to its
former condition as soon as possible.
      4.   Supervision: All such excavations, refills and resurfacing shall be
made subject to the supervision and under the direction of the superintendent
of public works. (1966 Code § 112)
   B.   Openings:
      1.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any
opening or stairway in any public street or alley or sidewalk or other public
place without a permit from the president and board of trustees.
      2.   Protective Devices: All such lawfully maintained openings shall be
guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing, to the approval of the
superintendent of public works. (1966 Code § 113)
7-1-6: BARRICADES AND LIGHTS:
   A.   Barricades And Lights Required:
      1.   Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or
other public place or making an excavation in the same shall maintain suitable
barricades to prevent injury of any person or vehicle by reason of the work;
such barricades shall be protected by suitable lights at nighttime.
      2.   Any defect in such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent injury,
and any person properly maintaining any opening or excavation in any such place
shall guard such opening or excavation, while the same remains open, by proper
barricades and lights. (1966 Code § 105)
   B.   Disturbing Barricades And Lights Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to
disturb or interfere with any barricade or lights lawfully placed to protect or
mark any new pavement or excavation or opening in any public street, alley or
sidewalk. (1966 Code § 106)
7-1-7: USE OF PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Private Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street,
sidewalk or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise
for sale or to write or mark any signs or advertisements on such pavement,
except as allowed in title 10, chapter 15 of this code. (1966 Code § 107; amd.
2013 Code)
   B.   Poles And Wires: It shall be unlawful to erect any poles or wires or
maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley or other
public way without having first secured permission from the president and board
of trustees. (1966 Code § 110)
   C.   Gas Pumps And Tank Installation:
      1.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to maintain or erect any
gasoline pump or tank in any public street, alley or sidewalk without having
first secured a permit therefor from the president and board of trustees.
      2.   Bond: No such permit shall be issued until the applicant furnishes a
bond to indemnify the village against loss or liability in the sum of fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any such loss or liability occasioned by such
tank or pump. (1966 Code § 111)
7-1-8: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Obstructions: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or
maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way,
except as may be specifically authorized by ordinance or by the superintendent
of public works. (1966 Code § 104)
   B.   Encroachments: It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building
or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property. (1966 Code §
108)
   C.   Injury To Property:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal
upon, or injure any newly laid street or alley pavement while the same is
guarded by a warning sign or barricade or to knowingly injure any street,
sidewalk or alley pavement. (1966 Code § 101)
      2.   It shall be unlawful for anyone to injure, deface or interfere with
any property belonging to the village without proper authority from the village
board. (1966 Code § 93; amd. 2013 Code)
7-1-9: DEPOSITS ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Deposits On Streets:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to deposit upon any street any material which
may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any glass or other articles which
may cause injury to any person, animal or property.
      2.   Coal or other materials may be deposited in streets preparatory to
delivery for use; provided, that such deposit does not reduce the usable width
of the street or roadway at that point to less than eighteen feet (18'); and
provided, that such material or coal, other than material used in actual
building construction, shall not be permitted to remain in such street for more
than three (3) hours. Any such material or coal shall be guarded by lights if
the same remains upon any street after nighttime. (1966 Code § 115)
   B.   Deposits On Sidewalks:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to deposit upon any public sidewalk any
material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material or
any glass or other articles which might cause injury to persons, animals or
property.
      2.   Merchandise or other articles may be deposited upon sidewalks
preparatory to delivery; provided, that the usable width of the sidewalk is not
thereby reduced to less than four feet (4'); and provided, that no such article
shall remain on such walk for more than one-half (1/2) hour. (1966 Code § 116)
7-1-10: STREET DRAINAGE:
   A.   Obstructing Drains Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to obstruct any
drain in any public street or alley. (1966 Code § 109)
   B.   Prohibited Discharges:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or
institution, public or private, to connect or cause to be connected any drain
carrying, or to carry, any toilet, sink, basement, septic tank, cesspool, or
industrial waste, or any fixture or device discharging polluting substances to
any open ditch, drain, or drainage structure installed solely for street or
highway drainage purposes in the village.
      2.   This subsection is intended to and shall be in addition to all other
ordinances, state statutes, rules, and regulations concerning pollution and
shall not be construed as repealing or rescinding any ordinance or part of any
ordinance unless in direct conflict therewith. (Ord. 2006-60, 9-13-2006)
      3.   Any person, firm, or corporation violating this subsection shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed for each and every day during which a violation continues or
exists. (Ord. 2006-60, 9-13-2006; amd. 2013 Code)
7-1-11: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1966
Code § 119; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 2
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Permit Requirements
7-2-2: Trimming Trees And Shrubs
7-2-3: Protection Required
7-2-4: Prohibited Acts
7-2-5: Penalty
7-2-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Planting Permits: It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or shrub in
any public street or parkway or other public place without having first secured
a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the village
clerk and shall be referred by him to the village president and board of
trustees. All trees and shrubs so planted shall be placed subject to the
direction and approval of the committee on streets and alleys. (1966 Code §
120; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Removal Permits: It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or
shrub in any street, parkway or other public place without having first secured
a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the village
clerk and shall be referred by him to the president and board of trustees for
approval before permission shall be granted. (1966 Code § 121)
7-2-2: TRIMMING TREES AND SHRUBS:
   A.   Dangerous Conditions:
      1.   Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other
public place in the village in such a way as to impede or interfere with
traffic or travel on such public place shall be trimmed by the owner of the
abutting premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction
shall cease.
      2.   Any limb of a tree which has become likely to fall onto or across
any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises upon
which such tree grows or stands. (1966 Code § 124)
   B.   Duty Of Franchisee: Any person or company given the right to maintain
poles and wires in the streets, alleys or other public places in the village
shall, in the absence of provisions in the franchise concerning the subject,
keep such wires and poles free from and away from any trees or shrubs in such
places so far as may be possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs
properly trimmed and subject to the supervision of the superintendent of public
works, so that no injury shall be done to the poles or wires or shrubs and
trees by contact. (1966 Code § 125)
7-2-3: PROTECTION REQUIRED:
   A.   Excavations: In making excavations in streets or other public places,
proper care should be taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub,
wherever possible. (1966 Code § 127)
   B.   Gas Pipes: Any person maintaining any gas pipe in the village shall, in
the absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such
pipes free from leaks. (1966 Code § 126)
7-2-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful to:
   A.   Injury: Injure any tree or shrub planted in any public place. (1966
Code § 122)
   B.   Advertisements Or Notices: Attach any sign, advertisement or notice to
any tree or shrub in any street, parkway or other public place. (1966 Code §
123)
   C.   Attaching Wire Or Rope: Attach any wire or other rope to any tree
without permission of the president and board of trustees. (1966 Code § 125)
7-2-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1966
Code § 128; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 3
PARKS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Vehicles Prohibited
7-3-1: VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to drive unauthorized vehicles inside the confines of
Utica Memorial Park. (Ord. 79-07, 6-5-1979)
CHAPTER 4
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
7-4-1: Purpose And Scope
7-4-2: Definitions
7-4-3: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
7-4-3-1: Permitted Use
7-4-3-2: Permit Required
7-4-3-3: Collocation Requirements And Conditions
7-4-3-4: Application Fees
7-4-3-5: Exceptions To Applicability
7-4-3-6: Pre-Existing Agreements
7-4-3-7: Annual Recurring Rate
7-4-3-8: Abandonment
7-4-4: Dispute Resolution
7-4-5: Indemnification
7-4-6: Insurance
7-4-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act.
   B.   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances
or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to
the extent of such conflict.
   C.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws
or regulations. (Ord. 2018-21, 7-12-2018)
7-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes
adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those
codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5),
as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as
amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group
of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the National
Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their
eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at
47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or
local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in
public rights-of-way.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or
initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the
State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
Right-of-way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic
control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
2018-21, 7-12-2018)
7-4-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
7-4-3-1: PERMITTED USE:
Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to
administrative review, except as provided in subsection
7-4-3-3A9 of this section
7-4-3 regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning
review or approval if they are collocated: a) in rights-of-way in any zoning
district, or b) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for
commercial or industrial use. (Ord. 2018-21, 7-12-2018)
7-4-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the Village to
collocatee a small wireless facility. An application shall be received and
processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and
requirements:
      1.   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the Village, together with the Village's Small Cell
Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
         a.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         b.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         c.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
         d.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         e.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
         f.   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge; and
         g.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      2.   Application Process: The Village shall process applications as
follows:
         a.   Priority: The first completed application shall have priority
over applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         b.   Existing Utility Pole: An application to collocate a small
wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or
replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the
Village fails to approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after
the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75)
days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this subsection.
         c.   New Utility Pole: An application to collocate a small wireless
facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails
to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after
the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five
(105) days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this subsection.
         d.   Denial: The Village shall deny an application which does not meet
the requirements of this chapter.
If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that
concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and conditions contained
herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced
before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of
the provider.
The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific Code
provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the
documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies an
application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit
the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of denial is
sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The Village
shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to
resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial shall
require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the Village's review period.
The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed
with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted
with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited
in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure
requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility.
         e.   Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an
approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility
pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment
Agreement, provided by the Village for the initial collocation on a Municipal
utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate
on a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the Village and the
applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment
Agreement.
      3.   Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving
an application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within
thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the
applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
      4.   Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         a.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
Village; or
         b.   A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      5.   Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of
small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village may
remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
      6.   Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period
of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities
or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village
codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits
shall be subject to the applicable Village Code provisions or regulations in
effect at the time of renewal.
      7.   Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal
delivery at the Village's designated place of business, by regular mail
postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including
electronic mail. (Ord. 2018-21, 7-12-2018)
7-4-3-3: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Requirements And Conditions:
      1.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on
Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably
determines that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      2.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      3.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and
frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with
industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable
interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a
public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless
provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the
interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such
interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of
Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the
interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      4.   Space And Zones On The Pole: The wireless provider shall not
collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of
an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker
safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole. However, the
antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in
the communications space on the Village utility pole and on the top of the
pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with
applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      5.   Compliance: The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable
codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
      6.   Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written
design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth
in a Village ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village, a comprehensive
plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the
rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
      7.   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this collocation
requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required
to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or
category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems
on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the
collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole,
the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred
feet (100') of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it
has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant
shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the
criteria in this paragraph.
      8.   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small
wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         a.   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within
three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or
         b.   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
      9.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a special use permit, variance, as applicable, in conformance
with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in the Village Zoning
Ordinance.
      10.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground- mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
      11.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      12.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
      13.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend
this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility
pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be
void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant. (Ord.
2018-21, 7-12-2018)
7-4-3-4: APPLICATION FEES:
   A.   Application fees are imposed as follows:
      1.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
      2.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
      3.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      4.   The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights- of-way, for:
         a.   Routine maintenance;
         b.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with subsection 7-4-3-2A1d of this section
7-4-3; or
         c.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
      5.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures. (Ord. 2018-21, 7-12-2018)
7-4-3-5: EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless
facilities on:
      1.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
      2.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      3.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to
that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: a) to obtain a
franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video
service or b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or
operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject
to this chapter. (Ord. 2018-21, 7-12-2018)
7-4-3-6: PRE-EXISTING AGREEMENTS:
Existing agreements between the Village and wireless providers that relate to
the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the
collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles, that are in
effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities
collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to
the Village before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions
contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply
with this chapter.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on the
effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the Village
makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
(2) or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the Village
that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement
remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small
wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the Village's
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before the
wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this
paragraph. (Ord. 2018-21, 7-12-2018)
7-4-3-7: ANNUAL RECURRING RATE:
A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate to
collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility pole located in a
right-of-way that equals: a) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or b) the
actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of
space on the Village utility pole.
If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs,
the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day after
the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent
to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter. (Ord. 2018-21, 7-
12-2018)
7-4-3-8: ABANDONMENT:
A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of
twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt
of written notice from the Village notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or
transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village.
Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless
provider. (Ord. 2018-21, 7-12-2018)
7-4-4: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of LaSalle County, Illinois, shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for
collocation of small wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the
right-of-way, the Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on
its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per
year per Municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final
resolution of the dispute. (Ord. 2018-21, 7-12-2018)
7-4-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
Village improvements or right- of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability. (Ord. 2018-21, 7-12-2018)
7-4-6: INSURANCE:
   A.   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
      1.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
      2.   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
      3.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of Village
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation
of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to
the collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage
and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section.
A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage limits required by the Village. (Ord. 2018-21, 7-12-2018)
CHAPTER 5
CEMETERY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-5-1: Definitions
7-5-2: Rates, Fees And Charges
7-5-3: Penalty
7-5-4: Rules And Regulations
7-5-5: Ownership
7-5-6: Maintenance
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
                         The whole area set apart for the burial of the dead,
CEMETERY:                and not merely the plots where the remains are
                         deposited.
CEMETERY CUSTODIAN:      An official appointed by the Village Board of
                         Trustees.
CREMAINS:                The ashes of a cremated body.
CREMATION:               The process whereby a body is reduced to its elements
                         by fire.
CREMATION GARDEN:        A garden where ashes are buried in the urn and a
                         single or double stone may be placed.
GRAVE:                   An excavation in the earth for the burial of remains,
                         including the burial place in a tomb or sepulcher.
GRAVESTONE:              A stone with an inscription erected near or laying
                         over the grave.
INTERMENT:               The act of depositing the remains in the earth, tomb
                         or burial vault.
LOT:                     A part of the cemetery intended for burial and
                         embraces more grounds than a single grave.
MAUSOLEUM:               A tomb built on a grand and magnificent scale.
                         Anything intended to preserve the memory of a person,
MEMORIAL:                including a monument, which may be a stone or a
                         building, that is either erected or maintained to
                         preserve the memory of a person or persons.
PLOT:                    Grave site.
URN:                     A prefabricated container used for holding cremains.
UTICA OAK HILL CEMETERY: Includes the entirety of the property.
VAULT:                   A prefabricated container constructed of concrete used
                         for protecting a casket. (Ord. 2022-36, 11-10-2022)
 
7-5-2: RATES, FEES AND CHARGES:
   A.   All cemetery fees are to be made to the Village Clerk.
   B.   The price for each grave in the Utica Oak Hill Cemetery shall be in
cash upon purchase and delivery of a deed, as follows:
      1.   The sum of $800.00 per grave, for the purchase by and for the use of
any person that is a resident or non-resident of the Village.
   C.   Burial charges include opening and closing the grave and tamping and
seeding the ground for each opening. A transfer within the Utica Oak Hill
Cemetery is charged as two grave openings. Payment is due at the time of burial
unless prior arrangements have been made with the Village Clerk and the charges
are as follows:
      1.   Grave opening: $1,000.00.
      2.   Cremation grave opening: $600.00.
      3.   Disinterment for removal: $1,500.00.
      4.   Disinterment for removal of cremains: $800.00.
   D.   Entombment charges include the opening of the crypt/vault, and the
closing and sealing of the crypt/vault and are as follows:
      1.   Casket removal: $1,000.00.
   E.   Transfer of a deed to a family member shall be $50.00 for each
transaction. (Ord. 2022-36, 11-10-2022)
7-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any section of this chapter shall be subject to punishment
as provided in section 1-19. (Ord. 2022-36, 11-10-2022)
7-5-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Times When Burials Permitted: Burials may be made between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. Monday through Friday and by special arrangement only
on Saturdays or holidays.
   B.   Use of Equipment for Burials: Tents, artificial grass, lowering devices
and other equipment shall be used exclusively in making burials and removal,
and such equipment shall be provided by commercial companies at the expense of
the person requesting the burial.
   C.   Moving of Remains to Other Plot: A body or cremated remains may be
removed from its original plot to a larger or better plot in the Utica Oak Hill
Cemetery with written permission of the Cemetery Custodian or the Village
Clerk. The Cemetery Custodian shall exercise due care with the removal, but the
Village shall assume no liability for damage to any casket, burial case or urn.
   D.   Vaults and Containers: All caskets are to be enclosed in a vault made
of concrete or steel. All cremains shall be placed in a steel, concrete or
marble container. No rough boxes are allowed.
   E.   Limits on Burial in Each Grave: Burial in each grave site is allowed as
follows:
      1.   One (1) vault;
      2.   One (1) vault with one (1) urn on top; or
      3.   Three (3) urns.
   F.   Persons Permitted on Graves: Only the grave owner, family, and friends
of the family are permitted on the cemetery grave. Graves are sacred, private
property and must not be invaded.
   G.   Gravestones: The construction and installation of a gravestone is
permitted in the Utica Oak Hill Cemetery with approval of the Cemetery
Custodian. The stone shall not encroach on another lot or on any avenue or path
of the Utica Oak Hill Cemetery. The Cemetery Custodian reserves the right to
remove or to have removed any stone, monument, structure or inscription that
he/she deems improper or detrimental.
   H.   Orders for Opening of Graves: All orders for the opening of graves
shall be made to the Cemetery Custodian by the owner, owner’s representative or
funeral director with a reasonable amount of time allowed prior to burial.
   I.   Motor Vehicle Restrictions: Automobiles shall not be driven through the
Utica Oak Hill Cemetery at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour, and
automobiles shall always be driven on the righthand side of the roadway.
Automobiles are not allowed to park or stop in front of any open grave unless
such automobiles are in attendance at the funeral. Snowmobiles are prohibited
from Utica Oak Hill Cemetery property.
   J.   Supervision of Funerals: All funerals shall be under the supervision of
the Cemetery Custodian and/or their designee, upon entering the cemetery.
   K.   Memorial Mausoleum:
      1.   Decorations are allowed in the Memorial Mausoleum except for live
flowers or plants, or anything that could damage the shelves or marble. The
mausoleum shall be subject to all the general rules and regulations as are
heretofore provided for the cemetery except as such rules and regulations are
not consistent with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2022-36, 11-10-2022)
7-5-5: OWNERSHIP:
   A.   Issuance of Deeds: Upon full payment to the Village Clerk as provided
in section
7-5-2, a deed shall be issued by the Village President and attested by the
Village Clerk conveying the lot or grave. The deed provides for strict
compliance with this chapter and any amendment to this chapter, as well as any
other or future regulation pertaining to the management, supervision or upkeep
of the grounds in the Utica Oak Hill Cemetery.
   B.   Transfer of Grave or Lot: No transfer of a grave or lot in the Utica
Oak Hill Cemetery shall be made by any person therein named, or his heirs,
devisees, or successors, to any other person. If any such person desires to
sell a lot or grave, the Village will purchase the property for the current
cost of the grave only, not including perpetual care. No private sales are
allowed. A transfer or assignment of the beneficial ownership of a lot or grave
may be made with the permission of the Village Clerk and payment of a transfer
fee as provided in section
7-5-2F. The original deed must be surrendered and a new deed will be issued.
(Ord. 2022-36, 11-10-2022)
7-5-6: MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Trees, Shrubs and Other Vegetation: The Cemetery Custodian reserves the
right to remove any tree or shrub, or parts thereof, situated on any lot or
grave. No tree, flower, shrub, plant or herbage of any kind shall be injured or
removed by any private person without the consent of the Cemetery Custodian. No
tree, flower, shrub, plant or herbage of any kind may be planted in the Utica
Oak Hill Cemetery without the consent of the Cemetery Custodian.
   B.   Decorations on Graves: The placement of fresh flowers, artificial
flowers, wreaths, memorials, candles, vigil lights, and decorations on graves
is allowed in all parts of the Utica Oak Hill Cemetery during spring and summer
months, based on the weather, as announced by the Village Clerk on the Village
of North Utica website and other media outlets. Shepherd’s hooks or any wooden
or metal frame or device to hold floral displays or other displays are also
allowed. Winter decorations and coverings for entire graves are allowed during
fall and winter months, based on the weather, as announced by the Village Clerk
on the Village of North Utica website and other media outlets. The grave owner
shall remove all such items for Utica Oak Hill Cemetery cleaning as announced
by the Village Clerk on the Village of North Utica website and other media
outlets. The Cemetery Custodian may remove items remaining on graves. The
Village shall not be responsible for any damage or loss to any items removed
from any gravesites at any time.
   C.   Cutting of Grass and Maintenance of Graves Around Decorations: The
Cemetery Custodian shall not be required to remove and then replace any
decorations on graves for the cutting of grass and maintenance of the graves.
Persons placing decorations on graves shall assume the cutting of grass and
maintenance of that portion of the grave covered by the decoration.
   D.   Removal of Unsightly, Dangerous, Detrimental or Diseased Articles:
Floral arrangements, artificial flowers, and any other article which becomes
unsightly, dangerous, detrimental, diseased, or does not conform to standards
maintained in the Utica Oak Hill Cemetery may be removed by the Cemetery
Custodian. Any floral frame or arrangement removed from the plot site may be
held for seven days for the lawful owner, after which time the Village may
dispose of it in any manner it deems fit. (Ord. 2022-36, 11-10-2022)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC SERVICES
CHAPTER 1
WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Water And Sewer Service Provided
8-1-2: Metered Water And Sewer Required
8-1-3: Classification Of Water And Sewer Users
8-1-4: Nonresidential Users
8-1-5: Designation Of Accounts
8-1-6: Separate Services Required
8-1-7: Deposit Required
8-1-8: Fees, Rates And Charges Established
8-1-9: Bills Rendered; Due Date
8-1-10: Liability Of Owner And Consumer For Bills And Service
8-1-11: Refunds And Discounts
8-1-12: Delinquent Bills; Notice Of Judgment And Lien Claim
8-1-13: Lien Provisions
8-1-14: Discontinuance Of Service Procedure
8-1-15: Disposition Of Revenues
8-1-16: Accounting
8-1-17: Office
8-1-1: WATER AND SEWER SERVICE PROVIDED:
The village will furnish and supply water and sewer service to all classified
consumers and users upon the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter and
at rates fixed and designated by the village board. (Ord. 2001-05, 3-7-2001)
8-1-2: METERED WATER AND SEWER REQUIRED:
   A.   Effective May 1, 2000, all new construction projects which are subject
to inspection and approval by the village, including commercial, industrial,
and residential projects, shall install water and sewer meters.
      1.   All new single-family residences shall install one meter. The
village shall supply the meter, and the property owner shall be responsible for
installation of the meter.
      2.   All new duplex residential projects shall install one meter for each
of the duplex's separate dwelling units. The village shall supply the meters,
and the property owner shall be responsible for installation of the meters.
Each meter will be billed separately.
      3.   All new multiple-family residential projects shall install one
meter. The property owner shall purchase the meter from the village, and the
property owner shall be responsible for installation of the meter.
      4.   Property owners of all new commercial and industrial projects shall
purchase meters from the village, and the property owners shall be responsible
for installation of the meters.
   B.   By December 31, 2001, the village will have a contractor install meters
for all current residential users that have not previously had a meter
installed. Residential users who refuse to permit the contractor to install the
meter will have water service disconnected in ten (10) days. Water service will
be reconnected only when the residential user permits the installation of the
water meter, pays an installation fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and a
reconnection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   C.   Effective July 1, 2000, all commercial and industrial users shall have
meters installed. Failure to install a meter shall result in termination of
water and sewer service within ten (10) days. If a user's service is
disconnected, there shall be a reconnection fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00). (Ord. 2001-05, 3-7-2001)
8-1-3: CLASSIFICATION OF WATER AND SEWER USERS:
There shall be constituted three (3) classes of water and sewer users or
consumers for purposes of this chapter:
   A.   Residential, whose water and sewer use shall be primarily for personal,
domestic consumption;
   B.   Commercial, whose water and sewer use shall be primarily for or
incident to any business purpose or activity;
   C.   Industrial, whose water and sewer use shall be primarily for
manufacturing and processing activities and of a consumption volume exceeding
seventy five thousand (75,000) gallons per quarter. Industrial users shall be
required to contract separately with the Village for the establishment of
rates, and each such user must meter its water and sewer use at the sole
expense of the user, with said meter being read at least once quarterly by an
authorized officer of the Village and with the user allowing reasonable access
for said purpose; and
   D.   New commercial, whose water and sewer use shall be primarily for or
incident to any business building which construction commences on or after June
1, 1997. Each new commercial user commencing commercial activity must meter its
water use at the sole expense of the user, with said meter being read at least
once quarterly by an authorized officer of the Village and with the user
allowing reasonable access for said purpose. New commercial users shall pay the
water and sewer rate required of new commercial users under section
8-1-8 of this chapter; provided, however, that such users shall pay the rate
required of commercial users for any month in which water or sewer usage does
not exceed twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) gallons. (Ord. 97-07, 7-2-
1997)
8-1-4: NONRESIDENTIAL USERS:
Nonresidential users or consumers are herewith required to pay a nonrefundable
charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) prior to the installation of water
service, and will be solely responsible for all costs incident to hooking up to
the Village water system; except, that the Village will furnish the water meter
at its expense, and shall retain ownership of said water meter, which shall be
returned to the Village upon the termination of service. The expense of
installation and maintenance of said water meter shall be solely that of the
user, and the location of said meter shall be at the sole discretion of the
Village Board or authorized Village official. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
8-1-5: DESIGNATION OF ACCOUNTS:
All water and sewer service accounts shall be kept in the name of the owner of
the premises served and the name of the consumer of the services if different
from the owner. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
8-1-6: SEPARATE SERVICES REQUIRED:
Each separate store, apartment, or residence shall be deemed a separate
service, and where a residence or apartment and store are combined in the same
building, that building shall be considered as having two (2) services and two
(2) connections. In that circumstance, two (2) charges for the use of the water
or sewer services each shall be made, one for the residence and one for the
store, each at the standard Village rate for that type of service. (Ord. 88-20,
10-12-1988)
8-1-7: DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
All consumers or users of water or sewerage service who are not the owners of
the premises to be served, who shall hereafter request service, shall make a
deposit with the Village Clerk. Said deposit shall be in the amount of the bill
for service for one-fourth (1/4) of the year, to be paid before any connection
is made. When service is discontinued, such deposit shall be applied toward the
payment of any outstanding account with the Village for water or sewerage
service, and the whole or any part thereof after deduction of unpaid bills
shall be refunded to the consumer or user. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
8-1-8: FEES, RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Tap-On Or Connection Fees: The following tap-on or connection fees
shall be effective January 1, 2010, and are per user, and the fee is assessed
separately for each water and/or sewer connection. For example, a single-family
residence connecting to both Village water and sewer would pay a total tap-on
fee of five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00).
      1.   Water:
 
Single-family residential  $ 400.00
Duplex residential         450.00
Industrial and commercial:
 Under 2,000 sq. ft.      850.00
 2,001 to 10,000 sq. ft.  1,100.00
 Over 10,000 sq. ft.      2,100.00
 
      2.   Sewer: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (Ord. 2009-27, 10-14-
2009)
   B.   User Rates:
      1.   The established rates for water and sewer service shall be as
follows:
   Water UsRate
   Water User                     Rate
                                            
Residential (non-metered)            $11.50 per month1,3
                                            
Single-family and duplex residential 11.50  per first 1,000 gallons (minimum)
(metered)                                   per user1
                                     1.60   per each 1,000 gallons thereafter1
                                            
Multiple-family residential          11.50  per first 1,000 gallons (minimum)
(metered)                                   per user1
                                     1.60   per each 1,000 gallons thereafter1
                                            
Commercial (non-metered)             60.00  per month per user1
                                            
Commercial (metered)                 14.00  per first 1,000 gallons (minimum)
                                            per user1
                                    1.70   per each 1,000 gallons thereafter1
                                            
Industrial                           3.20   per 1,000 gallons1
                                            
Water tanker/equipment fill          60.00  per 1,000 gallons2
 
   Notes:
      1.    For each separate commercial, industrial or residential dwelling
user per unit.
      2.    Prior notice and consent of the Village of the date, time, and
location of the fill is required. Consent shall be given by the Mayor or the
Superintendent of Public Works.
      3.    The Village shall notify a residential user of the necessity to
schedule an appointment to have a new meter installed. Failure by user to
schedule and maintain a scheduled appointment within 30 days of the initial
contact by the Village shall cause the Village to issue a 10-Day Notice of
Installation Violation. Such notice shall be provided to the user by certified
mail at the address of the premises or by personal service. If the notice of
installation violation is not remedied within 10 days of delivery of the
notice, then the non-metered rate shall increase from the base rate of $11.50
per month to $60.00 per month (the "violation" rate) commencing with the next
billing period. A notice sent by certified mail and not accepted or signed for,
shall be subject to the increased $60.00 per month fee if not remedied within
15 days of the date of mailing by the Village. Once the violation is remedied,
the non-metered rate shall revert from the violation rate to the base rate
commencing with the next billing cycle until the Village commences Villagewide
use of the metered rate.
   Sewer UsRate
   Sewer User                     Rate
                                            
Residential (non-metered)            $10.25 per month1,2
                                            
Single-family and duplex residential 10.25  monthly per user1
(metered)                            1.75   per each 1,000 gallons thereafter1
                                            
Multiple-family residential          10.25  monthly per user1
(metered)                            1.75   per each 1,000 gallons thereafter1
                                            
Commercial (non-metered)             12.25  per month per user1
                                            
Commercial (metered)                 15.00  per first 1,000 gallons (minimum)
                                            per user1
                                    2.85   per each 1,000 gallons thereafter1
                                            
Industrial                           3.20   per 1,000 gallons1
 
   Notes:
      1.    For each separate commercial, industrial or residential dwelling
user per unit.
      2.    The Village shall notify a residential user of the necessity to
schedule an appointment to have a new meter installed. Failure by user to
schedule and maintain a scheduled appointment within 30 days of the initial
contact by the Village shall cause the Village to issue a 10-Day Notice of
Installation Violation. Such notice shall be provided to the user by certified
mail at the address of the premises or by personal service. If the notice of
installation violation is not remedied within 10 days of delivery of the
notice, then the non-metered rate shall increase from the base rate of $10.25
per month to $60.00 per month (the "violation" rate) commencing with the next
billing period. A notice sent by certified mail and not accepted or signed for,
shall be subject to the increased $60.00 per month fee if not remedied within
15 days of the date of mailing by the Village. Once the violation is remedied,
the non-metered rate shall revert from the violation rate to the base rate
commencing with the next billing cycle until the Village commences Villagewide
use of the metered rate.
      2.   Upon installation of a meter and an initial reading of the meter by
the Village, the user shall begin payment according to the applicable meter
rate set forth in this section. (Ord. 2019-15, 5-9-2019)
   C.   Water Service Maintenance Fee: The water service maintenance fee for
all users of water service is five dollars ($5.00) per month. (Ord. 2004-36,
11-24-2004)
   D.   Sewer Service Maintenance Fee: The sewer service maintenance fee shall
be five dollars ($5.00) per month for all residential and commercial users
effective as of June 1, 2019, and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month
for all industrial users effective as of August 1, 2019.
   E.   Annual Increase: All industrial water and sewer rates are subject to an
annual increase of four percent (4%) per year, with the first increase
occurring on January 1, 2021. (Ord. 2019-15, 5-9-2019)
   F.   Terms: For all purposes of this chapter, the terms "meter", "metered"
and "metered rate" shall refer to the water meter installed unless the Village
has given prior approval of installation of a sewer meter. (Ord. 2019-09, 4-10-
2019)
8-1-9: BILLS RENDERED; DUE DATE:
   A.   Bills for water supply and sewer service shall be rendered monthly and
are payable to the Village Clerk at the Village office. (Ord. 89-08, 8-2-1989;
amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Bills for water or sewerage service shall be payable at the Office of
the Village Clerk within twenty (20) days after commencement of the next
billing period, and in the event said bills are not paid within that time, the
Village reserves the right to suspend water or sewer service for all unpaid
current water or sewer bills and charges, to remain suspended until payment is
made. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
   C.   Any bill unpaid within twenty (20) days after commencement of the next
billing period shall incur a delinquency fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) in
addition to any other penalties or charges imposed.
   D.   Any account for which a check is issued for payment, and the check
issued to the Village is returned for nonsufficient funds, shall incur a charge
of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each returned check. (Ord. 2014-12, 5-14-
2014)
8-1-10: LIABILITY OF OWNER AND CONSUMER FOR BILLS AND SERVICE:
   A.   Generally: A copy of the Village water and sewer regulations, properly
certified by the Village Clerk, shall be filed in the Office of the County
Recorder of Deeds and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of
their liability for water or sewer service supplied to any occupant or user of
such services upon their properties. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Rental Properties:
      1.   Each owner of rental property, whether residential, commercial, or
other, shall be responsible for payment of all water and sewer bills or other
charges when issued, consistent with the procedures established by the Village
in conjunction with collection of said amounts. Nothing in this subsection
shall prohibit the owner of said property from subsequently seeking appropriate
reimbursement from the occupant or occupants of said property.
      2.   Each owner of rental property shall be subject to all remedies
available to the village for nonpayment, including, but not limited to,
termination of service. The village shall not be prohibited from termination of
service for an entire parcel of real estate for: a) partial payment of charges
due by the property owner; or b) for complete payment of charges covering only
a portion of the real estate in question. (Ord. 98-01, 1-7-1998)
8-1-11: REFUNDS AND DISCOUNTS:
No refund or discount on water charges or bills shall be made on account of the
premises served having been vacant or no water used, unless the water service
has been shut off by the village upon written request of the consumer or owner
of the premises, as herein provided. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
8-1-12: DELINQUENT BILLS; NOTICE OF JUDGMENT AND LIEN CLAIM:
   A.   Whenever a bill for water or sewer service remains unpaid twenty (20)
days after the commencement of the next billing period, the village clerk shall
file with the recorder of deeds of LaSalle County, a statement of judgment,
then lien claim, which shall contain the legal description of the premises
served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the village claims a
lien for this amount as well as for all charges for water and sewer service
subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
   B.   If the consumer of water or sewer service whose bill is unpaid is not
the owner of the premises, and the village clerk has notice of this, notice
shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his address be known, whenever
such bill remains unpaid for a period of twenty (20) days after the
commencement of the next billing period. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
8-1-13: LIEN PROVISIONS:
   A.   Rates And Charges A Lien: All water and sewer charges, rates, and bills
shall be a lien upon the premises and real estate upon or for which the same is
used and supplied, as is provided for by the statutes of the state. (Ord. 85-
04, 5-7-1985)
   B.   Foreclosure Of Lien; Other Remedies: Property subject to a lien for
unpaid water or sewerage charges may be sold for nonpayment of the same, and
the proceeds thereof applied on such charges, after deducting costs, including
reasonable attorney fees, as is the case in foreclosure of statutory liens.
Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity, in the name of the village. In the
alternative, the village may pursue a concurrent remedy at law to recover the
monies due for services rendered, plus a reasonable attorney fee. (Ord. 95-01,
1-11-1995)
   C.   Suits For Foreclosure: The village legal counsel is hereby authorized
and directed to institute such proceedings, whether in law or equity, in the
name of the village, in any court having jurisdiction over such matters,
against any property or owner thereof for which the water or sewer bill remains
unpaid twenty (20) days after the commencement of the next billing period.
(Ord. 95-01, 1-11-1995; amd. 2013 Code)
8-1-14: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE PROCEDURE:
   A.   Notice Of Delinquency; Options:
      1.   If user's billed charges of water and/or sewer service are not paid
within fifteen (15) days after such billed charges become due, the village
shall provide written notice of delinquency/termination to the user, which
shall state the amount of the delinquency and the date of commencement of the
delinquency (the due date). In addition, such notice shall inform the user of
the following options:
         a.   Immediate payment of the delinquency; or
         b.   Written agreement, within fifteen (15) days, to pay the balance
of the delinquency within one year, in regular monthly installments.
      2.   The notice of delinquency/termination will inform the user that
service will be terminated unless one of the two (2) options set out in
subsection A1 of this section is exercised.
   B.   Interest Penalty: Unless payment is made or a written agreement is
signed within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice of delinquency, an
interest penalty of five percent (5%) per annum shall be assessed against the
user's delinquency, applicable to the delinquency period commencing on the due
date.
   C.   Agreement For Installment Payments:
      1.   In order to elect to repay the delinquency over the course of one
year, the user shall enter into a promissory note with the village, whereby the
user shall agree to make the aforesaid monthly installments which shall be
added to the regular monthly charge assessed against the user. If the user
violates the terms of the promissory note, such user's water or sewer service
shall be discontinued without further notice, and shall not be reinstated until
all past due bills are paid in full, including interest, and together with the
cost and charges for the reinstatement of such service.
      2.   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the village retains
the discretion to allow a payment agreement to extend beyond one year if
circumstances warrant as determined by the village president. The village
president is authorized to designate his authority hereunder to the water/sewer
liaison/chair as determined by the village president.
   D.   Reconnection Of Service; Fee: If a user's service is disconnected
pursuant to this section, there shall be a reconnection fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). such payment, as well as such delinquency and interest
associated therewith, shall be paid to the village clerk, or such other person
(s) assigned for the purpose of receiving such funds, by cash or certified
check prior to reinstating water or sewer service. If the reconnection is
requested to occur outside of regular business hours of the Utica Public Works
Department, then the reconnection fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(Ord. 2010-17, 6-9-2010; amd. Ord. 2020-18, 8-13-2020)
8-1-15: DISPOSITION OF REVENUES:
The village treasurer shall receive all revenues from the waterworks and
sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
said systems as the same may be delivered to him. Said funds shall be deposited
in separate funds, and the revenue derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be deposited in funds as provided for by ordinance relating to the
issuance of revenue bonds for the sewerage system, as said ordinance is now and
may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
8-1-16: ACCOUNTING:
The village treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall
keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the waterworks and sewerage
system, and at regular intervals, annually or more often, the village board of
trustees shall cause to be made an audit of the books by an independent
auditing concern, to show the receipts and disbursements of the water and
sewerage systems. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
8-1-17: OFFICE:
The office of the water and sewer department for the transaction of business
shall be located at the village clerk's office, and all monies due the
department from any consumers and users and for all purposes and sources,
including service charges, etc., shall be paid to the village clerk. (Ord. 85-
04, 5-7-1985)
CHAPTER 2
WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-2-1: Contract For Service
8-2-2: Use Of Public System Required
8-2-3: Connection To System; Water Taps
8-2-4: Permit For Additional Work
8-2-5: Installation And Maintenance Of Service Pipes
8-2-6: Water Meters
8-2-7: Heating Equipment Or Devices
8-2-8: Application For Water Service
8-2-9: Water Service Rates
8-2-10: Authority Of Village To Shut Off Water
8-2-11: Temporary Service
8-2-12: Unlawful Use, Unnecessary Waste Of Water
8-2-13: Damage To, Tampering With System
8-2-14: Nonliability Of Village
8-2-15: Discontinuance Of Service
8-2-16: Right Of Entry
8-2-1: CONTRACT FOR SERVICE:
The following rules and regulations, as herein set forth, or as they may be
hereafter amended, shall be considered a part of the contract with every
consumer or user taking water service of the village, and each shall be
considered as having expressed his agreement to be bound thereby. (Ord. 85-04,
5-7-1985)
8-2-2: USE OF PUBLIC SYSTEM REQUIRED:
The owner of all houses, buildings, or other properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the
village and abutting on any street, alley, or right of way in which there is
now located, or may in the future be located, public water service is hereby
required, at his expense, to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public water service in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within
ninety (90) days after the date of official notice to do so; provided, that
said public water service is within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the
property line; and further provided, that a property within a newly platted
subdivision shall comply with the requirements of subsection 11-6B-7A2a of this
code. (Ord. 89-08, 8-2-1989; amd. 2013 Code)
8-2-3: CONNECTION TO SYSTEM; WATER TAPS:
   A.   1. Applications for water service connections shall be made in writing
to the village clerk by the owners of the property to be served, or the agent
of said owner, which shall state the official street and number to be served,
the size of the pipe required, and approximate location where such a service
shall enter the premises. Thereafter, taps or connections will be made only by
the water and sewerage department at the costs set out in subsection 8-1-8A of
this title. (Ord. 2003-57, 12-10-2003; amd. 2013 Code)
      2.   Charges specified in any existing or future annexation or
preannexation agreements may differ.
   B.   All tap-on fees shall be paid to the village clerk before a tap is
made.
   C.   If a larger tap or connection than one inch (1") in size is desired, or
special services are rendered by the village relative to the tap-on service,
such extra work will be done at the actual cost of labor and materials, plus a
ten percent (10%) charge for overhead expenses. (Ord. 2003-57, 12-10-2003)
8-2-4: PERMIT FOR ADDITIONAL WORK:
After service connection has been made, no person shall make any attachments,
alterations, or connections to said connection to serve other premises, unless
a written permit is first obtained from the village clerk specifying exact work
to be done, said work to be performed according to said permit, ordinances of
the village, and rules and regulations of the water and sewerage department.
(Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
8-2-5: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SERVICE PIPES:
   A.   Installation Of Pipes: No service pipes shall be conducted across lots
or buildings and adjoining premises, but must be laid on streets, alleys, or
public grounds to premises served, and there shall be a separate service pipe
laid at right angles from the main to each premises to be served, and in all
cases, each building served must have an independent service shut off. Where no
water main is available for direct connection, a small temporary main will be
permitted as hereinafter provided. If there are two (2) or more services on the
premises, piping must be separate and no connections made from one to the
other. In buildings containing more than one residential unit, there shall be
an independent service shutoff for each such unit for the purpose of shutting
off service to consumers with delinquent accounts. The water and sewerage
department shall have sole access to these independent shutoffs.
   B.   Curb Box And Valves:
      1.   A curb stop box or shutoff shall be placed on every pipe at right
angles to the main and shall be no more than twelve inches (12") outside of the
sidewalk line on the street side and no more than twelve inches (12") outside
of the lot line on alley side, and the cover of the same shall be at the same
height as the sidewalk or surrounding ground. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
      2.   Every service pipe must also have a stop and waste valve placed in
the building within nine inches (9") of the point where the pipe enters the
building, and it shall be kept in such condition that water may be shut off at
any time by the occupants of the premises. There shall also be a gate valve
placed inside of the premises.
   C.   Pipe Specifications: All service lines replaced or installed henceforth
must be at least three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter, and must be installed a
minimum depth of four and one- half feet (41/2'). Service lines must have a
minimum working pressure rating of one hundred sixty (160) psi at seventy three
and four-tenths degrees Fahrenheit (73.4°F) and must be constructed of one of
the following types of materials: copper (type K), polyvinyl chloride (PVC),
polyethylene, or polybutylene. Service lines must not be covered until they are
inspected and approved by a duly authorized village representative.
   D.   Responsibility For Installation And Maintenance Of Pipes: All service
pipes and fixtures from the main to the premises shall be installed and
maintained at the expense of the owner or owners of the premises. If any leaks
or other defects in the same come to the knowledge of the water and sewerage
department, such department shall notify the owner or owners of the premises,
who shall promptly repair said leak or other defect, and if such repairs are
not effected, water will be turned off and remain turned off until such repairs
are made and expense thereof charged against said owner or owners, to be paid
before water will be turned on again. Any person, firm or corporation violating
this section shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985; amd. 2013 Code)
8-2-6: WATER METERS:
Water meters and related pipe connections may be located near the curb box, or
within the user's premises as determined by the village representative. The
meter must be located at a point where it is readily accessible. The water user
shall permit the meter to be located upon his property and shall allow such
access as is necessary for purposes of construction, repair, maintenance, meter
reading, relocation or expansion of the water system, including such meters, as
may be necessary. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985; amd. Ord. 2001-05, 3-7-2001; 2013
Code)
8-2-7: HEATING EQUIPMENT OR DEVICES:
All consumers hereafter installing equipment or devices for heating water for
domestic use through the plumbing system shall install a suitable automatic
relief valve and check valve so arranged that in event of overheating of water,
there can be no reversal overflow, all on the cold water inlet side of the
heating equipment or devices. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
8-2-8: APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE:
   A.   Application For Service: Application for water service shall be made in
writing to the village clerk on the blanks furnished by the clerk, stating the
street and number to be served, which said application shall be made at least
seven (7) days in advance of the time service is required.
   B.   Change Of Residence:
      1.   No consumer or user of water services, when a change of residence
occurs, shall be given water service at the new residence until all delinquent
water bills and charges owing from the furnishing of water services at a prior
place of residence or business shall be paid. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
      2.   No water service at such new location shall be turned on, and if
turned on, it shall be turned off until a charge of twenty five dollars
($25.00) shall be paid for turning on the water and renewing the service. (Ord.
99-25, 12-8-1999)
   C.   Satisfying Outstanding Bills Required: No water service shall be
established at any location until all prior bills and charges incurred by a
prior consumer at said location have been paid in full. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
8-2-9: WATER SERVICE RATES:
The rates for water service for all users are established in section
8-1-8 of this title. (Ord. 2001-05, 3-7-2001)
8-2-10: AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE TO SHUT OFF WATER:
   A.   Whenever it becomes necessary, the village may, without notice, shut
off water service for purposes of making repairs or extensions, or for other
purposes, and no claim shall be made against the village by reason of the
breakage of any service pipe or service cock, or from other damage resulting
therefrom.
   B.   The water and sewerage department shall give notice of shutting off of
water if conditions are such that it is possible to do so.
   C.   When water is shut off, consumers of water service on premises which
have water heaters or heat coils shall turn off the water at the basement
shutoff and open a faucet in the hot water pipe and leave it open until water
is again turned on, in order to protect piping and fixtures from excessive
pressure from hot water or steam. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
8-2-11: TEMPORARY SERVICE:
Application shall be made to the village clerk for any temporary service
desired by contractors, builders, or other users for water to be used in
construction work, or for any other purpose. The charge for such water service
shall be four dollars ($4.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used,
with a four dollar ($4.00) minimum charge. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
8-2-12: UNLAWFUL USE, UNNECESSARY WASTE OF WATER:
   A.   Unlawful Use Prohibited: No consumer shall supply water to other
persons, nor allow them to take water, unless special permission is received
from the village, and if such permission is granted, the consumer shall be held
responsible for the payment for the water supply. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985; amd.
2013 Code)
   B.   Unnecessary Waste Prohibited: Consumers shall prevent the unnecessary
waste of water and shall keep all water outlets closed when not in actual use.
Should unnecessary waste occur, village reserves the right to cut off the water
supply. The village further reserves the right to prohibit the use of water for
yard sprinklers, etc., and all large users of water whenever the village shall
deem it necessary to do so. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
8-2-13: DAMAGE TO, TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM:
   A.   No user, either person, firm or corporation, shall tamper, adjust,
damage or in any manner interfere with the components or operation of the water
system owned by the village.
   B.   The shutoff valve shall be opened only by a duly authorized
representative of the village. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
   C.   Penalty for tampering, damaging, adjusting, or in any manner
interfering with the components or operation of the system shall be as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code for each such offense. If said penalty is not paid within
thirty (30) days after the amount is determined, the village shall shut off the
water service. In addition to said penalty, the user, person, firm or
corporation responsible shall reimburse the village for the actual cost of
repairing any damage arising from the act. Users shall report any known
evidence of tampering, adjusting, damaging, or interference with operation of
the system, owned by the village, to the board of trustees. Any malicious act
or damage to the system shall be prosecuted through a court of law. (Ord. 85-
04, 5-7-1985; amd. 2013 Code)
8-2-14: NONLIABILITY OF VILLAGE:
   A.   The village shall not be held responsible by reason of the breaking of
any service pipe or apparatus, water coil, or for failure in the supply of
water.
   B.   The village shall not be responsible for any damage that may occur by
reason of improper fixtures, or improper connections, or for any other causes
when turning on water.
   C.   The village does not guarantee that the supply of water will at all
times be constant, nor does the village agree to furnish water at all times,
and it will not be liable to any consumer for any damage in failing to maintain
a continuing or even supply of water. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985)
8-2-15: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
   A.   Notice Required: Consumers who wish to discontinue the use of water
service shall give notice in writing to the village clerk who shall then cause
said water service to be turned off, at which time all water bills and charges
shall immediately become due and payable. Water bills and charges shall
continue until said notice is given.
   B.   Reconnection Fee: When water service is again desired after such
discontinuance, a charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be made and
collected before turning on water service. If the reconnection is requested to
occur outside of regular business hours of the Utica Public Works Department,
then the reconnection fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 85-04,
5-7-1985; amd. Ord. 99-25, 12-8-1999; Ord. 2020-18, 8-13-2020)
8-2-16: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The superintendent of public works or employees of the village shall be
permitted at all reasonable hours to enter the premises or building of
consumers of water services for the purpose of examining water pipes and
fixtures and the manner in which the water is used. (Ord. 85-04, 5-7-1985; amd.
2013 Code)
ARTICLE A. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
8-2A-1: Purpose
8-2A-2: Definitions
8-2A-3: Compliance With Existing Laws
8-2A-4: Cross Connections Restricted
8-2A-5: Surveys, Investigations, Tests
8-2A-6: Backflow Prevention Devices
8-2A-7: Booster Pumps
8-2A-8: Approval Of Corrections And Protective Devices
8-2A-9: Piping Identification
8-2A-10: Private Water Storage Tanks
8-2A-11: Elimination Of Existing Cross Connections
8-2A-12: Inspections
8-2A-13: Violations; Discontinuance Of Water Service
8-2A-14: Penalty
8-2A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is:
   A.   To protect the public water supply system from contamination of
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system.
   B.   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety.
   C.   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's potable water systems. (Ord. 99-15, 10-13-1999)
8-2A-2: DEFINITIONS:
AGENCY: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation For Cross Connection Control of the University Of Southern
California, Association Of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, or streams; or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the
distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois
plumbing code and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
CONSUMER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of any
premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located on the customer's premises. A
building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by the entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2)
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
   Direct Cross Connection: A cross connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
   Indirect Cross Connection: A cross connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe,
potable water system.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASE standard 1015. A double check valve
assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the watertightness of each check valve.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well
being of consumers. The word "severe", as used to qualify "health hazard",
means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in
death or significant reduction in the quality of life.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois plumbing
code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of Illinois law.
PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension
of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures,
appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including,
without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a private water
supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to,
within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work
or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units, to
and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing includes all
piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a
sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or buildings
where a person or persons live, work, or assemble from the point of connection
of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system
five feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of Illinois law for drinking,
culinary, and domestic purposes.
POTENTIAL CROSS CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
PROCESS FLUID(S): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically
or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced into the public
or a consumer's potable water system. This includes, but is not limited to:
   A.   Polluted or contaminated waters.
   B.   Process waters.
   C.   Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may
have deteriorated in sanitary quality.
   D.   Cooling waters.
   E.   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams, or irrigation systems.
   F.   Chemicals in solution or suspension.
   G.   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which
regularly serve at least twenty five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days per
year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a
"noncommunity water supply".
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a
minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves, together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the
two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE standard 1013. During normal flow
and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks
shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check
valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall
operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the
supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located
at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly
located test cocks.
SAFE AIR GAP: The minimum distance of a water inlet or opening above the
maximum high water level or overflow rim in a fixture, device or container to
which public water is furnished which shall be at least two (2) times the
inside diameter of the water inlet pipe; but shall not be less than one inch
(1") and need not be more than twelve inches (12").
SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY: A water supply system maintained in addition to a
public water supply, including, but not limited to, water systems from ground
or surface sources or water from a public water supply which in any way has
been treated, processed or exposed to any possible contaminant or stored in
other than an approved storage facility.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at
the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
SUBMERGED INLET: A water pipe or extension thereto from a public water supply
terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of
questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is unprotected
against backflow.
SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system
regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and
must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of
all cross connection control devices and methods located within that customer's
pipe system. The survey must be in written form and should not be an actual
plumbing inspection.
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's
water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no
longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water system.
WATER SYSTEM: Shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the public water
supply system and the consumer's water system.
   A.   Public Water Supply System:
      1.   The public water supply system shall consist of the source
facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities
of the potable water system under the control of the superintendent of public
works up to the point where the consumer's water system begins.
      2.   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized
in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public
water supply distribution system.
      3.   The public water supply distribution system shall include the
network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's
water system.
   B.   Consumer's Water System: The consumer's water system shall include all
parts of the facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from
the public water supply distribution system to points of use.
WATER UTILITY: The village of North Utica water and sewerage department. (Ord.
99-15, 10-13-1999; amd. 2013 Code)
8-2A-3: COMPLIANCE WITH EXISTING LAWS:
All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in accordance with
the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890. If, in
accordance with the Illinois plumbing code or the judgment of the
superintendent of public works, an approved backflow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the superintendent
of public works shall give notice to the water customer to install such an
approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at the customer's
expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in
accordance with the Illinois plumbing code and all applicable local
regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices
upon installation and as required by the Illinois plumbing code and local
regulations. (Ord. 99-15, 10-13-1999)
8-2A-4: CROSS CONNECTIONS RESTRICTED:
   A.   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply, other than the regular public
water supply of the village, enters the supply or distribution system of the
village, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the
method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
superintendent of public works and the Illinois environmental protection
agency.
   B.   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited, except when and where approved cross connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   C.   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion
of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the agency.
   D.   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply. (Ord. 99-15, 10-13-1999)
8-2A-5: SURVEYS, INVESTIGATIONS, TESTS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the superintendent of public works to cause
surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served
by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to
the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be
made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2)
years, or as often as the superintendent of public works shall deem necessary.
Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a
period of at least five (5) years.
   B.   The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved cross connection control device inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross connections within the consumer's premises, and
testing, repair and maintenance of cross connection control devices within the
consumer's premises.
   C.   On request by the superintendent of public works, or the
superintendent's authorized representative, the consumer shall furnish
information regarding the piping system or systems or water use within the
customer's premises. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable
times to the superintendent of public works for the verification of information
submitted by the consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding cross
connection inspection results.
   D.   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on the consumer's premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross connections to the consumer's water
system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the
consumer's or the public potable water system. All cross connection control or
other plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with 225 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 320/3(1).
   E.   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow into
the public water system by ensuring that:
      1.   All cross connections are removed or approved cross connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back siphonage.
      2.   Cross connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.
      3.   Cross connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the agency as a
cross connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
   F.   1. Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at least
annually or more frequency if recommended by the manufacturer. (Ord. 99-15, 10-
13-1999)
      2.   Records submitted to the village shall be available for inspection
by agency personnel in accordance with 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4.
(Ord. 99-15, 10-13-1999; amd. 2013 Code)
      3.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of the most
recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
      4.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
         a.   Date of each test;
         b.   Name and approval number of person performing the test;
         c.   Test results;
         d.   Repairs or servicing required;
         e.   Repairs and date completed; and
         f.   Service performed and date completed. (Ord. 99-15, 10-13-1999)
8-2A-6: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   A.   Devices Required:
      1.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on all
connections to the public water supply as described in the plumbing code, 77
Illinois administrative code 890, and the agency's regulations, 35 Illinois
administrative code 680. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device
shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving
premises, where, in the judgment of the superintendent of public works, actual
or potential hazards to the public water supply system exist.
      2.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
         a.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the superintendent of public
works, and the source is approved by the Illinois environmental protection
agency.
         b.   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the superintendent of public works.
         c.   Premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment
of the superintendent of public works and the cross connection control device
inspector, are not correctable or are intricate plumbing arrangements which
make it impractical to determine whether or not cross connections exist.
         d.   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross connection survey.
         e.   Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
      3.   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the plumbing code, 77 Illinois
administrative code 890, and the agency's regulations, 35 Illinois
administrative code 653. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device
shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving,
but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the
superintendent of public works determines that no actual or potential hazard to
the public water supply system exists:
         a.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
         b.   Laboratories.
         c.   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
         d.   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater
pumping stations.
         e.   Food or beverage processing plants.
         f.   Chemical plants.
         g.   Metal plating industries.
         h.   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
         i.   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
         j.   Car washes.
         k.   Pesticide, or herbicide, or extermination plants and trucks.
         l.   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.
   B.   Types Of Devices:
      1.   The type of protection required under subsections A1, A2 and A3 of
this section shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists, as follows:
         a.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard.
         b.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
         c.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause
a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
      2.   The type of protection required under subsection B1 of this section
shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device.
      3.   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for
a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall
be installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
         a.   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or
other chemicals;
         b.   Water is pumped into the system from another source;
         c.   Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source;
         d.   Water can be pumped into the fire safety system from any other
source; or
         e.   There is a connection whereby another source can be connected to
the sprinkler system.
   C.   Approved Devices: All backflow prevention devices or methods required
by this article shall be approved by the Research Foundation For Cross
Connection Control of the University Of Southern California, American Water
Works Association, American Society Of Sanitary Engineering, or American
National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation
to be in compliance with applicable industry specifications.
   D.   Installation: Installation of approved devices shall be made in
accordance with 35 Illinois administrative code 653.802, and only as specified
by the Research Foundation For Cross Connection Control of the University Of
Southern California or applicable industry specifications. Maintenance, as
recommended by the manufacturer of the device, shall be performed.
Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on site. (Ord. 99-15, 10-
13-1999)
8-2A-7: BOOSTER PUMPS:
   A.   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure
cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the superintendent of
public works, at least once a year, that the device is operable. (Ord. 99-15,
10-13-1999)
8-2A-8: APPROVAL OF CORRECTIONS AND PROTECTIVE DEVICES:
Any user of the water supply system shall obtain written approval from the
water and sewerage department of any proposed corrective action or protective
device before using or installing it. The total time allowed for completion of
the necessary corrections shall be contingent upon the degree of hazard
involved and include the time required to obtain and install equipment. If the
cross connection has not been removed within the time as hereafter specified,
the village shall physically separate the water supply system from the on site
piping system in such manner that the two (2) systems cannot be connected by
any unauthorized person. (Ord. 99-15, 10-13-1999; amd. 2013 Code)
8-2A-9: PIPING IDENTIFICATION:
When a secondary water source is used in addition to the public water supply,
the public water supply and secondary water piping shall be identified as
distinguishing colors or tags and so maintained that each pipe may be traced
readily in its entirety. It will be necessary to protect the water supply
system at the service connection in a manner acceptable to the water and
sewerage department. (Ord. 99-15, 10-13-1999; amd. 2013 Code)
8-2A-10: PRIVATE WATER STORAGE TANKS:
A private water storage tank supplied from the water supply system shall be
deemed a secondary water supply unless it is designed and approved for potable
water usage. (Ord. 99-15, 10-13-1999)
8-2A-11: ELIMINATION OF EXISTING CROSS CONNECTIONS:
Within one year from the effective date hereof, all existing cross connections
to the water supply systems shall be eliminated. The expenses of such
elimination shall be that of the owner of the property on which such cross
connection exists. (Ord. 99-15, 10-13-1999)
8-2A-12: INSPECTIONS:
The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to
enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public
water supply or distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying
the presence or absence of cross connections, and the superintendent of public
works or the superintendent's authorized agent shall have the right to enter at
any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water
supply or distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying
information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross connection
control inspection. On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property
so served shall furnish to the superintendent of public works any information
which the superintendent may request regarding the piping system or systems or
water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when demanded,
shall, with the discretion of the superintendent of public works, be deemed
evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this article.
(Ord. 99-15, 10-13-1999)
8-2A-13: VIOLATIONS; DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE:
   A.   The superintendent of public works is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service
to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this
article is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as the
superintendent may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of
the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such property
shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected
in compliance with the provisions of this article, and until a reconnection fee
of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is paid to the village. Immediate
disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the superintendent of
public works is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the
public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written
notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without
notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated
contamination or pollution of the public water supply; provided, that in the
reasonable opinion of the superintendent of public works or the Illinois
environmental protection agency, such action is required to prevent actual or
potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the
village nor the superintendent of public works, or any agents or assigns
thereof, shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost
revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in
accordance with the terms of this article, whether or not said termination was
with or without notice. (Ord. 99-15, 10-13-1999; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with this
article and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of public works, and the
required connection fee is paid. (Ord. 99-15, 10-13-1999)
8-2A-14: PENALTY:
The consumer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination through
backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an
illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired
device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup of
the potable water supply system. The village may issue a monetary penalty for
noncompliance in accordance with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 99-15, 10-
13-1999)
ARTICLE B. WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
SECTION:
8-2B-1: Definitions
8-2B-2: Contractor Requirements
8-2B-3: Permit For Connection; Fee And Bond
8-2B-4: Application For Connection Or Extension
8-2B-5: Plans
8-2B-6: Specifications
8-2B-7: Notice Of Excavation
8-2B-8: Protection Of Work
8-2B-9: Separate Connections Required
8-2B-10: Inspections; Costs
8-2B-11: Responsibility For Costs
8-2B-12: Installation Of Service; Costs
8-2B-13: Responsibility For Maintenance Of Service
8-2B-14: Existing Unauthorized Connections
8-2B-15: Damage To, Trespassing Upon System
8-2B-16: Enforcement
8-2B-17: Violations; Penalty
8-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this
article shall be as follows:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, association, or other entity.
VILLAGE: The village of North Utica, LaSalle County, Illinois, acting by and
through its duly constituted mayor and village board of trustees, or other duly
authorized representative or representatives.
WATER MAIN: Any pipe connected to the village water system shown on the
official village water main map.
WATER SERVICE: Any water line connected to a village water main and serving a
single water customer. (Ord. 77-04, 9-6-1977; amd. 2013 Code)
8-2B-2: CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License And Bond Required: No person shall make any main or service
connection to the village water system until he has applied for and obtained
from the village clerk a license to extend the water system and has posted a
surety bond with the village clerk that has been approved by the village board
of trustees in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or ten percent
(10%) of the estimated cost, whichever is greater. Said bond shall be
conditioned upon the applicant's faithful prosecution of such waterworks as he
may undertake in strict compliance with the provisions of this article. (Ord.
77-04, 9-6-1977; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Qualifications; License Fee: The applicant shall present evidence that
he is competent to perform water extensions, and shall pay a license fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) annually for the issuance or renewal of such
"license to extend water system".
   C.   Liability For Work: Each and every contractor or subcontractor will be
liable for his own work and any work which he may have subcontracted. (Ord. 77-
04, 9-6-1977)
8-2B-3: PERMIT FOR CONNECTION; FEE AND BOND:
   A.   No person shall make or cause to be made any main or service connection
to any water main in the village until he has applied for and received a permit
for such connection from the mayor, and then only in the manner and at the
location described in the permit. The fee for such permit shall be three
dollars ($3.00).
   B.   No work shall begin without written permission from the mayor, and no
work shall begin until a performance bond is posted with the village. Each
contractor or subcontractor will be required to post a bond in the amount of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or ten percent (10%) of the estimated cost,
whichever is greater. (Ord. 77-04, 9-6-1977; amd. 2013 Code)
8-2B-4: APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION OR EXTENSION:
The form of permit for water main or service connection described in section
8-2B-3 of this article shall also include an application for water service to
be signed by the owner of the premises where such connection is to be made
before said permit is issued. Said application shall cause the owner and/or
lessee of the premises to be liable and subject to the charges for water
service provided for by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 77-04, 9-6-1977)
8-2B-5: PLANS:
   A.   Main Extension: Prior to any main extension, the developer, at his
expense, shall obtain a permit from the state environmental protection agency
or current applicable agency. The permit application shall be approved and
signed by the village upon completion of the work, and an as built set of plans
shall be filed with the village clerk.
   B.   Service Extension: A sketch showing the as built location of the
service and appurtenances shall be filed with the village clerk. (Ord. 77-04,
9-6-1977)
8-2B-6: SPECIFICATIONS:
All work shall be in accordance with the "State Of Illinois Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction", adopted July 1973, or
latest revision thereof. (Ord. 77-04, 9-6-1977)
8-2B-7: NOTICE OF EXCAVATION:
No person shall open or excavate any trench for any purpose whatsoever in any
street, alley or other public grounds in which any water line is laid without
first giving notice to the superintendent of public works of the nature and
location of such intended work and the date and time such work will be
undertaken. (Ord. 77-04, 9-6-1977)
8-2B-8: PROTECTION OF WORK:
The owner of the premises or his agents shall conduct the work of making
service connections or private lines in such a manner as to provide for the
safety of workers, property and the public. He shall provide and maintain
proper barricades, warning lights and other safety precautions usually employed
on such work. (Ord. 77-04, 9-6-1977)
8-2B-9: SEPARATE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED:
Each and every house, business building or institution and industry must have a
direct and separate connection with the main. The connection of two (2) or more
such structures to the public main with one pipe is expressly forbidden. (Ord.
77-04, 9-6-1977)
8-2B-10: INSPECTIONS; COSTS:
   A.   Inspections Required: Inspections will be needed for the following:
      1.   Ditch Excavation: Depth and width.
      2.   Sand Bedding: Processed sand; a minimum of six inches (6") under
pipe; a minimum of twelve inches (12") will be required if rock is encountered.
      3.   Laying Of Pipe: Pipe shall be laid to the specified grade; all
joints shall remain visible until pressure tests are taken.
      4.   Sand Overlay: Depth check; all water mains shall have a minimum of
twelve inches (12") of processed sand placed over the top.
      5.   Locating Tape: Metallic detecting tape shall be placed approximately
eighteen inches (18") below finished ground line over all water main and over
all services.
      6.   Fire Hydrants:
         a.   All hydrants shall be a maximum of four hundred feet (400') from
the farthest point of any property to be serviced unless otherwise shown on the
plans.
         b.   Shutoff valves shall be installed at proper heights, and a
minimum of one cubic yard of one-fourth inch (1/4") to three- eighths inch (3/
8") pea gravel shall be placed on the bottom of the fire hydrants for drainage.
      7.   Shutoffs: Water shutoffs will be placed in accordance with the plans
or as designated by the village.
   B.   Entry Powers: The superintendent of public works or other persons
authorized by the village to inspect service or main connections shall, upon
request, have free and unobstructed access to all parts of any premises where
such services are planned to be made, are being made or have been made during
all daylight hours for the purpose of examining the construction, location,
condition and usage of said service connection. The superintendent of public
works shall be notified by the owner of the premises, or his agent, upon
completion of pipe laying and before backfilling and again upon completion of
backfilling and street repair work for his inspection and approval.
   C.   Violations: Materials and/or workmanship which are disapproved by the
superintendent of public works shall be removed immediately and replaced with
satisfactory materials and workmanship at the expense of the owner or his
agent.
   D.   Responsibility Of Owner For Costs: The owner will pay all expenses to
have the installation of water main extension inspected and certified by a
registered professional engineer. A copy of the engineer's certification as
required by the state shall be deposited with the village clerk. (Ord. 77-04,
9-6-1977)
8-2B-11: RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS:
   A.   All costs of the construction and connection, from the point of
connection with the public main designated on the permit to the terminus of the
service connection or private line, shall be borne by the owner of the premises
served, or his agents. He shall also bear the costs of replacing all street
paving, sidewalks, pipelines, utility lines and other public property damaged
or destroyed by him or his agent in constructing the service or water main. He
shall be liable for all damage to persons or property through negligence of
himself or his agents in doing such work, and shall save the village harmless
in any damage suits arising therefrom. (Ord. 77-04, 9-6-1977; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   All costs of the reconstruction and maintenance of service connections
or private lines from the point of the buffalo box to the terminus of the
service connection or private line shall be borne by the owner of the premises
served, or his agents. He shall also bear the cost of replacing all street
paving, sidewalks, pipelines, utility lines, and other public property damaged
or destroyed by him or his agent in this regard, assuming that property which
is damaged is located between the buffalo box and the terminus of the service
connection or private line. He shall be liable for all damage to persons or
property through negligence of himself or his agents in doing such work, and
shall save the village harmless from any damage suits arising therefrom, as
described in the previous sentence. (Ord. 94-11, 8-3-1994)
8-2B-12: INSTALLATION OF SERVICE; COSTS:
The village will install water service to the property line on the street where
the main is located. Installation charges to the property owner will be charged
at the village's cost of prevailing labor and materials, plus a ten percent
(10%) overhead charge. Permission may be granted by the village for private
installation. (Ord. 77-04, 9-6-1977)
8-2B-13: RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF SERVICE:
The property owner is responsible for maintenance of the buffalo box and the
service from the buffalo box into the house. (Ord. 77-04, 9-6-1977)
8-2B-14: EXISTING UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS:
All persons having any existing unauthorized connections with any of the water
mains within the village shall either disconnect such connections immediately
and provide proper connection after receiving a permit for service connection
in the usual manner, or shall take out a permit, notify the superintendent of
public works of the desire for an inspection, and uncover all pipes and
otherwise provide proof that the connection has been made substantially in
accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 77-04, 9-6-1977)
8-2B-15: DAMAGE TO, TRESPASSING UPON SYSTEM:
   A.   Damage To System Prohibited: No person shall wilfully, maliciously or
negligently deface, break, destroy or injure in any manner any water main or
appurtenance, or any part of the water plant. No person shall interfere with,
molest, uncover or disturb any part of any water system, appurtenance thereto,
or any part of the water plant or the grounds, landscaping or fencing of the
disposal plant site, except the employees of the village authorized to do so.
   B.   Trespassing Prohibited: No person, except employees of the village,
shall enter upon the site or grounds of the water plant unless express
permission to do so shall have been obtained from the mayor of the village or
the superintendent of public property. (Ord. 77-04, 9-6-1977)
8-2B-16: ENFORCEMENT:
It is hereby made the duty of the superintendent of public works or his duly
authorized agent to enforce full compliance with the terms of this article in
every particular relating to water main or service connections. (Ord. 77-04, 9-
6-1977)
8-2B-17: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanor Violation; Penalty: Any person who shall be found guilty of
violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, and for each
subsequent offense, such person shall be fined not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day on
which any violation of any provision of this article may continue, and each day
shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 77-04, 9-6-1977; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Liability For Violation: Any person violating any of the provisions of
this article shall become liable to the village for any expense or damage
occasioned to the village by reason of such violations. (Ord. 77-04, 9-6-1977)
ARTICLE C. WELL DRILLING
SECTION:
8-2C-1: Definitions
8-2C-2: Permit Required
8-2C-3: Application For Permit; Fee
8-2C-4: Advisory Report
8-2C-5: Hearing
8-2C-6: Conditions And Contents Of Permit
8-2C-7: Scope Of Provisions
8-2C-8: Penalties
8-2C-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this article:
HIGH CAPACITY WELL OR WELL SYSTEM: A water well or several water wells equipped
with a pump or pumps which either, individually or working together, are
capable of producing more than ten thousand (10,000) gallons of groundwater in
a twenty four (24) hour period.
RESIDENTIAL OR AGRICULTURAL WELL: A single groundwater supply well which
provides for household drinking, culinary and sanitary purposes and serves not
more than four (4) families or is for agricultural purposes. (Ord. 2009-26, 10-
14-2009)
8-2C-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person, partnership, corporation, governmental body, association or any
other entity shall drill, establish or maintain a high capacity well for any
purpose, other than residential or agricultural wells, as defined in section
8-2C-1 of this article, within the corporate boundaries of the village without
first receiving a permit for said well from the village board of trustees.
(Ord. 2009-26, 10-14-2009)
8-2C-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE:
   A.   Every applicant for a well drilling or maintenance permit for a high
capacity well shall submit to the village clerk a written application
containing the following information:
      1.   The name of the applicant.
      2.   The name of the owner of the property on which the well is to be
located.
      3.   The name of the proposed user of said well.
      4.   The legally described location of said proposed well.
      5.   The purpose for which said well will be drilled, the estimated daily
usage of water to be pumped and the proposed maximum daily capacity of said
well.
      6.   The estimated date upon which well drilling will begin.
      7.   If an existing well is to be upgraded to a high capacity well, the
date on which said modifications will be completed.
      8.   Report of a certified engineer showing that the proposed well
drilling will not cause pollution to, depletion of or injury to the water
source or the water table of the village.
   B.   A nonrefundable application fee in the sum of three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) shall be paid for each permit sought. (Ord. 2009-26, 10-14-
2009)
8-2C-4: ADVISORY REPORT:
Within ten (10) days after receiving the application, the village clerk shall
deliver the application to the village engineer. The village engineer may
request from the applicant such additional information as may be deemed
necessary to evaluate the application. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of
all of the information requested from the applicant and of the written report
from the village engineer, the village engineer shall submit to the board of
trustees an advisory report reviewing the probable effect of the proposed well
on the water source of the village. Such report shall be accompanied by the
report from the engineer, the application, and all information received from
the applicant. Such report shall also be accompanied by a recommendation by the
village engineer as to whether the permit requested should be granted. (Ord.
2009-26, 10-14-2009)
8-2C-5: HEARING:
The submission to the village board of trustees of the application, as provided
herein, shall cause a hearing to be held as follows: The board of trustees
shall, in considering the application, consider whether the applicant has
presented satisfactory evidence that the drilling or use of said well will not
cause pollution or injury to or depletion of the water source of the village,
or threaten pollution or injury to or depletion of the water source of the
village, or threaten pollution or injury to or depletion of the water table
underlying the village and the surrounding area covered by this article. (Ord.
2009-26, 10-14-2009)
8-2C-6: CONDITIONS AND CONTENTS OF PERMIT:
The village board of trustees shall not grant a permit for drilling unless the
applicant has presented satisfactory evidence that the drilling or use of said
well shall not cause pollution or injury to or depletion of the water source of
the village, or threaten pollution or injury to or depletion of the water table
underlying the village and the surrounding area covered by this article. The
permit shall state the maximum number of gallons of water that may be pumped
per twenty four (24) hour period in excess of ten thousand (10,000) gallons.
(Ord. 2009-26, 10-14-2009)
8-2C-7: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS:
This article shall apply to every high capacity well sought to be drilled after
the effective date hereof. This article shall apply to every existing well that
is made operational as a high capacity well after the effective date hereof.
(Ord. 2009-26, 10-14-2009)
8-2C-8: PENALTIES:
   A.   Injunction: Upon the failure of any individual to comply with the
provisions of this article, the village may make application to the circuit
court for an injunction requiring conformance with this article or make such
other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance herewith. (Ord.
2009-26, 10-14-2009)
   B.   Fine: Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate offense shall be
deemed committed for each day during or on which the violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 2009-26, 10-14-2009; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Additional Remedies: Nothing herein shall prevent the village from
taking other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord.
2009-26, 10-14-2009)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: Use Of Public Sewers Required
8-3-3: Private Sewage Disposal Systems
8-3-4: Building Sewers And Connections
8-3-5: Discharges Into Public System
8-3-6: Interceptors
8-3-7: Preliminary Treatment; Flow Equalization
8-3-8: Control Manhole
8-3-9: Measurements, Tests And Analyses
8-3-10: Special Agreements
8-3-11: Sewerage Rates
8-3-12: Protection Of System From Damage
8-3-13: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
8-3-14: Violation; Penalties
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATOR: The administrator of the U.S. environmental protection agency.
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The superintendent of public works.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter (mg/l).
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater,
stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
COMMERCIAL USER: As defined in section
8-1-3 of this title.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are
discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a control manhole is to provide access for the village
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
DIRECTOR: The director of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EFFLUENT CRITERIA: Are defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
FEDERAL ACT: The federal clean water act (33 USC 466 et seq.), as amended
(Pub.L. 95-217).
FEDERAL GRANT: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided by title II grants for construction
of treatment works of the act and implementing regulations.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
INDUSTRIAL USERS: As defined in section
8-1-3 of this title.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted
to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business
establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any
natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY: An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment
works that:
   A.   Has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average
workday; or
   B.   Has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste; or
   C.   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under section 307(a) of the federal act; or
   D.   Is found by the permit issuing authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
MAY: Permissible.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand milliliters
(1,000 ml) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per
million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of
water and wastewater analysis.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
administrator, or where appropriated by the director, after enactment of the
federal clean water act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to
section 402 of the federal act.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface water or groundwater.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
pH: The logarithm (base-10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA division of
laboratories manual of laboratory methods.
POPULATION EQUIVALENT: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing two hundred sixty
milligrams per liter (260 mg/l) of BOD and three hundred milligrams per liter
(300 mg/l) of suspended solids.
PRETREATMENT: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters)
in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village boundaries
that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village
sanitary system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with
village funds.
REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories
or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment
works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were
designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
RESIDENTIAL USER: As defined in section
8-1-3 of this title.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes, or a
combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water and groundwater
or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: Is used interchangeably with "wastewater".
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or other waste liquids, including
stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
SEWERAGE: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
SEWERAGE FUND: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received
in the operation of the sewerage system.
SHALL: Mandatory.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
STATE ACT: The Illinois anti-pollution bond act of 1970 1 .
STATE GRANT: The state of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois anti-pollution
bond act and for making such grants as filed with the secretary of state of the
state of Illinois.
STORM SEWER: A sewer that carries stormwater, surface water and groundwater
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into the
sewers.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS): Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA division of
laboratories manual of laboratory methods.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria
in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality
standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and
wastewater treatment facilities provided.
USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated.
USER CLASS: The type of user, residential, commercial or industrial, as defined
in section
8-1-3 of this title.
VILLAGE: The village of North Utica.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint, of course, it
may be a combination of liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge; sometimes used as synonymous
with "waste treatment plant" or "pollution control plant".
WATER QUALITY STANDARDS: Are defined in the water pollution regulations of
Illinois.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently. (2013 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 30 ILCS 405/1 et seq.
8-3-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Discharge Of Human And Animal Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the village, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the village, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
   B.   Discharges Into Natural Outlets: It shall be unlawful to discharge to
any natural outlet within the village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the village, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
chapter.
   C.   Private Systems: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful
to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-
1988)
   D.   Connection To Public Sewer Required: The owner of all the houses,
buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or
other purposes situated within the village and abutting on any street, alley,
or right of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located
any public sanitary (or combined) sewer of the village, is hereby required, at
his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official
notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within two hundred fifty
feet (250') of the property line. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988; amd. 2013 Code)
8-3-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
   A.   Private Systems Permitted: Where a public sanitary (or combined) sewer
is not available under the provisions of section
8-3-2 of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 88-
13, 7-6-1988)
   B.   Permit Required; Application; Fee: Before commencement of construction
of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written
permit signed by the county health department. The application for such permit
shall be made on a form furnished by the county health department, which the
applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information
as required.
   C.   Inspection And Approval By Village: A permit for a private sewage
disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed
to the satisfaction of the county health department. The department shall be
allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the village when the work is ready for
final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The
inspection shall be made within seventy two (72) hours of the receipt of
written notice by the village.
   D.   Specifications: The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private
sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state
private sewage disposal licensing act and code and with the state environmental
protection agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. (Ord. 88-13, 7-
6-1988; amd. 2013 Code)
   E.   Connection To Public Sewer When Available:
      1.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section
8-3-2 of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in
compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
      2.   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within sixty (60) days, and the private sewage disposal
system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean, bank run gravel or
dirt.
   F.   Operation Of Private System: The owner shall operate and maintain the
private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no
expense to the village.
   G.   Additional County Requirements: No statement contained in this section
shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be
imposed by the LaSalle County public health department. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988)
8-3-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit To Connect:
      1.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with, or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the village.
      2.   Classes Of Permits; Applications:
         a.   There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 1) for
residential wastewater service; and 2) for commercial, institutional/
governmental or industrial wastewater service. In either case, the owner or his
agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the village. (Ord.
88-13, 7-6-1988)
         b.   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the superintendent of public works.
      3.   Fee: A permit and inspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
a residential or commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the village
at the time the application is filed. The industry, as a condition of permit
authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics, and type of activity. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988; amd. 2013 Code)
      4.   Conditions Of Permit: A building sewer permit will only be issued
and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the
downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater
treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and
efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-
1988)
   B.   Separate Building Sewers Required: A separate and independent building
sewer shall be provided for every building; except, that where one building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no building sewer is
available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining
alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may
be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
   C.   Use Of Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test
by the superintendent of public works, to meet all requirements of this
chapter. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988; amd. 2013 Code)
   D.   Construction Specifications:
      1.   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of
the village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society Of Testing Materials, "Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual Of Practice No. 9", and "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer
Main Construction In Illinois" shall apply.
      2.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which
is approved in accordance with subsection G1 of this section, and discharged to
the building sewer. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988)
   E.   Connections To System: The connection of the building sewer into the
public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing
codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the village or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society Of
Testing Materials, "Water Pollution Control Federation Manual Of Practice No.
9", and "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois". All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
superintendent of public works before installation. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988; amd.
2013 Code)
   F.   Excavations: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
village.
   G.   Discharges Into System:
      1.   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the federal act and more stringent state and local standards.
      2.   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988)
   H.   Inspections: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the superintendent of public works when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made
under the supervision of the superintendent of public works or his
representative. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988; amd. 2013 Code)
   I.   Liability For Costs And Expenses: All costs and expense incident to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. (Ord.
88-13, 7-6-1988)
8-3-5: DISCHARGES INTO PUBLIC SYSTEM:
   A.   Stormwater And Surface Water Runoff; Storm And Combined Sewers:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
      2.   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the village. Industrial cooling waters or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the village, to a
storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
   B.   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   C.   Restricted Discharges:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the village that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream;
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
village will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The
substances prohibited are:
         a.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
         b.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials, or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter
(100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (32
and 150°F) (0 and 65°C).
         c.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the village.
         d.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not.
         e.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the village for such materials.
         f.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the village as necessary after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
         g.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the village in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
         h.   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.0.
         i.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 milligram
per liter as Hg at any time except as permitted by the village in compliance
with applicable state and federal regulations.
         j.   Any cyanide in excess of 0.1 milligram per liter at any time
except as permitted by the village in compliance with applicable state and
federal regulations.
         k.   Materials which exert or cause:
            (1)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as,
but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).
            (2)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
            (3)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
            (4)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting "slugs" as defined in section
8-3-1 of this chapter.
         l.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
      2.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsection C1 of this section, and/or which
are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, June
26, 1978, and any amendments thereto, and which, in the judgment of the
village, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the village may:
         a.   Reject the wastes;
         b.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         c.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         d.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of section
8-3-10 of this chapter.
      3.   If the village permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flow, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the village, and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988)
8-3-6: INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the village, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the village, and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988)
8-3-7: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT; FLOW EQUALIZATION:
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988)
8-3-8: CONTROL MANHOLE:
Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole, and when required
by the village, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the village. The manhole shall be installed
by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe
and accessible at all times. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988)
8-3-9: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
   A.   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge.
   B.   The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than once per
month the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at such times and in such a
manner as prescribed by the village. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the village. At such times as
deemed necessary, the village reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
   C.   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of IEPA division of laboratories manual of
laboratory methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or
upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls,
whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988)
8-3-10: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the village for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial
concern, provided such payments are in accordance with federal and state
guidelines for user charge system. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988; amd. 2013 Code)
8-3-11: SEWERAGE RATES:
The rates for sewerage service for all users are established in section
8-1-8 of this title. (Ord. 2001-05, 3-7-2001)
8-3-12: PROTECTION OF SYSTEM FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this section shall be
subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. 88-
13, 7-6-1988)
8-3-13: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   The superintendent of public works and other duly authorized employees
of the village, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the U.S.
environmental protection agency, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The superintendent of public works or his
representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including
metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries,
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge
to the sewers, waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
   B.   The superintendent of public works and other duly authorized employees
of the village, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds a
duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated agreement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord.
88-13, 7-6-1988; amd. 2013 Code)
8-3-14: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   Notice Of Violation; Time For Compliance: Any person found to be
violating any provision of this chapter, except section
8-3-12 of this chapter, shall be served by the village with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   B.   Revocation Of Permit: The village may revoke any permit for sewage
disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord.
88-13, 7-6-1988)
   C.   Penalty: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided for in subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each violation. Each day in which any such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988; amd.
2013 Code)
   D.   Liability For Violations: Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation.
(Ord. 88-13, 7-6-1988)
CHAPTER 4
GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Garbage System
8-4-3: Receptacle Requirements
8-4-4: Disturbing Receptacles Prohibited
8-4-5: Dangerous Items
8-4-6: Contract For Collection
8-4-7: Collection By Village
8-4-8: Service Charge
8-4-9: Yard Waste And Recyclables
8-4-10: Prohibited Deposits Of Garbage And Refuse
8-4-11: Penalty
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words "garbage" and "refuse" shall have the following meanings:
GARBAGE: Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
REFUSE: Combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons,
boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture,
bedding; noncombustible trash, including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans,
metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass,
crockery, and other mineral wastes; street rubbish, including, but not limited
to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch basin dirt, and contents of litter
receptacles; provided, refuse shall not include earth and wastes from building
operations, nor shall it include solid wastes resulting from industrial
processes and manufacturing operations such as food processing wastes, boiler
house cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings. (Ord. 2004-41, 12-8-2004)
8-4-2: GARBAGE SYSTEM:
There is hereby established by this chapter a garbage system for the collection
and disposal of residential garbage for and in the village; and there shall be
hereafter maintained a garbage system for the collection and disposal of
garbage within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2004-41, 12-8-2004)
8-4-3: RECEPTACLE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The owner, occupant or lessee of any premises in the village, upon
which shall accumulate any garbage, ashes or miscellaneous waste, shall provide
or cause to be provided at his expense, and shall maintain clean and in good
repair, adequate separate receptacles of the following material, construction
and capacity:
      1.   Residential receptacles for garbage shall have a close fitting
cover, shall be watertight, and shall have a capacity of not more than thirty
two (32) gallons.
      2.   At each location, the total amount of garbage and miscellaneous
waste to be collected each week shall not exceed three (3) 32-gallon
receptacles or its equivalent unless stickers are purchased and affixed for
excess cans or bags.
      3.   The occupant, tenant, owner or his agent of any three-family
residence or larger, as well as commercial buildings with attached apartments,
and any commercial or business refuse generators shall use dumpsters, and the
following conditions shall be maintained by every occupant, tenant, owner or
his agent of said premises:
         a.   Dumpsters must be of sufficient capacity to contain all garbage
between pick ups.
         b.   Dumpsters must be covered with close fitting covers, unless such
dumpsters contain no animals or vegetable or food wastes.
         c.   Dumpsters used for disposal of large amounts of food wastes
causing foul, offensive or disagreeable odors shall be emptied as needed.
         d.   Dumpsters shall be:
            (1)   Stable while empty or loaded;
            (2)   Equipped for mechanical dumping;
            (3)   Durable;
            (4)   Leakproof and verminproof; and
            (5)   Maintained in good repair.
   B.   Any person subject to the provisions of this section may file a written
request for exemption with the village clerk, which shall be considered and
acted upon by the village board. Such request shall be based upon factual
circumstances which would make the application of the requirements an undue
hardship or burden upon the applicant, or otherwise demonstrate the
requirements to be inappropriate. (Ord. 2004-41, 12-8-2004)
8-4-4: DISTURBING RECEPTACLES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the garbage collector, or the
owner, occupant, lessee or person in possession of the premises, to remove,
displace, injure, deface, destroy, uncover or in any way or manner disturb any
receptacle of garbage or miscellaneous waste or any portion of its contents.
(Ord. 2004-41, 12-8-2004)
8-4-5: DANGEROUS ITEMS:
Tin cans, bottles, broken glass, crockery, metalware or sharp edged articles
shall be wrapped in paper before depositing same into receptacles. (Ord. 2004-
41, 12-8-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
8-4-6: CONTRACT FOR COLLECTION:
   A.   The village shall provide for collection of residential garbage and
refuse as provided herein by contract, with the contractor picking up weekly,
from each residential user, waste materials as defined in this chapter not
exceeding the number of containers as provided in this chapter and the refuse
collection contract with the contractor; further provided, that each owner/user
of individual premises shall be responsible for removal at extra expense of any
containers of garbage or refuse in excess of the amount provided in this
chapter.
   B.   When said contract is awarded by the village board, the same shall be
executed by the president on behalf of the village board and attested by the
village clerk. This chapter is considered by the village board to be a health
measure. (Ord. 2004-41, 12-8-2004)
8-4-7: COLLECTION BY VILLAGE:
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the village from collecting, hauling and
disposing of garbage and refuse and miscellaneous waste during cleanup periods
designated by the village or during emergencies as determined by the village
board. (Ord. 2004-41, 12-8-2004)
8-4-8: SERVICE CHARGE:
A service charge is hereby established to be collected from all single-family
units, multiple-family dwellings, and any other residential structures within
the corporate boundaries of the village for the collection and disposal of
garbage as hereinafter set forth.
   A.   Definitions:
    MULTIPLE-FAMILY UNITS: Includes duplexes or apartment buildings having
separately billed water service connections for each dwelling unit.
   OTHER UNITS: Includes any residential structure or structure used as a
residence having a separately billed water service.
   SINGLE-FAMILY UNIT: Includes any single-family residence, duplex residence,
any trailer or mobile home, any multiple-family apartment dwelling or similar
structure having billed water service connections for each dwelling unit. (Ord.
2004-41, 12-8-2004)
   B.   Service Charge Established: Effective January 1, 2008, the following
rates or service charges are hereby established as reasonable charges to yield
revenues for the village for the cost of collecting and disposing of solid
waste and provide an adequate fund for the collection and disposal of garbage,
refuse, and other solid wastes:
For the calendar year 2008, all units: Fifteen dollars fifty cents ($15.50) per
month. (Ord. 2007-45, 12-12-2007; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Payment Of Charge; Delinquencies: The provisions of sections
8-1-12,
8-1-13 and
8-1-14 of this title shall apply to payment of the charge and delinquencies.
(2013 Code)
   D.   Exemption From Charge: A residential unit owner may apply for an
exemption from the refuse service charge by providing to the village clerk
satisfactory evidence (e.g., invoice, rental agreement, etc.), as determined by
the village clerk, of use and access to a commercial dumpster. During the
period of access and use of the commercial dumpster, the applicant shall be
exempted from the refuse service charge. If the village determines that the use
and/or access to the commercial dumpster is terminated, then the residential
unit shall be billed the charge per the applicable rate in effect at that time
for refuse service. (Ord. 2004-41, 12-8-2004)
8-4-9: YARD WASTE AND RECYCLABLES:
Yard waste and recyclable items shall be disposed of pursuant to the refuse
collection contract in effect during the period of collection. (Ord. 2004-41,
12-8-2004)
8-4-10: PROHIBITED DEPOSITS OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE:
It shall be unlawful to deposit garbage or refuse, excepting dirt, sand, and
gravel, anywhere within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2004-41, 12-
8-2004)
8-4-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
one dollar ($1.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense. (Ord. 2004-41, 12-8-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
TITLE 9
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Zoning Enforcement Officer
9-1-2: Bond Requirements
9-1-3: Building Operations Regulated
9-1-4: Enforcement Of Provisions
9-1-5: Penalties
9-1-1: ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
   A.   Appointment: There is hereby created the position of zoning enforcement
officer, who shall be appointed by the president, with the consent of the board
of trustees. (1966 Code § 58; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   Inspection And Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the zoning
enforcement officer to see to the enforcement of all ordinance provisions
relating to building, plumbing or zoning and to inspect all buildings or
structures being erected or altered, as frequently as may be necessary, to
ensure compliance with village ordinances. (1966 Code § 59; amd. 2013 Code)
      2.   Entry Powers: The zoning enforcement officer shall have the power to
make, or cause to be made, an entry into any building or premises where the
work of altering, repairing, or constructing any building or structure is going
on, for the purpose of making inspections, at any reasonable hour. (1966 Code §
61; amd. 2013 Code)
9-1-2: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to commence work on any excavation or on any
construction work in the village involving driving or hauling machinery, trucks
or equipment over any parkway or sidewalk area or involving excavating or
leveling of any parkway or sidewalk area unless the person doing such work
shall first have filed with the village a bond with corporate surety,
conditioned to indemnify the village for any damage done to any village
property, including any curb, pavement, cable, pipe, shutoff box or other
equipment, in the course of such work.
   B.   Where the work contemplated includes the making of any excavation for
any structure or foundation, the bond shall also be conditioned that the
building or structure contemplated shall be completed within one year from the
date of commencement of work or the excavation refilled and the surface
restored to its original condition. Such bond shall be in the principal amount
of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), payable to the village in the event of
any breach of the condition of such bond. (1966 Code § 458)
9-1-3: BUILDING OPERATIONS REGULATED:
   A.   Use Of Streets And Sidewalks:
      1.   Use Limited: The use of streets for the storage of materials in the
process of construction or alteration of a building or structure may be granted
where the same will not unduly interfere with traffic or restrict visibility at
intersections and will not reduce the usable width of the roadway to less than
eighteen feet (18').
      2.   Permission Necessary: No portion of the street, other than that
directly abutting on the premises on which work is being done, shall be used
except with the consent of the owner or occupant of the premises abutting such
portion.
      3.   Permit And Bond Required: Any person seeking to make such use of the
street shall file an application for a permit therefor with the clerk, together
with a bond, with sureties to be approved by the clerk, to indemnify the
village for any loss or damage which may be incurred by such occupation.
      4.   Sidewalk Obstruction: No sidewalk shall be obstructed in the course
of building, construction or alteration without a special permit from the
clerk, and whenever removal of a sidewalk is required in such work, a special
permit from the clerk shall be obtained.
   B.   Safeguards: It shall be the duty of the person doing any construction,
altering or wrecking work in the village to do the same with proper care for
the safety of persons and property. Warnings, barricades and lights shall be
maintained wherever necessary for the protection of pedestrians or traffic, and
temporary roofs over sidewalks shall be constructed whenever there is danger to
pedestrians from falling articles or materials.
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 2002-26, 12-11-2002; amd. 2013 Code)
9-1-4: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Enforcement Officials: It shall be the duty of the zoning enforcement
officer and any lawfully appointed deputies to enforce the provisions of this
title.
   B.   Inspections And Tests: The zoning enforcement officer is hereby
empowered to make such inspections as may be necessary to see to the
enforcement of this title and to make any tests or examinations of materials or
methods to be used, for the purpose of seeing if they comply with the
provisions of this title.
   C.   Stop Work Order: The zoning enforcement officer may order work stopped
whenever any construction, alteration or repair work is being done in violation
of any provisions of this title; such stop order, when oral, shall be followed
by a written stop order within twenty four (24) hours. It shall be unlawful to
continue work in violation of a stop order until such order has been revoked by
the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 2002-26, 12-11-2002; amd. 2013 Code)
9-1-5: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any provisions of this chapter
shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. The
village shall have all options and rights available to it under law to pursue
collection of any penalty set forth herein including, but not limited to, civil
and criminal actions. Should the village prevail in any such action, the
expenses incurred by the village in that regard, including attorney fees, shall
be added to the amount of the penalty. (Ord. 88-16, 9-7-1988; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 2
DESIGN REVIEW
SECTION:
9-2-1: Design Review Committee (DRC)
9-2-2: Application Of Provisions
9-2-3: Procedure
9-2-4: Design Guidelines
9-2-5: Relationship To Zoning And Subdivision Regulations
9-2-6: Fees And Penalties
9-2-1: DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE (DRC):
The village planning commission shall serve as the design review committee,
hereinafter referred to as "DRC". The DRC shall receive assistance and input
from the zoning enforcement officer, village engineer and/or other
professionals as needed. The purpose of the design review committee is to
encourage high quality design of all structures for the betterment of aesthetic
values and the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of and the
visitors to the village within the prescribed area of the design guidelines.
(Ord. 2004-28, 9-22-2004)
9-2-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   For all properties located within the design guidelines boundary, each
application for a building permit, except those for solely single-family
residential purposes, interior remodeling or structures accessory thereto,
shall receive a design review pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   The boundaries for improvements subject to this chapter are set forth
in the downtown design guidelines which are attached to the ordinance codified
herein and made a part hereof.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to exempt any improvement
from any zoning ordinance or other village ordinance requirements or
procedures. (Ord. 2004-28, 9-22-2004)
9-2-3: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Preapplication: Applicants are encouraged to contact the village zoning
enforcement officer at the earliest stage of project planning to obtain
application forms, submittal item checklists and to share sketches and ideas
and receive input.
   B.   Application: Upon receipt of a building permit application, the zoning
enforcement officer, hereafter "ZOE", shall review the application for presence
of all information needed to complete the review. If the application is not
complete, the ZOE shall send the applicant a memorandum stating the
application's deficiencies. The applicant must resubmit the application, with
the deficiencies corrected, before the application will be submitted for review
by the DRC.
   C.   DRC Action Generally:
      1.   The DRC shall review the applications. The DRC shall make a report
on each application and, if necessary, discuss it with the applicant within
thirty (30) working days.
      2.   If an applicant agrees with the DRC report and, if applicable,
modifies the plan and other aspects of the building(s) accordingly, then the
ZOE shall issue the building permit. If an applicant objects to the report,
then the application, along with the DRC report and any other related
materials, shall be submitted to the village board of trustees for appeal
within twenty (20) days of the DRC report pursuant to the village zoning
ordinances.
   D.   Appearance Before DRC: Upon receipt of a complete application, the ZOE
shall place review of that application on the agenda of the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the DRC.
   E.   Review And Decisions:
      1.   The DRC shall review each application for conformance with the
downtown design guidelines as attached to the ordinance codified herein and
made a part hereof.
      2.   If the DRC approves a plan, a building permit shall then be issued;
provided, that all other requirements of all other applicable village codes and
ordinances are satisfied.
      3.   If the DRC does not approve a plan, the applicant shall be notified
by certified mail, return receipt requested. The applicant may appeal the DRC's
decision to the village board of trustees.
   F.   Appeal To Village Board:
      1.   A notice of appeal must be filed with the village clerk no later
than twenty (20) days after the date of receipt as shown on the return receipt.
A failure by an applicant to file an appeal in accordance with the foregoing
provision shall be deemed to constitute a withdrawal by the applicant of the
application for a permit.
      2.   Upon receipt by the village clerk of the applicant's notice of
appeal, the village clerk shall set a public hearing date for said appeal. The
date the village clerk shall set for a public hearing of the appeal shall be
within thirty (30) working days after receipt of the notice of appeal by the
village clerk. The DRC shall take no further action on the matter pending the
village board's decision.
      3.   The village board shall act as promptly as practicable on any appeal
taken in connection with the proposed plan. The village board shall permit all
interested persons to offer oral or written testimony. After the close of the
public hearing, the village board, by a majority vote, may accept, reject or
modify the findings and recommendations of the DRC. The decision of the village
board shall be final and binding on all parties. (Ord. 2004-28, 9-22-2004)
9-2-4: DESIGN GUIDELINES:
All building permit applications shall be reviewed for conformance with the
following:
   A.   The village downtown design guidelines attached to the ordinance
codified herein.
   B.   All existing village ordinances, including, but not limited to, the
zoning ordinance, sign ordinance, subdivision ordinance, and comprehensive plan
of the village. (Ord. 2004-28, 9-22-2004)
9-2-5: RELATIONSHIP TO ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS:
The procedures prescribed in this chapter are not intended to be a substitute
for, or to have any bearing upon, any procedures required under the zoning
ordinance or the subdivision regulations. DRC may review the plan in advance of
the ruling on the special use permits or variations. However, such findings
shall not constitute a position by the village or by any employee of the
village in support of the petitioner's application for a special use permit or
variation. The report of the DRC in such cases shall be submitted to the
village board concurrently with any report on special use permits, variances,
etc. (Ord. 2004-28, 9-22-2004)
9-2-6: FEES AND PENALTIES:
The fee for design review shall be included in the fee paid for the associated
building permit. An additional fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be
assessed against and paid by any person who commences work or construction
prior to the issuance of the required permit for such work or construction. The
commencement of any such work or development prior to the issuance of the
applicable permit(s) shall also subject the violator to all applicable fines
provided by this chapter or any other applicable ordinance of the village.
(Ord. 2004-28, 9-22-2004)
CHAPTER 3
ADDRESS NUMBERS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Findings
9-3-2: Number Requirements
9-3-3: Penalty
9-3-1: FINDINGS:
The village has determined that the safety of residents, employees, and
occupants of structures located within the village will benefit by the display
of an address number that is visible from the street. Further, the village has
determined that such will provide a convenience to individuals and is necessary
and will benefit the community. (Ord. 2010-02, 2-10-2010)
9-3-2: NUMBER REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings located within the village, whether of a residential, commercial,
industrial, civic, or other use, shall have a permanently displayed address
number in place on or before June 1, 2010. The address shall be displayed on
the front side of the structure. The front side is that side of the structure
in which the main entrance faces the street. The address number shall be
prominently displayed so that it has an unobstructed view from the street. It
does not need to be attached to the structure, provided it is visible and
permanent. The numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (4") in height. (Ord.
2010-02, 2-10-2010)
9-3-3: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.
2010-02, 2-10-2010; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 4
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Permit Requirements
9-4-2: Procedures For Moving Buildings
9-4-3: Penalty
9-4-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall move any building on, through or over
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the village without having
obtained a permit therefor from the village board.
   B.   Applications: Applications for such permits shall be made in writing to
the clerk and shall state thereon the proposed route and the number of days it
is intended that the building shall occupy any portion of any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place. (1966 Code § 473)
   C.   Approval Of Route; Fees: Upon approval of the intended route by the
village board, a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each day or fraction thereof
that it is intended that the building shall occupy any such portion of any
public place shall be paid to the clerk and the permit issued. Additional
payments of ten dollars ($10.00) for each day or fraction thereof over and
above the time stated on the permit during which any building shall occupy any
public place shall be paid. (1966 Code § 474)
   D.   Bond Requirements: Every person applying for a permit under this
chapter shall submit with his application a cash bond with a lawful corporate
surety to be approved by the village board, conditioned on his compliance with
all the provisions of this chapter, and agreeing to pay and holding the village
harmless from any claim which may be made against the village by reason of the
occupation of any street, alley, sidewalk or other place by the building or
structure moved. (1966 Code § 475)
9-4-2: PROCEDURES FOR MOVING BUILDINGS:
   A.   Lights And Warning Devices:
      1.   Wherever a street or alley is blocked by a house or structure which
is being moved, warnings to that effect shall be placed by the police
department so as to warn vehicles and persons from entering that portion of the
street so blocked.
      2.   The persons moving any building through the streets shall keep
warning signs and lanterns or lights on the building so as to guard against any
person or vehicle from colliding therewith. (1966 Code § 476)
   B.   Utility Wires Or Cables: Whenever it shall be necessary to interfere
with wires or cables of a public utility in moving a building, the terms of any
special franchise ordinance governing shall apply, and the bond therein
specified shall be given. If no such terms apply, then the village president
shall estimate the expense of fixing the wires and the bond to be given to
cover such expense. (1966 Code § 477)
   C.   Fire Alarm Wires: When any moving building shall approach any fire
alarm wire or pole which shall be endangered by the moving of such building or
structure, it shall be the duty of the mover to notify the fire chief at least
six (6) hours before reaching such wire or pole so that they may be removed or
cared for by the village authorities. (1966 Code § 478)
9-4-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1966 Code § 479; amd.
2013 Code)
CHAPTER 5
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Definition
9-5-2: Nuisance Declared
9-5-3: Dangerous Buildings Prohibited
9-5-4: Abatement Procedure
9-5-5: Damaged Frame Structures Within Fire Limits
9-5-6: Penalty
9-5-1: DEFINITION:
The term "dangerous building", as used in this chapter, is hereby defined to
mean and include:
   A.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which is dangerous
to the public health because of its condition, and which may cause or aid in
the spread of disease or injury to the health of the occupants of said building
or neighboring structures.
   B.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of
faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is
especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard.
   C.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, by reason
of faulty construction or any other cause, is liable to cause injury or damage
by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any part of such structure.
   D.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of
its condition or because of lack of doors or windows, is available to and
frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who are not lawful occupants of
such structure. (1966 Code § 463)
9-5-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any dangerous building in the village is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(1966 Code § 463)
9-5-3: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
building in the village, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or
person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in a
dangerous condition or to occupy such building or permit it to be occupied
while it is or remains in a dangerous condition. (1966 Code § 464)
9-5-4: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Notice To Abate: Whenever the zoning enforcement officer, the fire
chief or the county health department shall be of the opinion that any building
or structure in the village is a dangerous building, he shall file a written
statement to this effect with the village clerk. The clerk shall thereupon
cause written notice to be served upon the owner thereof and upon the occupant
thereof, if any, by registered mail or by personal service. Such notice shall
state that the building has been declared to be in a dangerous condition, and
that such dangerous condition must be removed or remedied by repairing or
altering the building or by demolishing same, and that the condition must be
remedied at once. Such notice may be in the following terms:
To                      (owner-occupant of premises) of the premises known and
described as                          .
You are hereby notified that (described building) on the premises
abovementioned, has been condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous building after
inspection by                          .
The causes for this decision are (here insert the facts as to the dangerous
condition).
You must remedy this condition or demolish the building immediately, or the
Village will proceed to do so.
   B.   Failure To Abate; Abatement By Village: If the person receiving the
notice has not complied therewith or taken an appeal from the determination of
the officer or employee finding that a dangerous building exists within fifteen
(15) days from the time when this notice is served upon such person by personal
service or registered mail, the zoning enforcement officer may, upon orders of
the president and board of trustees, proceed to remedy the condition or
demolish the dangerous building. (1966 Code § 465; amd. 2013 Code)
9-5-5: DAMAGED FRAME STRUCTURES WITHIN FIRE LIMITS:
   A.   Violation Determined: Any frame building or structure within the fire
limits of the village, as prescribed by ordinance, which has or may be damaged
by fire, decay or other causes, to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its
value, shall be torn down and removed or rebuilt with nonflammable walls. (1966
Code § 466)
   B.   Notice Filed: Upon written notice by the zoning enforcement officer,
the county health department or the fire chief, to the effect that such
building has been so damaged, filed with the clerk, the clerk shall notify the
village board of the receipt of such notice. (1966 Code § 466; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Board To Determine Damages: The village board shall then appoint three
(3) persons to determine whether or not such building or structure has been
damaged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value.
   D.   Notice Served: A copy of the notice of the appointment of this board of
three (3) persons to determine the damage shall be served upon the owner of the
premises by personal service or by registered mail at his last known address.
Such notice shall be in substantially the following form:
To                               :
You are hereby notified that                                has determined that
the building owned by you at                , located within the fire limits of
the Village, has been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise to the extent of
fifty percent (50%) of its value and that a board of three persons has been
appointed to verify this finding, which board will hold its first meeting in
room            in the Village Hall on the            day of                 at
the hour of            o'clock, at which time it will determine whether or not
this finding is correct.
If this finding is verified by the board, you must tear down and remove the
said building or rebuild it with nonflammable walls.
(1966 Code § 466)
   E.   Abatement: If this finding is verified by the board of three (3)
members, and the board of three (3) members determines that the building in
question has been damaged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value, it
shall be the duty of the owner to tear down and remove the said building within
fifteen (15) days after the finding of such board or to remodel said building
to comply with the requirements for new buildings in the fire limits, and it
shall be unlawful to occupy or permit the occupancy of such building after such
finding until it is so remodeled. (1966 Code § 466; amd. 2013 Code)
9-5-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or permitting any dangerous
building, or any building or structure to remain in a dangerous condition, or
to remain in the fire limits, without remodeling as provided for in this
chapter, after said building has been damaged to the extent of fifty percent
(50%) of its value, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1966
Code § 467; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC EVENTS STRUCTURES
SECTION:
9-6-1: Compliance With Provisions
9-6-2: Structural Requirements
9-6-3: Notice Of Event; Inspections
9-6-4: Penalty
9-6-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
It shall be unlawful to hold, manage or conduct any meetings or entertainment
of any kind in the village in any premises other than a building constructed in
full compliance with the ordinances and laws pertaining thereto for auditorium,
theater or lodge room purposes, excepting in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. (1966 Code § 555)
9-6-2: STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Exits: Adequate unobstructed exits shall be provided in all premises
used for such purposes to permit rapid egress of all persons attending, and
there shall be at least two (2) separate exits located at least thirty feet
(30') from each other. There shall be two (2) linear feet of doorway or exit
space for each one hundred (100) people accommodated. (1966 Code § 557)
   B.   Seats:
      1.   Any stands or rows of seats used in such premises shall be so
constructed as to be safe for the use designated and shall be sufficiently
strong to carry the same weight and stress as is required for the construction
of the auditorium floors of theater buildings, not less than one pound per
square foot.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to admit to any such premises a number of
persons to exceed the number of actual seats maintained for their
accommodation. (1966 Code § 558)
   C.   Doors: All doors or gates on exits from premises used for such purposes
shall be opened outward, and no such exit shall be so constructed or locked
that egress from inside the premises is blocked. (1966 Code § 559)
   D.   Roofs: No structure enclosed by a roof shall be used for such purposes
unless the same is constructed of nonflammable materials; provided, that tents
or structures covered by canvas or similar materials may be used if such canvas
or other material has been properly treated so as to be rendered fire
resistant. (1966 Code § 556)
9-6-3: NOTICE OF EVENT; INSPECTIONS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of any person conducting, calling for or managing
any gathering in any premises other than a theater, lodge room or auditorium
building, constructed as provided in section
9-6-2 of this chapter, to notify the village clerk of the date of such intended
use at least ten (10) days before such meeting is to take place. Upon such
notice, the zoning enforcement officer shall inspect the premises to determine
whether or not they comply with the provisions hereof. Any permit issued for
any such gathering shall be subject to the condition that this chapter be fully
complied with, whether or not such condition is embodied in the permit. (1966
Code § 560; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   No such gathering or entertainment shall be held or presented in any
premises other than a building as described in section
9-6-1 of this chapter, unless such premises have been examined by the zoning
enforcement officer not more than three (3) days before the date of such
gathering and found to be free from any fire hazard and found to be suitable
for the purpose. (1966 Code § 556; amd. 2013 Code)
9-6-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1966
Code § 561; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 7
MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Definitions
9-7-2: Licensing Requirements
9-7-3: Operation And Maintenance
9-7-4: Registry Mandated
9-7-5: Notice Of Violation; Revocation Of License
9-7-6: Enforcement
9-7-7: Penalty
9-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in 210 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 115/1 et seq.; except, that "mobile home" is defined as in
section
10-2-2 of this code. (Ord. 77-03, 8-2-1977; amd. 2013 Code)
9-7-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or
operate within the limits of the village any mobile home park unless such
person shall first obtain a license therefor from the village.
   B.   Application: An application for a license shall:
      1.   Be made at the office of the village clerk;
      2.   State the name and address of the owner or manager of the park,
location, and maximum number of mobile homes to be accommodated; and
      3.   Be accompanied by plans of the park showing all buildings, toilets,
baths, washbasin facilities, sinks, water faucets, sewer connections, driveways
and other improvements. (Ord. 77-03, 8-2-1977)
   C.   Inspection And Investigation: Such license shall not be issued or
renewed until the proposed premises shall have been inspected by the county
health department and the chief of police, and until the character of the
applicant has been investigated and found proper. (Ord. 77-03, 8-2-1977; amd.
2013 Code)
   D.   Fees: The annual license fee for each mobile home park capable of
accommodating not to exceed twenty (20) mobile homes shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00). The fee for the transfer of the license shall be ten dollars
($10.00).
   E.   Issuance Of License: Licenses shall be issued by the village after
approval by the board.
   F.   Expiration Of License: Licenses expire on December 31 of each year.
   G.   License To Be Posted; Transfer: The license certificate shall be
conspicuously posted on the premises at all times and may be transferred to a
new applicant only upon approval of the village president. (Ord. 77-03, 8-2-
1977)
9-7-3: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
Mobile home parks shall be operated and maintained in accordance with 210
Illinois Compiled Statutes 115/1 et seq., which is hereby adopted by reference.
(Ord. 77-03, 8-2-1977; amd. 2013 Code)
9-7-4: REGISTRY MANDATED:
The licensee shall keep and be responsible for a register in which shall be
kept an accurate record of all mobile home occupants and shall specify the date
of arrival, name of the owner and the state in which the mobile home was
registered, and the license number. (Ord. 77-03, 8-2-1977)
9-7-5: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
If at any time a mobile home park is found to be violating the provisions of
this chapter, the owner or operator thereof shall be notified, and if the
violation is not corrected within five (5) days after notice, the license of
the mobile home park shall be revoked by the village president. (Ord. 77-03, 8-
2-1977)
9-7-6: ENFORCEMENT:
In the event of any violation of this chapter, the proper authorities of the
village may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the
occupancy of any mobile home which is situated or located so as to be in
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 78-06, 6-6-1978)
9-7-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 78-06, 6-6-1978; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 8
VACANT AND ABANDONED STRUCTURES
SECTION:
9-8-1: Findings
9-8-2: Definitions
9-8-3: Registration
9-8-4: Registration Information
9-8-5: Registration And Administrative Fee
9-8-6: Recovery Of Fees
9-8-7: Securing Structures
9-8-8: Right Of Entry And Inspection
9-8-9: Reuse And Re-Occupancy
9-8-10: Responsibility For Violations
9-8-11: Penalty
9-8-12: Enforcement Officer
9-8-1: FINDINGS:
The Village Board of Trustees determines that the presence of vacant and
abandoned structures creates blight. It is recognized that blight lowers
property values, leads to deteriorating conditions, undermines the quality of
life, affects the public health, safety and general welfare and also results in
human injury and criminal activities. It is also determined that vacant and
unoccupied structures demand an inordinate amount of Village administrative and
ordinance enforcement resources. As such, the Village Board of Trustees finds
the prolonged presence of vacant and abandoned structures to be unacceptable to
the citizens of the Village of North Utica. (Ord. 2017-30, 11-8-2017)
9-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ABANDONED COMMERCIAL OR OFFICE STRUCTURE: Means and includes:
   A.   Any single tenant building located in a C-1, C-2, or C-3 Zoned District
which has been unoccupied by a tenant for a period of ninety (90) consecutive
days or which satisfies one of the supplementary conditions defined in
subsections A through K of the definition of supplementary conditions; or
   B.   Any multi-tenant building located in a C-1, C-2, or C-3 Zoned District
which is more than fifty percent (50%) unoccupied (based on building square
footage) for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days or which satisfies one of
the supplementary conditions defined in subsections A through K of the
definition of supplementary conditions.
ABANDONED INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE: Means and includes:
   A.   Any single tenant building located in an I-1 or I-2 Zoned District
which has been unoccupied by a tenant for a period of ninety (90) consecutive
days or which satisfies one of the supplementary conditions defined in
subsections A through K of the definition of supplementary conditions; or
   B.   Any multi-tenants building located in an I-1 or I-2 Zoned District
which is more than fifty percent (50%) unoccupied (based on building square
footage) for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days or which satisfies one of
the supplementary conditions defined in subsections A through K of the
definition of supplementary conditions.
ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE: Means any building which has been used or was
intended for use as a residential dwelling, in whole or in part, including an
accessory building, which has become vacant or abandoned for a period of at
least forty five (45) consecutive days and which also meets at least one of the
following conditions:
   A.   Is open to casual entry or trespass;
   B.   Is damaged by fire, flood, weather, or vandalism to an extent which
prohibits safe human occupancy;
   C.   Is the site of loitering or vagrancy;
   D.   Demonstrates a lack of property maintenance and upkeep as evidenced by
one or more violations of this Code or State Construction Code;
   E.   Is under notice for being in violation of Village ordinances;
   F.   Has been secured or boarded up for at least thirty (30) days;
   G.   Has outstanding bills/fees/taxes in arrears to the Village for a period
of time exceeding three hundred sixty five (365) days;
   H.   Has utilities disconnected or not in use;
   I.   Is under a condemnation notice or legal order to vacate;
   J.   Is structurally unsound; or
   K.   Is a potential hazard or danger to persons.
ABANDONED STRUCTURE: Means and includes an abandoned residential, commercial,
office, or industrial structure as defined herein.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: Means a subordinate structure on the same premises as the
main structure, the use of which would be naturally and normally incidental to
that of the main structure, whether the main structure is an abandoned
structure or not, such as, but not limited to, a garage, barn or storage shed.
OWNER: Means any person with a legal or equitable ownership interest in the
structure.
SECURED: Means a building which has all points of entry into the structure
either:
   A.   Closed by use of windows and doors which are in proper working order,
intact, without holes, broken elements, and are locked; or
   B.   Secured by exterior grade plywood in compliance with this chapter.
SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS: Shall mean and include the following:
   A.   Is open to casual entry or trespass;
   B.   Is damaged by fire, flood, weather, or vandalism;
   C.   Is the site of loitering or vagrancy;
   D.   Demonstrates a lack of property maintenance and upkeep as evidenced by
one or more violations of the Property Maintenance Code, Fire Prevention Code,
Heating Code, Building Code, or State Construction Code;
   E.   Is under notice for being in violation of a Village ordinance;
   F.   Has been secured or boarded up for at least ninety (90) days;
   G.   Has taxes in arrears to the Village for more than three hundred sixty
five (365) days;
   H.   Has utilities disconnected or not in use;
   I.   Is under a condemnation notice or legal order to vacate;
   J.   Is structurally unsound; or
   K.   Is a potential hazard or danger to persons. (Ord. 2017-30, 11-8-2017;
amd. Ord. 2018-31, 10-11-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
9-8-3: REGISTRATION:
Owners of abandoned structures shall register such properties with the Village
and pay a monthly administration fee as set forth in section
9-8-5 of this chapter. The duty to register an abandoned structure shall not
require prior notice to the owner by the Village. Registration of an abandoned
structure does not preclude the Village from taking appropriate actions to
secure the property or to issue orders to repair or abate dangerous, hazardous
or unlawful conditions or from acting to eliminate an imminent hazard to public
health and safety. (Ord. 2017-30, 11-8-2017)
9-8-4: REGISTRATION INFORMATION:
   A.   For each abandoned structure each owner shall register with the Village
and provide the following information on an Abandoned Structure Registration
Form available from the Village:
      1.   The address of the abandoned structure;
      2.   The legal names of all owners of the property and each owner's date
of birth, if applicable;
      3.   The complete mailing address of all owners;
      4.   Telephone numbers of each owner, including cell phone and mobile
phone numbers;
      5.   Proof of identification of each owner;
      6.   The name, address and telephone number of any local agent or
representative authorized by the owner to handle the affairs of the property;
      7.   The reason for vacancy of the property;
      8.   The estimated length of time the property is expected to remain
vacant; and
      9.   Any plans for restoration, reuse or removal with an accompanying
timeline and work schedule.
   B.   An owner shall notify the Village and file an amended form within seven
(7) days of any change in the registration information required by this
section. (Ord. 2017-30, 11-8-2017)
9-8-5: REGISTRATION AND ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
   A.   An owner of an abandoned structure, whether registered or not, shall
pay an abandoned structure registration fee and a monthly administrative fee
for the time during which such structure remains an abandoned structure. The
abandoned structure registration fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) and
the monthly administrative fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord.
2019-01, 1-9-2019, eff. 2-1-2019)
      1.   Exception To Registration Fee: Upon approval of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, the registration fee may be waived during the period that
an abandoned structure is actively undergoing repairs/renovations for up to
ninety (90) days at a time, with a maximum waiver period of the fee being for
four (4) consecutive ninety (90) day periods. During a waiver period, the
property is still required to be registered as provided in this chapter. (Ord.
2018-08, 3-8-2018)
   B.   Fees under this section shall be established to support the services
rendered by the Village in the course of its duties related to abandoned
structures. Failure to register an abandoned structure or pay the monthly
administrative fee shall be cause for penalties to be assessed and are criminal
violations of this chapter.
   C.   The monthly administrative fee shall be paid so that it is received by
the Village on or before the seventh (7th) day of each month, following each
month during which the structure was an abandoned structure for fifteen (15)
days or more.
   D.   A late fee, in an amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the
registration fee rounded up to the next whole dollar amount shall also be
payable by an owner of an abandoned structure when the monthly administrative
fee is not paid by the due date. (Ord. 2017-30, 11-8-2017)
   E.   If the registration is incomplete, the Village may reject such in its
entirety and, unless the registration is corrected by the owner within ten (10)
days of rejection by the Village, such shall be subject to fines under section
9-8-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-31, 10-11-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
9-8-6: RECOVERY OF FEES:
If all or part of the fees required by this chapter are not paid or are
overdue, the Village may recover such sums by filing suit against the owner for
entry of civil money judgment or any other means available by law. The Village
shall be entitled to all attorney fees and costs incurred in obtaining a
warrant or to obtain a judgment against an owner for any overdue or unpaid fee
associated with any abandoned structure. (Ord. 2017-30, 11-8-2017)
9-8-7: SECURING STRUCTURES:
   A.   Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning/Building Enforcement Officer,
a Village order to secure an abandoned structure shall be complied with by the
owner within seventy two (72) hours. If the securing has not been completed or
does not comply with the requirements for securing the structure under this
chapter, the Village may secure the structure and bill the owner of record for
all costs incurred, including service fee and administrative costs. The amount
so billed shall constitute a personal debt of the owner and may be recovered in
the same manner as permitted for the recovery of fees under this chapter.
   B.   All points of entry on an abandoned structure that are suitable for
animal or human entry shall be secured as follows:
      1.   Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning/Building Enforcement
Officer, on all first story and ground accessible points of entry, such shall
be secured by use of exterior grade plywood or its equivalent, of at least one-
half inch (1/2") thickness, cut to the size of the opening and secured by the
use of Phillips- headed two inch (2") long screws; and
      2.   Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning/Building Enforcement
Officer, on entry points being secured above the first story or where not
accessible from ground level, such shall be secured by use of exterior grade
plywood or its equivalent of at least one- half inch (1/2") thickness, cut to
the size of the opening and secured by the use of 16 penny common nails. (Ord.
2017-30, 11-8-2017)
9-8-8: RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION:
If the owner has failed to secure a property the Village may, after obtaining
lawful authority, enter to secure the structure or reenter the structure to
conduct necessary inspections to ensure compliance with the requirements of
this chapter and to determine if there are any emergency or hazardous
conditions. (Ord. 2017-30, 11-8-2017)
9-8-9: REUSE AND RE-OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Re-Occupancy Of Abandoned Residential Structure: No abandoned
residential structure shall be reoccupied until it has been inspected and found
to be in full compliance with all applicable Village and State codes and is
approved by the Zoning/Building Enforcement Officer; all fees are paid in full;
and all other conditions set forth in this subsection are satisfied. (Ord.
2017-30, 11-8-2017)
9-8-10: RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS:
All nuisance, housing, building and related code violations will be cited and
noticed to the owner of record and shall become the owner's responsibility. The
owner of any abandoned structure shall be obligated to provide written notice
to any prospective purchaser of an abandoned structure of any violations, fees,
or obligations imposed by the Village regarding that abandoned structure.
Failure by an owner to comply with this section shall constitute a violation of
this chapter. If the owner sells or otherwise disposes of the property to
another party, the new owner shall not be entitled to any extension of time to
correct or address such violations as existed at the time of sale, transfer or
conveyance of the property. (Ord. 2017-30, 11-8-2017)
9-8-11: PENALTY:
   A.   A person who violates or fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense in accordance with section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   B.   Each day that an owner of an abandoned or vacant structure fails to
comply with the requirements of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense.
   C.   In addition to any other penalty provided for in this section, this
chapter may be enforced by suit for injunction, action for damages, or any
equitable relief appropriate to the enforcement of this chapter. Additionally,
the Village is authorized to file a lien against the property for any unpaid
sums owed to the Village including the cost of preparing and filing the lien.
(Ord. 2017-30, 11-8-2017)
9-8-12: ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
   A.   The Village Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to
enforce this chapter.
   B.   The Code Enforcement Officer shall have within his/her discretion, the
authority to waive any fee or penalty imposed hereunder or grant an extension
of time (up to 60 days) if he/she believes extenuating circumstances exist so
that strict enforcement of this chapter would be unduly burdensome. (Ord. 2018-
31, 10-11-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
10-1-1: Intent And Purpose
10-1-2: Application And Interpretation
10-1-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
In accordance with state law 1 , this title regulates structures and land uses
in the village and one and one-half (11/2) mile extraterritorial jurisdiction,
to the extent as allowed by law, as depicted on the "Village Of North Utica
Zoning Map" and the "Village Of North Utica 11/2 Mile Extraterritorial Zoning
Jurisdictional Map" in order to preserve, protect, and promote the public
health, safety, and welfare. More specifically, this title is intended to
assist in achieving the following purposes:
   A.   To classify, regulate, and limit the height, area, bulk, and use of
buildings.
   B.   To regulate and determine the area of front, side, and rear yards, and
other open spaces around buildings.
   C.   To regulate and determine the use and intensity of use of land and lot
areas.
   D.   To classify, regulate, and restrict the location of trades, callings,
industries, commercial enterprises and the location of buildings designed for
specified uses.
   E.   To protect and preserve the character, value, and stability of the
residential, business, industrial, agricultural, and public areas within the
village and such adjacent unincorporated areas as may be permitted by state
statutes, and to promote the orderly and beneficial development of such area.
   F.   To divide the entire village into districts of such number, shape, and
area, and of such different classes as are deemed best suited to carry out
these purposes.
   G.   To fix standards to which buildings or structures therein shall
conform.
   H.   To prohibit uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the
character of such districts.
   I.   To prevent additions to and alteration or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations herein lawfully imposed.
   J.   To provide for a planning commission and board of appeals and prescribe
their powers and duties.
   K.   To provide for the enforcement and amendment of this title.
   L.   To provide penalties for the violation of this title.
   M.   To provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land,
buildings, and structures that are adversely affecting the character, the
intended use, or the value of desirable development as specified for each
district.
   N.   To control floodplain uses such as fill, dumping, storage of materials,
structures, buildings, and any other works that, acting alone or in combination
with other existing or future uses, will cause damaging flood heights and
velocities by obstructing flows and reducing valley storage.
   O.   To attain the objectives established by the comprehensive plan for the
future development of North Utica.
   P.   To establish reasonable and uniform regulations for the location,
installation, operation and maintenance of solar and geothermal energy systems;
assure that any development and production of solar and geothermal energy
system is safe and minimizes any potentially adverse effects on the community;
promote the supply of sustainable and renewable energy resources, in support of
national, state and local goals; and facilitate energy costs savings and
economic opportunities for residents and businesses situated within the
village. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-8-2007;
Ord. 2019-34, 12-5-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1 et seq.
10-1-2: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Compliance With Provisions:
      1.   No building or land shall be erected, moved, or altered unless for a
use expressly permitted by and in conformity with the regulations for the
district in which it is located.
      2.   All buildings or structures erected hereafter, all uses of
buildings, structures or land established hereafter, and all structural
alteration or relocation of existing buildings or structures occurring
hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this title, or any amendment
hereto, that are applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings,
structures or parcels of land shall be located. However, where a building
permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law prior
to the effective date hereof, or any amendment hereto, and provided that
construction was begun before the effective date hereof, or any amendment
hereto, and completion is accomplished within one year of the effective date
hereof, or any amendment hereto, said building or structure may be completed in
accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit
has been issued, and further, may, upon completion, be occupied for the use for
which originally designated, subject thereafter to the provisions of this
title.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In interpreting and applying the provisions of
this title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
of the safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare.
   C.   Conflicting, More Restrictive Provisions:
      1.   It is not intended by this title to interfere with, abrogate, amend,
or repeal any ordinance, rules, or regulations previously adopted and not in
conflict with any of the provisions of this title or which shall be adopted
pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises, nor is it
intended by this title to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements,
covenants, or other agreements between parties; except, that where this title
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the
height of buildings or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required
by such other ordinances or such easements, covenants, or other agreements, the
provisions of this title shall control.
      2.   In the case of any conflict between this title, or part thereof, and
the whole or part of any existing or future private covenants or deeds, the
most restrictive shall apply.
   D.   Validity: Should any section, clause, or provision of this title be
declared by the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of
this title as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared
invalid. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Rules Of Word Construction
10-2-2: Definitions
10-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
Words used in the present tense include the future. All words in the singular
include the plural, and all words in the plural include the singular. The word
"shall" is mandatory and not directory. The word "used" shall be deemed to
include "designed, intended, or arranged to be used". (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004,
eff. 9-22-2004)
10-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A separate building customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal building and located on the same lot with such principal
building.
ACCESSORY USE: A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use and
located on the same zoning lot as the principal use.
ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any use which contains a substantial or significant
portion occupied by the sale, rental, lease, inspection, or viewing of media
(whether print, electronic, magnetic or other) depicting or describing sexual
activities, sale of materials used for sexual activities, the provision of live
entertainment which depicts, describes, or characterizes sexual activities, or
any combination thereof. An adult oriented business further includes any
premises to which the public patrons or members are invited or admitted and
which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms,
compartments, or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the
purpose of viewing adult oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer
provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron, or a member,
when such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a
profit, direct or indirect. The term "substantial or significant portion" shall
mean at least thirty percent (30%) of the floor space of the establishment.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT: An adult-use cannabis cultivation center,
craft grower, processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing
organization or transporting organization.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A.
101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027), as it may
be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrated into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time,
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR: A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER: An organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-
0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming,
dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and
animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing and
treating of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal
agricultural activities. Agriculture shall not include the commercial feeding
of garbage or offal to swine or other animals, the commercial feeding of
animals on open lots where no feed is raised on the premises, or the commercial
feeding of furbearing animals, poultry broilers, or laboratory animals such as
mice, rabbits, rats, etc.
AIRPORT (LANDING STRIP, HELIPORT, OR AIRCRAFT STOP): Any premises that are used
or intended for use for the landing and take off of aircraft; and any rights of
way, approach zones, and appurtenant areas that are used or intended for use
for buildings incidental to aircraft services, together with all buildings and
structures thereon.
ALLEY: A public or private way dedicated to public travel generally
characterized by providing a secondary access to lots and being less than
twenty feet (20') in width of right of way.
ANIMAL EXPERIENCE ATTRACTION: A business that exhibits domesticated and/or
common farm animals, that does not include exotic animals, in a safe and
healthy environment, that may include petting or other limited customer
contact, provided that adequate safety and health requirements are in effect.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms, with toilet and culinary accommodations,
used or designed for use as a residence by a family, located in a building
containing two (2) or more such rooms or suites or located in a building
devoted primarily to nonresidential use.
APARTMENT BUILDING: A single building comprised of three (3) or more dwelling
units with shared entrance facilities, where none of the dwelling units are
rented or are available for rent or occupation for periods of less than thirty
(30) days.
AUTOMOBILE DEALERSHIP: Any business establishment that sells or leases new or
used automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats, or
motorcycles or other similar motorized transportation vehicles. An automobile
dealership may maintain an inventory of the vehicles for sale or lease either
on site or at a nearby location and may provide on site facilities for the
repair and service of the vehicles sold or leased by the dealership.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any building or premises used for the dispensing,
sale, or offering for sale at retail to the public, automobile fuels stored
only in underground tanks and located wholly within the lot lines; lubricating
oil or grease for the operation of automobiles; and the sale and installation
of tires, batteries, other minor accessories, and minor auto repair, but not
including major auto repairs, automobile wrecking, automobile sales, or
automobile laundries; provided, however, that the washing of individual
automobiles where no chain conveyor is employed may be included. When the
dispensing, sale, or offering for sale of motor fuels or oil is incidental to
the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public
garage. Automobile service station shall not include the sale or storage of
inoperable vehicles as defined herein, except trucks used in the operation of
the service station, and shall not include a bulk plant.
BASEMENT: The portion of a building having up to one-half (½) its floor to
ceiling ground floor height below grade.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: A home occupation within a single-family
dwelling, wherein not more than three (3) rooms are rented and meals are served
to transient travelers for commercial purposes.
   A.   A residence providing overnight guestroom accommodations for a charge
to the public operations.
   B.   Bed and Breakfast Establishments may not be hotels, motels, vacation
rental units or food service establishments; provide, however, that breakfast
may be provided to the guests only.
   C.   No restaurant facility shall take place in such an establishment for
the general public.
BOARD: The village of North Utica board of appeals as authorized by this title.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building or premises where meals are regularly served by
prearrangement for definite periods of compensation for three (3) or more
persons, not a family, but not exceeding twelve (12) persons, not open to
transient guests, in contrast to hotels or restaurants which are open to
transients.
BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum yard and
open space requirements of this title have been complied with.
BUILDING: Any structure built for use of persons or animals or for storage of
inanimate objects.
BUILDING AREA: The horizontal area measured within the outside of the exterior
walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings on the lot.
BULK STORAGE: Bulk storage of flammable liquids in containers of forty two (42)
gallons or more; not, however, to include underground storage incidental to a
garage or filling station or the storage of fuel incidental to other uses.
BUSINESS: Any lawful commercial endeavor to engage in the manufacturing,
purchase, sale, lease, or exchange of goods and/or the provision of services.
CAMPING TRAILER: A vehicle intended only for seasonal use but not for living
purposes within the village. A camping trailer shall not exceed seventeen feet
(17') in length.
CAR WASH: A building, or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing
more than two (2) automobiles, using a blower, steam cleaning device, or other
mechanical devices. This definition may also include a self-service car wash.
CBD BUSINESS: A business that is engaged in the sale and/or manufacturing of
products containing Cannabidiol ("CBD") and/or Tetrahydrocannabinol ("THC"), at
levels that are not regulated by the State of Illinois.
CELLAR: The portion of a building having more than one-half (1/2) its floor to
ceiling ground floor height below grade. A cellar shall not be counted as a
story for the purpose of height measurement.
COMMISSION: The village of North Utica, Illinois, planning commission.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use that is authorized in a particular zoning district only
if certain requirements are met and after review by the planning commission and
approval by the village board.
CONVENIENCE STORE: A retail store with a floor area of less than two thousand
five hundred (2,500) square feet that sells a limited line of groceries and may
also sell gasoline, but does not include automobile service stations or vehicle
repair shops.
CRAFT DISTILLERY: A distillery in which operations produce no more than thirty
five thousand (35,000) gallons of alcoholic spirits per calendar year.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having one open end and being permanently terminated by a
vehicle turnaround.
DAYCARE CENTER: Any child or adult care facility which regularly provides
daycare for less than twenty four (24) hours per day for more than eight (8)
children or adults in a family home, or more than three (3) children or adults
in a facility other than a family home, including senior citizen buildings.
DAYCARE HOME: Family homes which receive more than three (3), up to a maximum
of eight (8), children or adults, for less than twenty four (24) hours a day.
The number includes the natural or adopted children and all persons under the
age of twelve (12). Such daycare homes shall be licensed by the Illinois
department of children and family services under the Illinois child care act of
1969 1  and allowed as a home occupation.
DISTRICT: A portion of the incorporated area of the village within which
certain regulations and requirements apply under the provisions of this title.
DWELLING: A permanent building used primarily for human habitation but not
including facilities for the housing of transient residents nor to include
mobile homes; a building or structure, or portion thereof, designed for
occupancy by one family for residential purposes as a single housekeeping unit.
In no case shall a motor home, trailer coach, automobile chassis, tent, or
portable building be considered a dwelling.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A permanent building or portion thereof providing
separate living accommodations for three (3) or more families, consisting of at
least five hundred (500) square feet per dwelling unit, and containing one
dwelling unit for each family.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A permanent building, separate, and freestanding, in
itself providing living accommodations for one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A permanent building designed exclusively for occupancy
by two (2) families, consisting of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet
per dwelling unit, and containing two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: Room or rooms occupied having a kitchen, sleeping, and plumbing
facilities, including a bathroom.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption occupying a
dwelling unit as an individual housekeeping organization.
FARM: Land used for the tillage of soil and the growing of vegetables, fruits,
grains, and other staple crops including livestock raising, dairying, or
woodlots. The term includes such principal buildings or structures as a barn or
silo, as well as accessory buildings and structures that are incidental to the
operation of the farm.
FARM DWELLING: The principal dwelling unit on a parcel of land used for
agriculture. This dwelling shall be occupied by the owner or his tenant who is
actively engaged in agriculture as the primary source of income.
FLOOD: See section
10-12-2 of this title.
FLOOD FRINGE: See section
10-12-2 of this title.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): See section
10-12-2 of this title.
FLOODPROOFING: See section
10-12-2 of this title.
FLOODWAY: See section
10-12-2 of this title.
FLOOR AREA (For The Purpose Of Determining The Floor Area Ratio): Finished
square feet of floor space within the outside line of walls and includes the
total of all space on all floors of a building at or above grade. The term does
not include porches, garages, or space in a basement or cellar when such
basement or cellar space is used for storage or incidental uses.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The "floor area ratio" of the building or buildings on
any zoning lot is the floor area of the building or buildings on that zoning
lot divided by the area of such zoning lot, or planned developments, by the net
site area. The "floor area ratio" requirements, as set forth under each zoning
district, shall determine the maximum floor area allowable for the building or
buildings (total floor area of both principal and accessory buildings) in
direct ratio to the gross area of the zoning lot.
FRONTAGE: All the property fronting on one side of a street between the two (2)
nearest intersecting streets, measured along the line of the street, or if dead
ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting
street and the dead end of the street.
FUNERAL HOME: A building or part thereof used for human funeral services. Such
building may contain space and facilities for:
   A.   Embalming and the performance of other services used in the preparation
of the dead for burial;
   B.   The performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures;
   C.   The storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral
supplies; and
   D.   The storage of funeral vehicles.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building, or portion of the main
building, designed, arranged, used, or intended to be used for the storage of
passenger automobiles of the occupants of the premises.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building, other than a private garage, used for the care,
incidental servicing, and sale of automobile supplies, or where motor vehicles
are parked or stored for remuneration, hire, or sale within the structure.
GRADE: Average level of the finished surface of the ground for buildings more
than five feet (5') from a street line. For buildings closer than five feet
(5') to a street, the grade is the sidewalk elevation at the center of the
building. If there is more than one street, an average sidewalk elevation is to
be used.
HEIGHT: Vertical distance from the grade to:
   A.   The highest point of a flat roof;
   B.   The deck line of a mansard roof; or
   C.   The average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel
roofs.
HISTORIC SITE: A parcel of land that marks or is associated with some event or
person of historical importance.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any use conducted by the occupant of the dwelling and as a
secondary use that is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling for
residential purposes.
HOTEL: A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided and
offered to the public for compensation and in which access to and from all
rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in
charge at all hours. As such, it is open to the public in contrast to an
“apartment”, which is separately defined in this section.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE: A measure of the percentage of lot coverage for principal
and accessory structures irrespective of the height or floor area. For the
purposes of this definition, impervious coverage only includes the structures
on the lot and does not include other impervious amenities such as roads,
driveways, sidewalks, or parking lots.
JUNKYARD: Any parcel of land where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags, or similar
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or
handled, including auto and building wrecking yards, but excluding similar uses
taking place entirely within a completely enclosed building. Junkyard shall be
synonymous with "salvage yard". Any business and any place of storage or
deposit, whether in connection with another business or not, that has stored or
deposited two (2) or more unregistered motor vehicles that are no longer
intended or in condition for legal use on the public highways, or used parts of
motor vehicles, or old iron, metal, glass, paper, cordage, or other waste or
discarded or secondhand material that has been a part, or intended to be a
part, of any motor vehicle, the sum of which parts or material shall be equal
in bulk to two (2) or more motor vehicles.
LOT: A piece, parcel, or plot of land occupied or to be occupied by one
principal building and its accessory buildings and required open spaces.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9c99a2f117ca9590a78cc6dde756366f6159102/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1634.gif]
LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets
having an interior angle of at least one hundred thirty five degrees (135°)
with a boundary line thereof bordering on two (2) of the streets.
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or
buildings and accessory buildings.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE OR THROUGH: A lot having frontage on two (2)
nonintersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: For an interior lot, the property line of a zoning lot
parallel to the street line of the lot; if a corner lot, it shall be the
shortest property line parallel to a street line.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A side lot line common with another lot.
LOT LINE, REAR: The "rear lot line" is the lot line or lot lines most nearly
parallel to and most remote from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Lot lines other than front or rear lot lines.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been
recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of LaSalle County, pursuant to
statute.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having its front and rear lot lines on adjacent and
substantially parallel streets, otherwise known as a "double frontage lot".
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right
angles to the lot depth at the established front building line.
MOBILE HOME OR TRAILER: A vehicle equipped for use as a dwelling and/or a
commercial place of business and designed to be hauled along a highway. The
terms mobile home and trailer shall be synonymous.
MOTEL:
   A.   An inn or group of cabins or rooms designed for occupancy by paying
guests.
   B.   A building or group of buildings in which lodging is provided to
transient guests, offered to the public for compensation, and in which access
to and from each room or unit is through an exterior door.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any passenger vehicle, truck, tractor, tractor- trailer, truck-
trailer, trailer, or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: A use of building lawful at the effective date hereof
that does not conform with the permitted use provisions of this title.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use that lawfully occupied a building or land at the
effective date hereof and that does not conform to the use regulations of the
district in which it is located.
NURSERY SCHOOL OR PRESCHOOL: An institution providing daycare service and
schooling for children from four (4) to six (6) years of age.
NURSING HOME: A home licensed by the state of Illinois for the aged or
chronically or incurably ill persons in which five (5) or more such persons,
not of the immediate family, are provided with food and shelter or care for
compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions
devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured.
OFF-ROAD RECREATIONAL RIDING PARK: Any property or part thereof used for
driving, riding or racing of vehicles consisting of go-carts, motorcycles All
Terrain Vehicles (ATVs), Utility Terrain Vehicles (UTVs), snowmobiles,
bicycles, or any such similar vehicles, no matter how such vehicles are
powered, which requires the participants in the driving, riding or racing to
pay remuneration or admission for participation in said activities or a club or
group that owns or maintains property or a part thereof for off-road riding
park activities.
OFFICE BUILDING: A building designed for or used as the office of professional,
commercial, industrial, religious, institutional, public, or semipublic persons
or organizations, provided no goods, wares, or merchandise shall be prepared or
sold on the premises; except, that a portion of the office building may be
occupied and used for secondary services for office workers such as a
restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper, or candy stand.
PARKING SPACE: An area on a lot sufficient in size (not less than 10 feet wide
and 20 feet long) to store one automobile and connected to a public street or
alley by a driveway not less than ten feet (10') wide. Such parking spaces
shall be arranged so as to permit ingress and egress of the automobile at all
times without moving any other automobile parked adjacent to the parking space.
The parking space and parking areas shall be surfaced with a permanent,
dustfree paving except in the R-1 and R-2 districts.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: Zoning regulations that permit uses based on a particular
set of standards of operation rather than on particular type of use.
Performance standards provide specific criteria limiting noise, air pollution,
emissions, odors, vibration, dust, dirt, glare, heat, fire hazards, wastes,
traffic impacts, and visual impact of a use.
PERMITTED USE: A use that may be lawfully established in a particular district
or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and
performance standards (if any) of such district.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land that is developed as a unit under
single ownership or control, which includes two (2) or more principal
buildings, and that is at least two (2) acres in area. In residential
districts, said "planned unit development" includes a group housing project
(whether separately located or separated only, but completely, by firewalls)
where the existing or contemplated street or streets or lot layouts make it
impractical to apply the bulk regulations of this title to the individual units
in such housing project.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: A nonaccessory building in which a principal use on the
zoning lot on which it is located is conducted.
RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for
track operation, but not including depots, loading platforms, stations, train
sheds, warehouses, car shops, car yards, locomotive shops, or water towers.
REMODELING OR REPAIR: Any change in a building that is not a structural
alteration or enlargement, or new construction.
SCHOOL: A public or private institution that offers instructions in any of the
branches of learning and study comparable to that taught in the public schools
under the Illinois school code, including prekindergarten, kindergarten,
elementary school, and junior and senior high schools, but excluding trade,
business, or commercial schools.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a building and any lot line as
may be required by this title.
SHORT-TERM VACATION RENTAL UNIT:  A dwelling unit or an allocated space or
portion thereof offered for rent for a period shorter than thirty (30)
consecutive days to any person other than a member of the owner’s family, as
those terms are defined herein below. The term “short-term vacation rental
unit” shall not include hotels or motels, and/or bed and breakfast
establishments, licensed pursuant to other sections of the village code. The
terms “vacation rental units” and/or “short-term vacation rental” shall have
the same meaning herein.
   A.   Family:
      1.   Type (A) Family: One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage,
or adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
      2.   Type (B) Family: Two (2) unrelated persons and their children living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
      3.   Type (C) Family: A group of not more than three (3) unrelated
persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
      4.   Type (D) Family: A group of two (2) or more persons containing
within it one (1) or more families, as defined in 1. and 2. of this definition,
including a husband and wife married to one another and their children, as well
as adults, living together in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit and
management, in premises in which the adult occupants are affiliated with a bona
fide not for profit corporation organized for religious or charitable purposes
chartered by the State of Illinois.
   “Family” shall not be construed to mean a club, a lodge or a fraternity/
sorority house.
SIGN: An outdoor advertising that is a structure or that is attached to or
painted on a building or that is leaned against a structure or displayed on a
premises.
SLUICE BOX/GEM CLEANING STATION: An artificial channel, long box or trough
through which water flows, for washing rocks and/or gemstones for amusement
operation.
SPECIAL USE: A use of land or buildings specifically authorized by this title
but not permitted unless certain stated conditions have been met.
STORY: Part of a building from one floor to the next floor above or to a
ceiling above if there is no floor above. Half story is space under a sloping
roof, all of which space must be at least three feet (3') high, but not more
than sixty percent (60%) of that floor area may be finished for use.
STORY, HALF:
   A.   Space under a sloping roof, all of which space must be at least three
feet (3') high, but not more than sixty percent (60%) of that floor area may be
finished off for use.
   B.   The portion of a building:
      1.   Under a sloping roof, the wall plates of which, on at least two (2)
opposite exterior walls, are not more than four and one-half feet (41/2') above
the floor of such story; or
      2.   A "basement" but not a "cellar" as both terms are defined in this
section.
STREET: Any public or private way twenty feet (20') or more in width dedicated
to public travel. The word "street" shall be synonymous with the words "road",
"highway", and "thoroughfare".
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such
as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders or any complete
rebuilding of the roof or exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent
location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on
the ground, including, but without limiting the generality to, advertising
signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts, curbs, fences, pavements,
sidewalks, and pergolas.
TATTOO AND PIERCING PARLOR: A use where the act or process of indelible marking
or coloring the skin of any person by the insertion of pigment under or on the
skin is conducted; and/or where body piercing can be obtained, excluding
therefrom a beauty salon or cosmetology business involving ear piercing.
TEMPORARY USE: The use of land or building established for a fixed period of
time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time
period.
TRUSTEES: Trustees of the village of North Utica, Illinois.
USE: The purpose or activity for which a building, structure, or land is
occupied or maintained.
VILLAGE: Village of North Utica, Illinois.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a principal building, open,
unoccupied, and obstructed by buildings, except as otherwise provided in this
title.
YARD, FRONT: The yard extending across the entire width of the lot between the
principal building and the right of way line or street line of the street that
the building faces.
YARD, REAR: The yard extending across the entire width of the lot between the
rear lot line and the nearest part of the principal building.
YARD, SIDE: The yard extending along the side lot line from the front yard to
the rear yard and lying between the side lot line and the nearest part of the
principal building.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Official of the village charged with the primary
responsibility for administering this title.
ZONING MAP: The map or maps incorporated into this title as a part hereof,
designating zoning districts.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-8-2007; Ord.
2010-09, 4-14-2010; 2013 Code; Ord. 2016-17, 8-17-2016; Ord. 2019-31, 11-12-
2019; Ord. 2021-24, 7-8-2021; Ord. 2021-32, 9-30-2021; Ord. 2021-33, 9-30-2021;
Ord. 2022-08, 3-10-2022; Ord. 2022-12, 2-24-2022; Ord. 2022-38, 12-15-2022;
Ord. 2024-36, 10-17-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 10/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-3-1: Zoning Enforcement Officer
10-3-2: Building, Demolition And Occupancy Permits
10-3-2-1: Building Permits
10-3-2-2: Demolition Permits
10-3-2-3: Occupancy Permits
10-3-3: Variances
10-3-4: Amendments
10-3-5: Appeals
10-3-6: Remedies And Penalties
10-3-1: ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
This title shall be administered and enforced by the zoning enforcement officer
who shall be appointed by the mayor with the village board's concurrence.
Duties of the zoning enforcement officer include:
   A.   Issue building permits, as specified in section
10-3-2-1 of this chapter.
   B.   Accept home occupation permits, as specified in section
10-4-6 of this title.
   C.   Notify any residents responsible for violating any provisions of this
title, indicating the nature of the violation, and order the necessary
corrective action.
   D.   Conduct inspections of buildings and land uses to determine compliance
with the provisions of this title.
   E.   Provide and maintain a public information service to all matters
arising out of this title.
   F.   Review all cases of encroachment into the required setbacks.
   G.   Assist the village engineer with maintaining and updating the official
zoning map. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
   H.   Provide staff support to the planning commission regarding all
amendments to the regulations, special uses, applications for appeals,
variances, or other matters in which the commission is required to consider.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. Ord. 2005-13, 3-9-2005; 2013
Code)
10-3-2: BUILDING, DEMOLITION AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
10-3-2-1: BUILDING PERMITS:
   A.   Permit And Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful to commence the
excavation for or construction of any principal building or accessory buildings
or to commence the moving or alteration of any buildings, including accessory
buildings, in the village where the cost of such construction exceeds one
hundred dollars ($100.00), until the zoning enforcement officer has issued a
building permit for such work. The permit shall verify that the construction
complies with the regulations of this title and the building and health laws of
the village.
   B.   Application For Permit; Required Information: In applying to the zoning
enforcement officer for a building permit, the applicant shall submit one copy
of a dimensioned sketch or site plan, drawn to scale, indicating the shape,
size, height, and location of all buildings to be erected, altered, or moved
and of any building already on the lot. The drawing shall also include all off
street parking and loading facilities and access aisles, any and all drainage
patterns and landscaping, and such other information as may be necessary to
provide for the enforcement of this title. The applicant shall also state the
existing and intended use of all such buildings and supply such other
information as may be required by the zoning enforcement officer for
determining whether the provisions of this title are being observed. Such plans
shall be verified by the signature either of the owner of the premises or by
the architect or contractor in charge of operations. A recorded warranty deed
or other legal documents showing ownership of the property shall be presented.
For the property to be built upon, a copy of an approved county septic and/or
well permit shall be obtained.
   C.   Permit Fees: To partially defray the expenses of administering this
title, a fee shall be collected by the village clerk. The amount of the fee
shall be established from time to time by the village board.
   D.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit; Records Kept: If the proposed excavation
or construction as set forth in the application is in conformity with the
provisions of this title and other ordinances of the village, the zoning
enforcement officer shall issue a building permit for such excavation or
construction. If a building permit is refused, the zoning enforcement officer
shall state such refusal in writing, with the cause, and shall immediately
forward such notice of refusal to the applicant. The zoning enforcement officer
shall grant or deny the permit within ten (10) days from the date the
application is submitted. The issuance of a building permit shall in no case be
construed as waiving any provisions of this title. A careful record of the
applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the village clerk.
   E.   Expiration Of Permit: A building permit shall become void one year
after issuance unless substantial progress has been made by that date on the
project described therein. If construction has not finished within two (2)
years after issuance, the building permit shall become void. Extensions may be
offered by the village board if substantial progress has been made or if there
are extenuating circumstances. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-3-2-2: DEMOLITION PERMITS:
   A.   Notice To Utilities; Issuance: Before a building can be demolished or
removed, the owner or agent shall notify all utilities having service
connections within the building, such as water, electric, gas, sewer and other
connections. A permit to demolish or remove a building shall not be issued
until a release is obtained from the utilities stating that their respective
service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators,
have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner. The applicant is
responsible for all costs of removal, sealing, and/or plugging of utilities.
(Ord. 2010-09, 4-14-2010)
   B.   Permit Fee: The fee for a permit for the demolition of a building or
structure shall be as provided in subsection 2-3-1A13 of this code. (Ord. 2010-
09, 4-14-2010; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Term Of Permit: The demolition permit shall only be valid for a period
of two (2) months following the issuance thereof. Upon the expiration of two
(2) months, the demolition permit shall expire and be of no force and effect.
   D.   Applicability Of Provisions: This section shall only apply to
demolitions of buildings or structures where there are village and/or public
utilities present in the area where the demolition is being done or where the
building or structure to be demolished is greater than one hundred fifty (150)
square feet. (Ord. 2010-09, 4-14-2010)
10-3-2-3: OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
   A.   Issuance; Form: The zoning enforcement officer has the authority to
issue an occupancy permit, in the form set out in subsection B of this section,
for previously unoccupied single-family residential structures only.
   B.   Form: The permit shall be in the following form:
      OCCUPANCY PERMIT*
      Name(s) of Owner(s):
      RE: Residence located at:                     , North Utica, Illinois
      Building Permit #           LaSalle County
P.I.N.                         
      The residence referenced above is located within the Village of North
Utica, Illinois and was built pursuant to a Village of North Utica Building
Permit. The residence is served by municipal/private water supply and
municipal/private waste disposal system. Based upon a single visual inspection
on the date of                , 20   , appears to be in a condition suitable
for residential habitation.
                                         
      Village Zoning Enforcement Officer
*DISCLAIMER: The issuance of this Permit does not warrant nor guarantee the
construction of the residence nor its suitability for residential occupation by
the Village or any of its agents, employees, officers, and/or representatives.
By requesting issuance of this Permit, the requestor and owner waive any
actions against the Village, its agents, employees, officers, and/or
representatives and indemnify and hold the same harmless from all liability,
including reasonable attorney fees.
   C.   No Warranty: Issuance of the certificate set forth in subsection B of
this section does not warrant nor guarantee the construction of the residence,
and the village specifically excludes any such warranty or guarantee. (Ord.
2010-09, 4-14-2010)
10-3-3: VARIANCES:
   A.   Purpose: When a property owner or his agent shows that a strict
application of the terms of this title relating to the use, construction, or
alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land imposes upon him
practical difficulties or particular hardship in that a literal interpretation
of the provisions of this title would deprive the applicant of rights commonly
enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this title,
then the property owner or agent may apply for a variance. The burden of proof
lies on the applicant to clearly establish that a variance is necessary.
   B.   Application For Variance: An application for variance shall be made as
follows:
      1.   The applicant shall file an application for variance with the
village clerk accompanied by a filing fee to be established by the village
board.
      2.   The application shall set forth the facts and details concerning the
proposed variance and shall have attached thereto a diagram or plan showing the
result the proposed variance would have on the subject property and surrounding
properties. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
      3.   The application shall contain the following requirements:
         a.   A legal description of the property, common address, and parcel
identification number (PIN).
         b.   Any photos or conceptual drawings of the property and the
specific area of the property seeking the variance.
         c.   A statement indicating the need for the variance.
         d.   Eleven (11) copies of the preliminary development plan and site
plan at a scale of not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') showing
adjacent property owners, including rights of way; the zoning of adjacent
properties; existing improvements and structures; and streets, railroads,
waterways, and other necessary physical features. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004,
eff. 9-22-2004; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-8-2007)
      4.   The application shall be filed prior to the date the notice of
hearing specified has been published in the local newspaper.
   C.   Hearing:
      1.   Date And Notice: The village planning commission, through its
chairperson, shall set a regular date, time, and place for a public hearing on
the application and shall inform the applicant of the same. The chairperson has
the option of changing the time and/or date if there is a conflict with other
meetings held concurrently at the village hall. Notice of the public hearing of
petitioner's application is to be given in the following manner: (Ord. 2004-26,
9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
         a.   By publishing the notice of the date, time, and place of such
hearing in a paper of general circulation in the village at least fifteen (15),
but not more than thirty (30), days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-
2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
         b.   By causing the notice to contain the particular location for
which the variance is requested as well as a brief statement describing the
proposed variance. The legal description shall, in addition to the required
metes and bounds or lot and block description, contain a simple description of
the property as to area and location of such a nature to enable the ordinary
reader to accurately locate such property. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-
2004)
         c.   The petitioner shall post a sign on the property that is subject
to the variance at least ten (10), but not more than thirty (30), days prior to
the hearing. The village will supply a sign upon payment by the petitioner of a
fifty dollar ($50.00) deposit. The sign shall be displayed in a prominent
location on the property until the conclusion of the hearing. The Village
reserves the right to specify the location on the property of the placement.
The deposit shall be returned to the petitioner upon return of the sign, in the
same condition as when issued. (Ord. 2007-24, 8-8-2007)
      2.   Public Hearing:
         a.   No variance in any case shall be made by the Village Board
without a public hearing by the Planning Commission as required herein, nor
without a report having been made by the commission to the Village Board, and
every report shall be accompanied by findings of fact specifying the reasons
for the reported recommendations. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004;
amd. 2013 Code)
         b.   The Planning Commission shall review the application, the
recommendation of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and the testimony at the
public hearing and shall grant the variance, grant the variance requested
subject to specified conditions, or deny the variance.
   D.   Planning Commission Findings Of Fact: Before any variance is granted,
the Planning Commission must make findings of fact that all of the following
conditions are shown to be present:
      1.   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in
that zone.
      2.   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances.
      3.   A variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of
the locality.
      4.   The variance would not grant more relief than necessary to alleviate
the alleged hardship.
      5.   The variance would not allow the owner or occupant to enjoy some
special privilege or additional right not available to owners or occupants of
other lots subject to the same provision, nor merely the inability of the owner
to make more money from the use of the subject lot.
      6.   The variance would not increase the danger of fire or floods,
endanger the public safety, or increase the need for repairs to roads,
utilities, and other public facilities.
      7.   The variance would not result in a use or development of the subject
lot that would not be in harmony with the general and specific purposes of this
title or the general purpose and intent of the North Utica comprehensive plan.
   E.   Village Board Decision:
      1.   Upon the report of the Planning Commission and the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, the Village Board, without further public hearing, may
adopt or deny any proposed variance or may refer the report back to the
commission for further consideration.
      2.   No variance shall become effective unless it is first submitted to
and approved by the Planning Commission, or if disapproved, shall receive a
two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of the Village Board. If the commission neither
approves nor disapproves the variance within sixty (60) days after the same has
been submitted, it shall be considered to be approved by the commission.
However, the commission may extend this time for the purposes of continuing the
public hearing.
   F.   Conditions Of Variance: In granting a variance, the Board may attach
thereto any conditions and safeguards it deems necessary or desirable in
furthering the purposes of this title. Violation of any of these conditions or
safeguards shall be deemed a violation of this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004,
eff. 9-22-2004)
   G.   Administrative Variations: Notwithstanding the aforesaid procedures for
a variance, the Village Board, upon the favorable vote of not less than two-
thirds (2/3) of the Corporate Authorities then holding office, may grant a
variation without the necessity of a public hearing upon the following
conditions:
      1.   A petition for administrative variation shall be filed with the
Zoning Enforcement Officer and Village Clerk with all filing fees paid to the
Village Clerk;
      2.   The administrative variation shall not seek any variance in excess
of twenty five percent (25%) of any numeric standards required by this title;
      3.   The petition for administrative variation shall be accompanied by
affidavits from all contiguous property owners giving the common address and
legal description of their respective properties and stating they have no
objections to the requested administrative variation;
      4.   The administrative variation shall apply only to properties located
within R-1 Single-Family Residential Districts, R-2 Two-Family Residential
Districts, and R-3 Multi-Family Residential Districts zoning classifications;
      5.   The administrative variation shall be recommended to the Village
Board by the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Village. (Ord. 2019-08, 4-10-
2019)
10-3-4: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority: The President and Village Board may amend, supplement,
change, modify, or repeal the regulations, restrictions, and boundaries as
provided in the text and map portions of this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004,
eff. 9-22-2004)
   B.   Types Of Amendments:
      1.   Text Amendments: Amendments to the text of this title shall be
referred to as "text amendments". The Planning Commission, Village Board,
Zoning Enforcement Officer, Village Legal Counsel, or any developer with
property located within the boundaries of the Village may initiate such
amendments. An application for amendment is required for any text amendment.
      2.   Map Amendments: Amendments to the location of land use district
boundaries of the official zoning map shall be referred to as "map amendments".
The planning commission, village board, zoning enforcement officer, village
legal counsel, or any developer with property located within the boundaries of
the village may initiate such amendments. An application for amendment is
required for any map amendment. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd.
2013 Code)
   C.   Application For Amendment:
      1.   A text or map amendment may be requested following the submission of
the appropriate application form to the zoning enforcement officer. The text
amendment application must state the specific location in this title proposed
for amendment, the proposed substitute wording, and the reasons for requesting
the amendment. The following may also be required, depending on the nature of
the amendment:
         a.   A legal description of the property, the common address, and
parcel identification number (PIN) of the property.
         b.   The name and address of the property owner(s) of the parcel that
are the subject of the proposed amendment request.
         c.   The present zoning classification and proposed reclassification
of the land proposed. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. Ord. 2007-
24, 8-8-2007)
      2.   The application shall be filed prior to the date the notice of
hearing specified has been published in the local newspaper.
   D.   Filing Fee: In order to partially defray the expenses of an amendment,
such person petitioning for a zoning change shall deposit with the village
treasurer a fee as established by the village board. No part of such amount
shall be refunded for failure of the amendment to be enacted into law.
   E.   Public Hearing:
      1.   A public hearing shall be held by the planning commission before
adoption of any amendment, supplement or change. Once the commission has heard
the relevant facts regarding the case, the commission will give a
recommendation to either accept or deny any or all of the proposed amendment to
the village board.
      2.   Notice of the public hearing will be given in the following manner:
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
         a.   By publishing public notice of the time and place of such hearing
in a newspaper of general circulation within the community not more than thirty
(30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-
2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
         b.   By causing the notice to contain the particular location for
which the amendment is requested as well as a brief statement describing the
proposed amendment. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
         c.   The petitioner shall post a sign on the property that is subject
to the zoning amendment application at least ten (10), but not more than thirty
(30), days prior to the hearing. The village will supply a sign upon payment by
the petitioner of a fifty dollar ($50.00) deposit. The sign shall be displayed
in a prominent location on the property until the conclusion of the hearing.
The village reserves the right to specify the location on the property of the
placement. The deposit shall be returned to the petitioner upon return of the
sign, in the same condition as when issued. (Ord. 2007-24, 8-8-2007; amd. 2013
Code)
      3.   No amendment, in any case, shall be made by the village board
without a public hearing by the planning commission as required herein nor
without a report having been made by the commission to the village board, and
every report shall be accompanied by findings of fact specifying the reasons
for the reported recommendations. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004;
amd. 2013 Code)
      4.   The planning commission shall review the application, the
recommendation of the zoning enforcement officer, and the testimony at the
public hearing and shall recommend the approval of the amendment, recommend
approval of the amendment requested subject to specified conditions, or
recommend denial of the amendment.
   F.   Criteria For Planning Commission Decision: Where the planning
commission is making a decision regarding an amendment to the zoning text or
map, the following criteria shall be followed:
      1.   The proposed rezoning or text amendment conforms to the North Utica
comprehensive plan.
      2.   The proposed rezoning or text amendment will not have a significant
detrimental, long range effect on the development of surrounding land uses.
      3.   The proposed rezoning or text amendment will not have a detrimental
effect on surrounding property values.
      4.   The greater good of the general public will be served rather than
hardship imposed on the property owner(s) and will not amount to spot zoning.
      5.   The proposed rezoning or text amendment promotes the health, safety,
and welfare of the general public.
      6.   The proposed rezoning or text amendment constitutes an expansion of
an existing zoning district that, due to the lack of undeveloped land, can no
longer meet the demand for the intended land uses.
      7.   The proposed rezoning or text amendment is suitable for the property
and can be supported through sufficient public infrastructure and services.
   G.   Village Board Decision:
      1.   Upon the report of the planning commission and the zoning
enforcement officer, the village board, without further public hearing, may
adopt or deny any of the proposed amendment or may refer the report back to the
commission for further consideration.
      2.   No amendment shall become effective unless it is first submitted to
and approved by the planning commission, or if disapproved, shall receive a
two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of the entire village board. If the commission
neither approves nor disapproves the amendment within sixty (60) days after the
same has been submitted, it shall be considered to be approved by the
commission. However, the commission may extend this time for the purpose of
continuing the public hearing.
   H.   Written Protest: In case of a written protest against any proposed
amendment of the regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the
owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by
the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately joining or
across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the
frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, such protest
being filed with the village clerk, the amendment shall not be passed except by
a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the village board.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-3-5: APPEALS:
   A.   Authority:
      1.   An appeal to the board of appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning
enforcement officer based in whole or in part upon the provisions of this
title.
      2.   An appeal to the village board may be taken by any person aggrieved
by any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the planning
commission. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
   B.   Filing Appeal: Such appeal shall be filed with the village clerk and
the board of appeals or village board within forty five (45) days of the action
appealed. Upon appeal, the zoning enforcement officer shall immediately
transmit to the board of appeals or village board all papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed was taken.
   C.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the board of appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed
with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in
his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In this event, the
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the board of appeals or by a circuit court on application and on
notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
   D.   Hearing: The board of appeals or village board shall fix a reasonable
time for hearing of the appeal, a notice of which shall be published at least
once, not more than thirty (30) days, nor less than fifteen (15) days before
the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation within the village. (Ord.
2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
   E.   Vote: The concurring vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the
board of appeals or village board is necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, or decision of an administrative official, or to decide in favor
of the applicant.
   F.   Record Of Decision: Each decision of the board of appeals or village
board shall be in writing and shall include the conclusions regarding each
standard applicable to the proposed development.
   G.   Appeals To Court: An appeal of a decision of the village board shall be
made to a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to the provisions of the
administrative review act, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. The
appealing party shall bear the cost of preparing the record on appeal. Copies
of any orders or proceedings ordered by the appellant shall be furnished to the
appellant at his or her own cost. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-3-6: REMEDIES AND PENALTIES:
   A.   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this title, the proper authorities of
the village board, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate
action or proceedings to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or
land. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
   B.   Any person violating any provisions of this title shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004;
amd. 2013 Code)
ARTICLE A. PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
10-3A-1: Statute Authority; Duties
10-3A-2: Commission Established; Appointment And Terms
10-3A-3: Chairperson
10-3A-4: Vacancies And Removals
10-3A-5: Meetings
10-3A-6: Compensation
10-3A-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY; DUTIES:
The planning commission may be provided in accordance with state law, 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-4, and is intended to serve many purposes.
In every case, they shall make a recommendation to the village board regarding
the proposed development or change to this title. The commission shall hold the
following duties: (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
   A.   To prepare and recommend to the village board a comprehensive plan for
the present or future or redevelopment of the village and the one and one-half
(11/2) miles extraterritorial jurisdiction.
   B.   To recommend periodic changes to the official comprehensive plan.
   C.   To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official charged with the
enforcement of this title.
   D.   To conduct public hearings and submit reports and recommendations to
the village board on proposed text or map amendments to the regulations imposed
by this title.
   E.   To conduct public hearings and submit reports and recommendations to
the village board on petitions for variances.
   F.   To conduct public hearings and submit reports and recommendations to
the village board on petitions for special use permits.
   G.   To submit reports and recommend approval or disapproval of preliminary
plats for subdivisions and, if directed by the village board, to report on
final plats for subdivisions.
   H.   To conduct public hearings and recommend approval or disapproval of
preliminary development plans for planned developments and to report on final
development plans.
   I.   When required by this title or the village board, to conduct public
hearings and recommend approval or disapproval of site plans.
   J.   To conduct public hearings and recommend approval or disapproval of
petitions for annexation agreements and to recommend approval or disapproval of
petitions for annexations.
   K.   To recommend approval or disapproval of requests for street, alley, or
plat vacations. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-3A-2: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
There is hereby established a planning commission. The commission shall consist
of nine (9) members nominated by the mayor of the village and appointed by the
village board. The members of the commission shall serve for the following
initial term: four (4) for one year and five (5) for two (2) years. The
successor of each member so appointed shall serve for a term of two (2) years.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-3A-3: CHAIRPERSON:
One of the members of the commission shall be designated by the mayor, with the
consent of the village board, as chairperson and shall hold office as
chairperson until a successor is appointed. Such chairperson, or in his
absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-3A-4: VACANCIES AND REMOVALS:
Vacancies shall be filled by the mayor, subject to consent of the village
board, for the unexpired term. Members may be removed by the village board for
cause and after a public hearing has been held if demanded by the member so
charged. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
10-3A-5: MEETINGS:
   A.   Time Of Meetings; Notice Requirements: All meetings of the commission
shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the
chairperson may determine. There shall be at least fifteen (15) days', but not
more than thirty (30) days', notice of the time and place of such meeting
published in a paper of general circulation in the village and shall contain a
statement of the particular purpose of such meeting and a brief description of
the location of the property or properties under consideration at such meeting.
   B.   Public Meetings: All meetings of the commission shall be open to the
public.
   C.   Record Of Meetings: The commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon every question or, if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its
examinations and other official actions. Findings of fact shall be included in
writing for the minutes of each case, and the commission's recommendations to
the village board to grant or deny each application shall be specified. Every
rule and regulation, and every order, requirement, decision, or determination
of the commission shall immediately be mailed to the applicant and the owner of
record (if different from the applicant) and filed in the office of the village
clerk and shall be a public record.
   D.   Quorum: No hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the planning
commission being present. A quorum shall consist of a majority of all the
members.
   E.   Rules Of Procedure: The commission shall adopt its own rules of
procedure, a copy of which and all recommendations thereto shall be filed in
the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-3A-6: COMPENSATION:
All members of the commission shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 2004-26,
9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
ARTICLE B. BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
10-3B-1: Board Created; Appointment And Terms
10-3B-2: Chairperson
10-3B-3: Vacancies And Removals
10-3B-4: Meetings
10-3B-5: Jurisdiction And Authority
10-3B-6: Expenditures
10-3B-1: BOARD CREATED; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
The village zoning board of appeals is hereby created in accordance with
Illinois statutes. The president shall appoint a zoning board of appeals
consisting of seven (7) members which shall be confirmed by a majority vote of
the members of the village board present and voting thereon. The members
appointed shall serve respectively for the following terms: one for one year,
one for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, one for four (4) years, one for
five (5) years, one for six (6) years, and one for seven (7) years; the
successor to each member appointed to serve for a term of five (5) years.
(Ord., 1998)
10-3B-2: CHAIRPERSON:
One of the members so appointed shall be named as chairperson at the time of
his appointment, and in case of vacancy, the president shall designate a
chairperson which shall be confirmed by a majority vote of the village board
present and voting thereon. (Ord., 1998)
10-3B-3: VACANCIES AND REMOVALS:
The president shall have the power to remove any member of the zoning board of
appeals for cause, after public hearing. Vacancies on the zoning board of
appeals shall be filled, for the unexpired term of the member whose place has
become vacant, in the manner herein provided for the appointment of such new
member. (Ord., 1998)
10-3B-4: MEETINGS:
   A.   General Requirements: All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall
be held at the call of the chairperson and at such times and places within the
village as the zoning board of appeals may determine. All testimony by
witnesses at any hearing provided for in this title shall be given under oath.
The chairperson, or in his absence, the acting chairperson, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
   B.   Public Meetings: All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be
open to the public.
   C.   Vote: The concurring vote of four (4) members of the zoning board of
appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the zoning enforcement officer or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter which the board is authorized by this title to render a
decision.
   D.   Record Of Meetings: The zoning board of appeals shall keep minutes of
its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of
its examinations and other official actions. Every rule and regulation, every
amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or
determination of the zoning board of appeals shall immediately be filed in the
office of the zoning board of appeals and shall be a public record. (Ord.,
1998)
10-3B-5: JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY:
The zoning board of appeals is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction
and authority:
   A.   To hear and decide an appeal from any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by the zoning enforcement officer or other authorized
official of the village with jurisdiction over such matters.
   B.   To hear all applications for variations from the terms provided in this
title in the manner and subject to the standards set forth in this section.
   C.   To hear and decide upon all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under this title, in accordance with applicable Illinois
statutes. (Ord., 1998)
10-3B-6: EXPENDITURES:
In the performance of its duties, the zoning board of appeals may incur such
expenditures as shall be authorized by the village board. (Ord., 1998)
ARTICLE C. SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION:
10-3C-1: Purpose
10-3C-2: Approval Requirements
10-3C-3: Application Requirements
10-3C-4: Criteria For Approval
10-3C-5: Zoning Enforcement Officer And Planning Commission Action
10-3C-6: Village Board Action
10-3C-7: Appeals
10-3C-1: PURPOSE:
The intent of establishing site plan review provisions is to promote orderly
development and redevelopment within the village. The use and development of
the land shall further the public's health, safety, and welfare, shall minimize
the negative impacts of such development, and shall be consistent with the
goals and policies of the comprehensive plan. This chapter shall outline the
objectives to preserve and enhance the character and appearance of the village.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. Ord. 2005-13, 3-9-2005)
10-3C-2: APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A site plan shall be submitted to the village clerk prior to building
permit approval. The planning commission and, if necessary, village board shall
grant approval of the site plan for the following purposes:
      1.   For approval for all new construction of any proposed uses in the R-
3, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, and I-2 districts. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-
2004)
      2.   For approval for any modifications and alterations to existing
buildings that increase the total floor area by at least twenty five percent
(25%) and are in the R-3, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 and I-2 districts. (Ord. 2004-26,
9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. Ord. 2005-13, 3-9-2005)
   B.   A site plan shall be submitted and approved prior to the construction
or alteration of a proposed use. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-3C-3: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The property owner or duly authorized agent or attorney shall file an
application for site plan approval with the village clerk in order to obtain a
building permit.
   B.   Eleven (11) copies of the site plan shall be submitted to the village
clerk at a scale of not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') showing
the following items:
      1.   A legal description of the property and name and address of the
property owner and developer (if applicable).
      2.   Adjacent property owners, including rights of way; the zoning of
adjacent properties; existing improvements and structures; and railroads,
waterways, and other necessary existing physical features.
      3.   Proposed buildings with footprint dimensions, building area in
square feet, and number of stories.
      4.   Location of existing and proposed streets, sidewalks, curb cuts,
easements, and rights of way.
      5.   Proposed location, height, size, and materials for any parking lots,
storage areas, landscaping, fencing, and signage.
      6.   Location, size and elevation of proposed or existing sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, water mains, hydrants, gas lines, underground power and
communication lines, catch basins, drywells, manholes, and any other
appurtenances.
      7.   Drainage design for roof areas, parking lots and driveways, and sump
pumps, showing area for or method of disposal of surface runoff waters.
   C.   Photos or conceptual sketches showing the design of the prospective
structure(s). (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-3C-4: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL:
   A.   The zoning enforcement officer and all appropriate village and county
officials shall review the site plan prior to the issuance of a building
permit. Approval of a building permit shall be based on conformity to the
regulations found within this title and conformance to overall site design
criteria. The zoning enforcement officer shall pay particular attention to the
following items:
      1.   Building density, height, and setbacks.
      2.   Lot area and lot coverage standards, including any designation of
open space.
      3.   Compatibility with neighborhood character.
      4.   Off street parking and loading regulations and design.
      5.   Accessibility of automobile and pedestrian traffic.
      6.   Impact on surrounding infrastructure.
      7.   Signage size and location.
      8.   Landscaping and screening regulations.
      9.   Other site design characteristics as deemed necessary.
   B.   No departure from the approved plan shall be permitted without the
express written consent of the zoning enforcement officer. The land area of a
site developed pursuant to an approved plan shall not thereafter be enlarged or
reduced in size, and no substantial change shall thereafter be made to any of
the structures or facilities approved on the original site plan without
submission of a new plan. The procedures for review and approval or disapproval
of a new or revised plan shall be the same as for the initial application.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
   C.   All areas within the boundaries of the CSX Railroad tracks on the
north, Division Street on the west, the I&M Canal on the south, and Vine Street
on the east are further subject to the downtown design guidelines. All
properties within this district are not required to meet all of the suggested
guidelines but must prove that the project will contribute positively to the
traditional character of the area. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004;
amd. 2013 Code)
10-3C-5: ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER AND PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION:
   A.   The village clerk shall provide the recommendation of the zoning
enforcement officer to the applicant and the planning commission after
completion of his review according to the regulations provided in this article.
The commission shall vote to either approve, approve with modifications, or
reject the site plan. Unless the site plan is part of a special use permit or
amendment, no further action is required by the village board. Site plans
seeking a special use permit or amendment shall follow the requirements for the
respective procedure. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   No public hearing is required for final site plan approval by the
planning commission unless the applicant is seeking a special use permit or
amendment. If the planning commission must hold a public hearing, it will give
a recommendation to either accept or deny the site plan proposal to the village
board after hearing the relevant facts regarding the case. Notice of the public
hearing will be given in the following manner:
      1.   By publishing notice of the time and place of such hearing in a
paper of general circulation in the village not less than fifteen (15) nor more
than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing. The planning commission
shall be given at least fifteen (15) days to review the special use or
amendment proposal.
      2.   By causing the notice to contain the particular location for which
the proposed development is requested as well as a brief statement describing
the site plan. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
      3.   The petitioner shall post a sign on the property that is subject to
the site plan approval at least ten (10), but not more than thirty (30), days
prior to the hearing. The village will supply a sign upon payment by the
petitioner of a fifty dollar ($50.00) deposit. The sign shall be displayed in a
prominent location on the property until the conclusion of the hearing. The
village reserves the right to specify the location on the property of the
placement. The deposit shall be returned to the petitioner upon return of the
sign, in the same condition as when issued. (Ord. 2007-24, 8-8-2007; amd. 2013
Code)
   C.   If no building permit is issued for the site within one year from the
date of approval by the planning commission, the site plan shall be considered
null and void. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-3C-6: VILLAGE BOARD ACTION:
If the planning commission is required to hold a public hearing regarding the
proposed development seeking a special use permit or amendment, the village
board shall vote to either approve or deny the proposed development based on
the regulations found within this title. (Ord. 2005-13, 3-9-2005)
10-3C-7: APPEALS:
If the planning commission denies the site plan, the applicant may file an
appeal with the village board within twenty (20) days of the action appealed.
All of the appeals shall be in accordance with the regulations of section
10-3-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-13, 3-9-2005)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Required Space Prohibitions
10-4-2: Obstructions To Vision At Intersections
10-4-3: Cellars For Residential Uses Prohibited
10-4-4: Calculating Separation Distances
10-4-5: Mobile Homes
10-4-6: Home Occupations
10-4-7: Adult-Use Cannabis
10-4-1: REQUIRED SPACE PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Infringement Of Required Open Areas: Yards, parking spaces, or lot area
required for one building cannot be used for another main building, nor can the
size of a lot be reduced below the requirements of this title.
   B.   Transfer Of Space: No space allocated to a building for the purpose of
complying with the yard, open space, or lot area requirements of this title
shall thereafter, by reason of change in ownership or for any other reason, be
used to satisfy the yard, open space, or lot area requirements of any other
building or group of buildings, unless, in so doing, all buildings or group of
buildings involved have sufficient yard, open space, or lot areas remaining to
satisfy this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
   C.   Reduction Of Space: No usable open space or off street parking or
loading space existing or provided hereafter for any building shall be reduced
below the minimum requirements hereinafter set for such usable open space,
parking space, or loading space, nor be further reduced if already less than
the minimum requirements. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013
Code)
10-4-2: OBSTRUCTIONS TO VISION AT INTERSECTIONS:
On any corner lot in all districts except the C-1 central business district,
there shall be no obstructions to traffic visibility within thirty feet (30')
of the intersection of the two (2) street property lines of the corner lot.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-4-3: CELLARS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES PROHIBITED:
No dwelling may be located entirely in a cellar in any district outlined by
this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-4-4: CALCULATING SEPARATION DISTANCES:
For those uses requiring separation from nearby districts or uses, distances
shall be calculated by following a straight line from the nearest point on each
property line. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-4-5: MOBILE HOMES:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: As to all zoning regulations henceforth
considered to be in force and effect, the terms "mobile home" and "trailer",
for the purpose of zoning, shall be considered synonymous, and all regulations
herein as to location and use shall apply to the trailers or mobile homes,
irrespective of whether such trailers or mobile homes are on a permanent
location or not. Placing a trailer or mobile home on a foundation shall not
change its character. If use or location of the same is forbidden as to a
trailer on wheels, it shall likewise be forbidden as to a mobile home or
trailer placed on a foundation.
   B.   Location In Parks Only: Mobile homes used as residences, commercial
uses, or storage shall only be located on lots in approved mobile home parks.
(Ord. 2007-24, 8-8-2007)
10-4-6: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Within a residential district, home occupations may be operated as follows:
   A.   Types Of Businesses:
      1.   A business employing only those family members living in the
household where the business operates may be permitted by action of the zoning
enforcement officer when the establishment and operation of the business is
determined not to be of adverse impact upon an adjoining residential use. The
types of businesses to be considered for administrative approval include, but
are not limited to: architect, accountant, decorator, seamstress, typist,
telephone sales, beautician, computer programming, musical instruction,
painting, sculpturing, writing, or tutoring. Any proposed home occupation that
is not specifically allowed by this subsection A1 shall be considered if it
meets the standards of this section.
      2.   A home occupation permit is intended for the operation of a two (2)
persons, members of the same family, nonretail business offering personal or
professional service. Medical and dental services are not eligible for a
permit.
   B.   Permit Required; Conditions: A permit may be issued by the zoning
enforcement officer, as administrative approval, without need of a public
hearing, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The proposed use is necessary and/or desirable to provide a service
which is in the interest of public convenience and will contribute to the
general welfare of the community.
      2.   The proposed use will not, under the circumstances of the particular
use, be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons
residing or working in the vicinity.
      3.   That sufficient on site off street parking will be provided as
required by chapter 14 of this title.
      4.   That no noticeable increase in on street parking will result from
the operation, nor will any increased traffic hazard occur as a result of
vehicles entering or exiting the premises.
      5.   That the proposed operation shall not involve any wholesale
business, except as may be incidental to the rendering of a personal service.
   C.   Standards: A home occupation in all residence districts shall be a
special use and shall be any business or occupation carried on by a member of
the immediate family residing within the dwelling in connection with which:
      1.   There are no signs, display or activity that will indicate from the
exterior that the building is being used, in part, for any purpose other than
that of a dwelling; except, that a home occupation permitted business shall be
allowed one nonilluminated sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in size. The
sign shall be attached to the structure unless approved in another location by
the zoning enforcement officer.
      2.   There are no commodities sold or services rendered that require
receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods, or equipment by other than a
passenger motor vehicle or U.S. letter carrier mail service or other small
parcel delivery service.
      3.   There is no person other than one additional member of the immediate
family residing on the premises employed or otherwise engaged in the home
occupation.
      4.   All activity, including storage, is conducted completely within the
dwelling unit, attached garage or detached garage.
      5.   There are no special structural alterations or construction features
to the dwelling, attached garage or detached garage, nor the installation of
special equipment attached to walls, floors or ceilings.
      6.   There is no perceptible noise, odor, smoke, electrical interference
or vibration emanating from the structure.
      7.   There are no more than two (2) customers or clients on the premises
at the same time, except for daycare homes.
      8.   There is no activity between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
   D.   Special Use: Any business not qualified to operate under administrative
approval may be permitted as a special use by the village board upon
recommendation of the planning commission in accordance with the procedures
outlined in chapter 10 of this title. Such special use shall only be granted
upon a finding that its establishment and operation will not have an adverse
effect on adjoining residential use; that sufficient on site parking will be
provided so that no noticeable increase in on street parking will result and no
increased traffic hazard due to entry or exiting of vehicles will result; that
delivery vehicles, if any, serving the home occupation will be of the size and
type commonly observed on the street of the residential district; and that the
occupation involves no retail or wholesale business or manufacture, except as
may be an integral part of, and clearly incidental to, the rendering of a
personal or professional service.
   E.   Application For Permit; Fee: Individuals seeking a home occupation
permit must submit a registration application to the village clerk accompanied
by a filing fee to be established by the village board. The registration must
be completed annually.
   F.   Notice To Adjoining Property Owners: Written notice of the applicant's
request will be provided to owners of property adjacent to, abutting, or across
the road, street, or alley in question. Affected property owners will be given
ten (10) days to file comments and/or objections to the requested permit.
   G.   Approval Or Denial Of Permit: If affected property owners file no
objection within ten (10) days, and all other conditions are met, a permit to
operate will be issued by the village clerk. If an affected property owner
files an objection, the permit request must be denied. In such an event, the
applicant may seek a special use permit as provided in chapter 10 of this
title.
   H.   Nontransferability Of Permit: A home occupation permit is issued to the
business owner/operator named on the application and is a nontransferable use.
(Ord. 2010-09, 4-14-2010)
10-4-7: ADULT-USE CANNABIS:
   A.   Purpose And Applicability: It is the intent and purpose of this section
to provide regulations regarding the cultivation, processing and dispensing of
adult-use cannabis occurring within the corporate limits of the Village of
North Utica. Such facilities shall comply with all regulations provided in the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027) (the "Act"), as it may be
amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder, and the
regulations provided below. In the event that the Act is amended, the more
restrictive of the state or local regulations shall apply.
   B.   Special Use: Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments facilities, as
defined herein, require approval of a special use in the respective districts
in which they are allowed and shall be processed in accordance with Special
Uses as provided for in the Village Zoning Ordinance and section
10-4-7C., Adult-Use Cannabis Facility Components, as provided herein.
   C.   Adult-Use Cannabis Facility Components: In determining compliance with
section
10-10-3, Special Uses, the following components of the adult-use cannabis
facility shall be evaluated based on the entirety of the circumstances
affecting the particular property in the context of the existing and intended
future use of the properties:
      1.   Impact of the proposed facility on existing or planned uses located
within the vicinity of the subject property.
      2.   Proposed structure in which the facility will be located, including
co-tenancy (if in a multi-tenant building), total square footage, security
installations/security plan and building code compliance.
      3.   Hours of operation and anticipated number of customers/employees.
      4.   Anticipated parking demand based on section and available private
parking supply.
      5.   Anticipated traffic generation in the context of adjacent roadway
capacity and access to such roadways.
      6.   Site design, including access points and internal site circulation.
      7.   Proposed signage plan.
      8.   Compliance with all requirements provided in section
10-4-7 D., Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower; section
10-4-7E, Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center; section
10-4-7F, Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization; section
10-4-7G, Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization; section
10-4-7H, Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization; or section
10-4-7I, Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization, as applicable.
      9.   Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance with
section
10-10-3, Special Uses.
   D.   Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower: In those zoning districts in which an
adult-use cannabis craft grower may be located, the proposed facility must
comply with the following:
      1.   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this section.
      2.   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used for
residential purposes, or within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of
another craft grower or cultivation center.
      3.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
      4.   For purposes of determining required parking pursuant to the Village
Zoning Ordinance, adult-use cannabis craft growers shall be classified as
"business and retail uses" provided, however, that the Village may require that
additional parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed through
section
10-4-7B, Adult-Use Cannabis: Special Use, herein.
      5.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with section
10-10-3, Special Uses, and section
10-4-7C, Adult-Use Cannabis Facility Components, as provided herein and all
other requirements of the Act.
   E.   Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center: In those zoning districts in
which an adult-use cannabis cultivation center may be located, the proposed
facility must comply with the following:
      1.   Facility may not be located within one hundred five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this section.
      2.   Facility may not be located within one hundred five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used for
residential purposes.
      3.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
      4.   For purposes of determining required parking pursuant to the Village
Zoning Ordinance, Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Centers shall be classified as
"business and retail uses" provided, however, that the Village may require that
additional parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed through
section
10-4-7B, Adult-Use Cannabis: Special Use, herein.
      5.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with section
10-10-3, Special Uses, and section
10-4-7C, Adult-Use Cannabis Facility Components, as provided herein and all
other requirements of the Act.
   F.   Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization: In those zoning districts
in which an adult-use cannabis dispensing organization may be located, the
proposed facility must comply with the following:
      1.   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this section.
      2.   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used
for residential purposes, or within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of
a pre-existing dispensing organization.
      3.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
      4.   At least seventy-five percent (75%) of the floor area of any tenant
space occupied by a dispensing organization shall be devoted to the activities
of the dispensing organization as authorized by the Act.
      5.   No cannabis dispensing organization shall sell food for consumption
on the premises, or allow on-site consumption of cannabis, unless authorized by
permit.
      6.   Facility may be issued a permit to host on-site consumption of
cannabis if located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the
dispensing organization and smoke from the facility does not migrate into an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. The security plan for the facility
required by section
10-4-7J, Additional Requirements, shall also reflect adequate provisions to
respond to disruptive conduct and over-consumption. The on-site consumption
permit shall be reviewed annually and may be suspended or revoked following
notice and hearing as provided in the Village of North Utica zoning code.
      7.   For purposes of determining required parking pursuant to the Village
Zoning Ordinance, adult-use cannabis dispensing organizations shall be
classified as "business and retail uses" provided, however, that the Village
may require that additional parking be provided as a result of the analysis
completed through section
10-4-7B, Adult-Use Cannabis: Special Use, herein.
      8.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with section
10-10-3, Special Uses, and section
10-4-7C, Adult-Use Cannabis Facility Components, as provided herein and all
other requirements of the Act.
   G.   Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization: In those zoning districts in
which an adult-use cannabis infuser organization may be located, the proposed
facility must comply with the following:
      1.   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this Section.
      2.   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used
for residential purposes.
      3.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
      4.   At least seventy-five percent (75%) of the floor area of any tenant
space occupied by an infusing organization shall be devoted to the activities
of the infusing organization as authorized by the Act.
      5.   For purposes of determining required parking pursuant to the Village
Zoning Ordinance, Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organizations shall be classified
as "business and retail uses" provided, however, that the Village may require
that additional parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed
through Section
10-4-7B, Adult-Use Cannabis: Special Use, herein.
      6.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with Section
10-10-3, Special Uses, and Section
10-4-7C, Adult-Use Cannabis Facility Components, as provided herein and all
other requirements of the Act.
   H.   Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization: In those zoning districts
in which an adult-use cannabis processing organization may be located, the
proposed facility must comply with the following:
      1.   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this Section.
      2.   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used
for residential purposes.
      3.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
      4.   At least seventy five percent (75%) of the floor area of any tenant
space occupied by a processing organization shall be devoted to the activities
of the processing organization as authorized by the Act.
      5.   For purposes of determining required parking pursuant to the Village
Zoning Ordinance, adult-use processing organizations shall be classified as
"business and retail uses" provided, however, that the Village may require that
additional parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed through
section
10-4-7B, Adult-Use Cannabis: Special Use, herein.
      6.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with section
10-10-3, Special Uses, and section
10-4-7C, Adult-Use Cannabis Facility Components, as provided herein and all
other requirements of the Act.
   I.   Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization: In those districts in
which an adult-use transporting organization may be located, the proposed
facility must comply with the following:
      1.   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this section.
      2.   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used
for residential purposes.
      3.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
      4.   The transporting organization shall be the sole use of the tenant
space in which it is located.
      5.   For purposes of determining required parking pursuant to the Village
Zoning Ordinance, Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organizations shall be
classified as "business and retail uses" provided, however, that the Village
may require that additional parking be provided as a result of the analysis
completed through section
10-4-7B, Adult-Use Cannabis: Special Use, herein.
      6.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with section
10-10-3, Special Uses, and section
10-4-7, Adult-Use Cannabis Facility Components, as provided herein and all
other requirements of the Act.
   J.   Additional Requirements: Petitioner shall install building
enhancements, such as security cameras, lighting or other improvements, as set
forth in the special use permit, to ensure the safety of employees and
customers of the adult-use cannabis business establishments, as well as its
environs. Said improvements shall be determined based on the specific
characteristics of the floor plan for an adult-use cannabis business
establishment and the site on which it is located, consistent with the
requirements of the Act.
   K.   Co-Locations Of Cannabis Business Establishments: The Village may
approve the co-location of an adult-use cannabis dispensing organization with
an adult-use cannabis craft grower center or an adult-use cannabis infuser
organization, or both, subject to the provisions of the Act and the Village's
special use criteria. In a co-location, the floor space requirements of
sections
10-4-7 F.4. and
10-4-7 G.4. shall not apply, but the co-located establishments shall be the
sole use of the tenant space. (Ord. 2021-36, 11-10-2021)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
10-5-1: Districts Established
10-5-2: Zoning Map
10-5-3: Boundaries Of Districts
10-5-4: Zoning Of Annexed Areas
10-5-5: Vacated Streets
10-5-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
For the purpose of this title, all land within the village is hereby designated
on the zoning map as being in one of the following districts:
A-1 Agricultural district
R-1 Single-family residential district
R-2 Two-family residential district
R-3 Multi-family residential district
R-R Rural residential district
C-1 Central business district
C-2 General commercial district
C-3 Highway commercial district
I-1 Light industrial district
I-2 Heavy industrial district
 
(Ord. 2005-13, 3-9-2005)
10-5-2: ZONING MAP:
The village board shall cause to be published, no later than March 31 of each
year, a map clearly showing the existing zoning uses, divisions, restrictions,
regulations, and classifications of the village boundaries and the one and one-
half (11/2) mile planning area. If, in any calendar year, there are no changes
in zoning divisions, no map shall be published for such calendar year. (Ord.
2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-5-3: BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS:
Unless otherwise indicated on the zoning district map, the boundary lines of
the districts follow lot lines, centerlines of streets and alleys, or such
centerlines extended, or the corporate limit lines as existing at the effective
date hereof. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-5-4: ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS:
All territory that may hereafter be annexed to the village shall be classified
at the time of annexation. If land is to be annexed and classified other than
R-1, then the trustees shall refer the matter to the planning commission for
recommendation and report. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing
in relation thereto, giving at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and
place of such hearing in a newspaper published in or having a general
circulation in the village. Said notice may, but need not be, published during
the period that the commission has the matter under consideration. (Ord. 2004-
26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-5-5: VACATED STREETS:
Whenever the trustees vacate a street or alley, adjacent districts shall extend
to the centerline of the vacation. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
CHAPTER 6
A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-6-1: Purpose
10-6-2: Permitted Uses
10-6-3: Special Uses
10-6-4: Accessory Uses
10-6-5: Lot Standards
10-6-6: Performance Standards
10-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the A-1 agricultural district is to devote and preserve land as
agricultural, including all related activities. This district shall hold land
as less intensive development until the time in which it can carry more
intensive development through the planned staging of utility extensions and
other such options necessary to withstand such development. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-
22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-6-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses incidental to the permitted uses.
Agricultural uses including:
Commercial breeding, raising, or training of animals; provided, that no
building, pens, or yards are within one hundred feet (100') of a public street
or thoroughfare or residential district.
Farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry.
Growing of trees, flowers, fruits, vegetables, grains, and other crops.
Research and/or experimental farming.
Sale of agricultural products produced on the premises.
Cemeteries of more than twenty (20) acres in area.
Public parks and playgrounds.
Single-family dwellings. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-6-3: SPECIAL USES:
Airstrips and airports.
Animal farms engaged in the raising of exotic animals.
Children’s nurseries, daycare centers, prekindergarten, and other private
schools, provided one hundred (100) square feet of open space is maintained for
each child enrolled.
Golf courses.
Mining, quarry, and gravel operations.
Off-road recreational riding park.
Places of worship, schools, libraries, museums, art galleries, and community
centers.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code; Ord. 2024-36, 10-17-
2024)
10-6-4: ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Accessory uses shall only be located and operated in side and rear
yards.
   B.   Accessory uses shall be operated and maintained under the same
ownership and on the same lot, or adjoining lots, as the principal use or
structure.
   C.   No accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in height, shall
not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the rear and side yard areas, and
shall not be closer than twenty feet (20') to any lot line. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-
22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-6-5: LOT STANDARDS:
   A.   Maximum Building Height: No building shall exceed two and one- half
(21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height.
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: Ten (10) acres.
   C.   Minimum Lot Width: Four hundred feet (400').
   D.   Minimum Floor Area: One thousand feet (1,000').
   E.   Maximum Impervious Coverage: Ten percent (10%) for all lots.
   F.   Minimum Setbacks:
      1.   Minimum front yard setback: Seventy five feet (75').
      2.   Minimum side yard setback: Forty feet (40').
      3.   Minimum rear yard setback: Seventy five feet (75').
      4.   Minimum corner lot setback: Seventy five feet (75') from all public
streets and thoroughfares. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-6-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Off Street Parking And Loading: There shall be provided in the
agricultural district adequate off street parking and loading in accordance
with the provisions in chapter 14 of this title.
   B.   Signs: All signs shall comply with the regulations of chapter 15 of
this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
CHAPTER 7
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Required Lot Standards
10-7-1: REQUIRED LOT STANDARDS:
 R-1              R-2           R-3                            R-R
    Single-Fami   Two-Fami   Multi-Fami   Mobile Ho   Rural
                                                               Residential
             R-1           R-2          R-3                       R-R
                Single-    Two-      Multi-    Mobile    Rural
             Family        Family       Family       Home         Residential
Maximum      21/2 stories  21/2 stories 3 stories or              3 stories or
building     or 35 ft.1    or 35 ft.1   45 ft.       15 ft.       45 ft.
height
                           5,400 sq.
                           ft. per
                           dwelling
                           unit for
                           two-family
                           dwellings
                           and 10,800   2,000 sq.
                           sq. ft. for  ft. per
                           single-      dwelling
                           family       unit 10,800
             10,800 sq.    dwellings    sq. ft. for
             ft. for all   for all      single-
             subdivisions  subdivisions family
             final platted final        dwellings
             after         platted      final
             November 9,   after        platted
Minimum lot  2005 8,250    November 9,  after        8 acres per
size         sq. ft. for   2005 3,000   November 9,  park         1 acre
             all           sq. ft. per  2005 6,000
             subdivisions  dwelling     sq. ft. for
             final platted unit for     single-
             prior to      two-family   family
             November 9,   dwellings    dwellings
             2005          and 6,000    final
                           sq. ft. for  platted
                           single-      prior to
                           family       November 9,
                           dwellings    2005
                           for all
                           subdivisions
                           final
                           platted
                           prior to
                           November 9,
                           2005
                           90 ft. for
             90 ft. for    all
             all           subdivisions
             subdivisions  final
             final platted platted
             after         after
Minimum lot  November 9,   November 9,
width        2005 60 ft.   2005 60 ft.  100 ft.      40 ft.       150 ft.
             for all       for all
             subdivisions  subdivisions
             final platted final
             prior to      platted
             November 9,   prior to
             2005          November 9,
                           2005
Minimum                    900 sq. ft.
floor area   1,000 sq. ft. per dwelling 500 sq. ft.  500 sq. ft.  1,000 sq. ft.
                           unit
Maximum      50% outside   50% outside  60% outside  60% outside
impervious   floodplain    floodplain   floodplain   floodplain   25%
coverage     40% inside    40% inside   50% inside   50% inside
             floodplain    floodplain   floodplain   floodplain
Minimum
front yard   25 ft.1       25 ft.       35 ft.       25 ft.       50 ft.
setback
Minimum
detached     15 ft. behind 15 ft.       6 ft. behind 6 ft. behind 15 ft. behind
front loaded front facade  behind front front facade front facade front facade
garage                     facade
setback
Minimum side 6 ft.         6 ft.        6 ft.        6 ft.        20 ft.
yard setback
Minimum rear 30 ft.        25 ft.       25 ft.       25 ft.       50 ft.
yard setback
Minimum      20 ft. from   20 ft. from  10 ft. from  10 ft. from
detached     paved edge of paved edge   paved edge   paved edge   20 ft. from
rear loaded  alley or      of alley or  of alley or  of alley or  rear lot line
garage       lane1         lane         lane         lane
setback
Minimum
corner lot   25 ft.        25 ft.       35 ft.       35 ft.       50 ft.
setback
 
Note:
   1.    See each district and chapter 18 of this title for exceptions.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. Ord. 2005-42, 11-9-2005; Ord.
2009-08, 3-11-2009; 2013 Code)
ARTICLE A. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7A-1: Purpose
10-7A-2: Permitted Uses
10-7A-3: Special Uses
10-7A-4: Accessory Buildings And Uses
10-7A-4-1: Private Garages
10-7A-5: Lot Standards
10-7A-6: Performance Standards
10-7A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-1 single-family residential district is to provide an area
for low density single-family residential uses and those public and semipublic
uses normally considered an integral part of the residential neighborhood they
serve. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009)
10-7A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory structures incidental to the permitted uses of not more than two
hundred (200) square feet and in no case larger than the principal structure.
Garages are not included in the definition of accessory structures and are
discussed at subsection
10-7A-4-1A of this article.
Garages (see subsection
10-7A-4-1A of this article).
Public parks and playgrounds.
Single-family dwellings and home occupations.
Unlighted real estate signs of not more than six (6) square feet of sign area.
Availability signs such as "For Sale", "Vacancy", or "For Rent" may be
permitted to announce the sale, rental, or lease of the lot where the sign is
displayed or to announce the sale, rental, or lease of one or more structures
or a portion thereof located on the lot. The signs shall conform with chapter
15 of this title. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009; amd. 2013 Code; Ord. 2013-18, 5-8-
2013)
10-7A-3: SPECIAL USES:
Accessory buildings and uses, including accessory living quarters, guesthouse,
recreation room, greenhouse, and bathhouse, greater than two hundred (200)
square feet, provided that no kitchen facilities shall be provided except in
the principal residential building.
Cemeteries of more than twenty (20) acres in area.
Children's nurseries, daycare centers, prekindergarten, and other private
schools, provided one hundred (100) square feet of open space is maintained for
each child enrolled.
Clubs, lodges, and nursing homes.
Places of worship, schools, libraries, museums, art galleries, and community
centers.
Planned unit developments in accordance with the provisions provided in chapter
11 of this title.
Shipping containers which are defined as containers or boxes made of steel or
other metals, that are commonly used for the storage and movement of materials
in the fright transportation system.
Single-family mobile home, provided:
   A.   The mobile home is replacing a mobile home that existed on said lot
prior to September 22, 2004 (effective date of this title), and the mobile home
is being placed at the same location (same footprint) on the lot.
   B.   The lot on which the mobile home will be located is not less than three
(3.0) acres in size or the applicant owns multiple contiguous lots constituting
at least three (3.0) acres in size.
   C.   The lot for which the special use is sought has not previously been
granted this special use.
Telecommunications towers. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009; amd. Ord. 2012-35, 11-14-
2012; 2013 Code; Ord. 2013-18, 5-8-2013; Ord. 2021-31, 9-30-2021)
10-7A-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES:
   A.   General Regulations: The following regulations shall apply to all
accessory buildings, unless the structure is an integral part of the principal
structure. If an accessory buildings is attached to a principal structure, it
shall follow all applicable standards of that zoning district for the principal
structure.
      1.   Ownership: Accessory uses shall be operated and maintained under the
same ownership and on the same lot, or adjoining lots, as the principal use or
structure.
      2.   Building Permit And Fee Required: All accessory buildings require a
building permit and payment of required fees.
      3.   Location:
         a.   Accessory uses shall only be located and operated in side and
rear yards.
         b.   No accessory use shall be closer than six feet (6') to any lot
line, with one exception. In this case notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, no accessory use shall be closer than two feet (2') to any side or
rear lot line. The accessory use setback exception shall apply to the following
areas:
            (1)   South of the Illinois and Michigan Canal and north of
Donelson Street (also known as Donaldson Street).
            (2)   South of the CSX Railroad tracks and north of the Illinois
and Michigan Canal.
            (3)   South of 2853rd Road (also known as Richard Hallett Road),
north of the CSX Railroad tracks, west of Division Street (also known as
Illinois Route 178) and east of Northwest Street. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009)
      4.   Maximum Area/Height: Maximum area of accessory buildings shall be
two hundred (200) square feet each. Maximum number of accessory buildings on a
lot shall be two (2). All accessory buildings shall not exceed a side wall
height of eight feet (8') and a ridge height of twelve feet (12') in any R-
1 district. Bathhouses, constructed as part of inground swimming pool projects,
shall be considered accessory buildings and shall not exceed a ridge height of
fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 2013-18, 5-8-2013)
      5.   Minimum Distance Requirements:
         a.   From principal building: Ten feet (10').
         b.   From side lot line: Six feet (6').
         c.   From rear lot line: Six feet (6').
      6.   Ground Floor Area: The total ground floor area of all detached
garages and accessory buildings located in a rear yard shall not exceed twenty
five percent (25%) of the area of such rear yard.
   B.   Corner Lots:
      1.   Accessory buildings shall not encroach upon the side yard adjacent
to the street of a corner lot.
      2.   Accessory buildings shall not encroach upon the side yard setback in
the rear yard adjacent to the street. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009)
   C.   Through Lots: Accessory buildings may not encroach upon the rear yards
of a through lot unless six foot (6') high screening, the type of which is to
be approved by the zoning enforcement officer, is provided. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-
11-2009; amd. 2013 Code)
   D.   Easements: It is the responsibility of permit holders to determine the
presence and use of all easements. Any violations of easement rights may result
in the removal of all improvements at the owner's expense. Easement holders
shall be entitled to the unrestricted use of easement areas.
   E.   Exceptions: When a lot which is an official lot of record at the
effective date hereof does not comply with the area, yard, or other
requirements of this section and the plat of subdivision has been previously
approved and contains setback lines, then that plat of subdivision shall
supersede this section where inconsistent. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009; Ord. 2021-
31, 9-30-2021)
10-7A-4-1: PRIVATE GARAGES:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   This section shall pertain to attached and detached garages as
indicated.
      2.   Attached or detached garages that are over one thousand (1,000)
square feet shall not have floor drains connected to the sanitary sewer unless
an oil interceptor is installed pursuant to the Illinois plumbing code. (Ord.
2009-08, 3-11-2009)
      3.   Any garage with over twenty eight (28) linear feet of garage doors
shall be required to screen the doors by one of the following methods:
landscaping, turning the garage so the doors do not face the street, fence, or
a combination of these. The purpose of the screening shall be to lessen the
visual impact of a large area of garage doors to neighbors. Plans indicating
screening method must be submitted and approved by the zoning enforcement
officer as part of the permit process. It is strongly recommended, but not
required, that a garage with over twenty (20) linear feet of garage doors
comply with this requirement.
      4.   Garage doors shall be residential in appearance. Commercial looking
garage doors are not allowed, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer.
(Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009; amd. 2013 Code)
      5.   The total area of all garages, detached or attached, and all
accessory structures (total combined garage area) shall not be larger than the
ground floor area of the primary residence and also not exceed the allowable
maximum total square footage per the following table based on lot size, not
including street or alley right-of-way areas adjacent to the lot:
Lot Size: Total Combined Garage Area Allowed = Less than Ground Floor Area of
          Primary Residence and Less Than:
Lot Size:           Total Combined Garage Area Allowed = Less than Ground Floor
                    Area of Primary Residence and Less Than:
0 - 0.25 Acres      1,500 S.F
0.26 - 0.50 Acres   1,800 S.F
0.51 - 0.75 Acres   2,100 S.F
0.76 - 1.00 Acres   2,400 S.F
1.01 - 1.50 Acres   2,600 S.F
1.51 - 2.00 Acres   2,800 S.F
2.01 - 2.50 Acres   3,000 S.F
2.51 - 3.00 Acres   3,200 S.F
3.01 - 4.00 Acres   3,600* S.F
4.01 - 5.00 Acres   4,000* S.F
5.01 - 7.50 Acres   5,000*
7.51 - 10.00 Acres  6,000*
10.01 - 15.00 Acres 8,000*
15.01 - 20.00 Acres 10,000*
20.01 Acres or More 12,500*
 
(* = Less than Ground Floor Area of Primary Residence does not apply.)
      6.   No garage doors shall be installed over ten feet (10') tall without
a variance.
B.   Attached Private Garages: The following regulations shall apply to all
attached garages. Variations to these requirements may be sought through the
variance process.
   B.   Attached Private Garages: The following regulations shall apply to all
attached garages. Variations to these requirements may be sought through the
variance process.
      1.   Maximum Height: The maximum height shall be the same as primary
structure indicated for the residential district.
      2.   Minimum Setback Distance: Minimum setback distance requirements
shall be the same as for the primary building.
      3.   Exterior Finish Materials: Exterior finish materials used on
attached garages shall be consistent with materials used on the primary
structure unless those materials are no longer available, in which case, the
materials shall be complementary to the primary structure. Materials used other
than those consistent with the primary structure must be approved by the zoning
enforcement officer prior to the start of construction. Owners that take issue
with materials not approved may go through the variance process.
   C.   Detached Private Garages: The following regulations shall apply to all
detached garages. Variations to these requirements may be sought through the
variance process.
      1.   Building Permit And Fee Required: All detached garages require
building permits and payment of required fees.
      2.   Maximum Height: Garages shall not exceed a height of twenty two feet
(22') in the R-1 single-family detached dwelling district and not more than
eighteen feet (18') in all other residential districts if the garage has a
sloped roof. Garages shall not exceed a height of twelve feet (12') in any
residential district if the garage has a flat roof. The garage shall not exceed
the height of the primary structure.
      3.   Minimum Distance Requirements:
         a.   From principal building: Ten feet (10').
         b.   From side property line: Six feet (6').
         c.   From rear property line: Thirty feet (30').
         d.   No accessory use shall be closer than six feet (6') to any lot
line, with one exception. In this case, notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, no accessory use shall be closer than two feet (2') to any side or
rear lot line. The accessory use setback exception shall apply to the following
areas:
            (1)   South of the Illinois and Michigan Canal and north of
Donelson street (also known as Donaldson Street).
            (2)   South of the CSX Railroad tracks and north of the Illinois
and Michigan Canal.
            (3)   South of 2853rd Road (also known as Richard Hallett Road),
north of the CSX Railroad tracks, west of Division Street (also known as
Illinois Route 178) and east of Northwest Street.
      4.   Ground Floor Area: The total ground floor area of all detached
garages and accessory structures located in the rear yard shall not exceed
twenty five percent (25%) of the area of such rear yard.
      5.   Exterior Finish Materials: Exterior finish materials used on
detached garages shall be consistent with materials used on the primary
structure or complementary to the structure. The zoning enforcement officer
must approve such materials prior to issuing a permit. Owners that take issue
with materials not approved may go through the variance request. (Ord. 2009-08,
3-11-2009; amd. 2013 Code; Ord. 2021-31, 9-30-2021)
10-7A-5: LOT STANDARDS:
   A.   Maximum Building Height: No building (excluding garages which are
governed by subsection
10-7A-4-1A of this article) shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or
thirty five feet (35') in height unless each side yard is increased over the
required minimum by two feet (2') for every one foot (1'), or fraction thereof,
of additional height over thirty five feet (35'). In no case shall the building
height exceed fifty feet (50').
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand eight hundred (10,800) square feet for
all subdivisions final platted after November 9, 2005, and eight thousand two
hundred fifty (8,250) square feet for all subdivisions final platted prior to
November 9, 2005.
   C.   Minimum Lot Width: Ninety feet (90') for all subdivisions final platted
after November 9, 2005, and sixty feet (60') for all subdivisions final platted
prior to November 9, 2005.
   D.   Minimum Floor Area: One thousand (1,000) square feet.
   E.   Maximum Impervious Coverage: Fifty percent (50%) for lots not in the
100-year floodplain and forty percent (40%) for lots within the 100-year
floodplain.
   F.   Minimum Setbacks:
      1.   Minimum Front Yard Setback: Twenty five feet (25'), except where the
front yard setback for other single-family dwellings on the same block is
twenty feet (20') or less. In this case, the minimum front yard setback shall
be the same as the adjacent structures. The front yard setback exceptions shall
apply to the following areas:
         a.   South of the Illinois and Michigan Canal and north of Donaldson
Street.
         b.   South of the CSX Railroad tracks and north of the Illinois and
Michigan Canal.
         c.   South of 2853rd Road (also known as Richard Hallett Road), north
of the CSX Railroad tracks, west of Division Street (also known as Illinois
Route 178) and east of Northwest Street.
      2.   Minimum Detached Front Loaded Garage Setback: Fifteen feet (15')
behind the front facade of the house.
      3.   Maximum Front Yard Setback: None.
      4.   Minimum Side Yard Setback: Six feet (6').
      5.   Minimum Rear Yard Setback: Thirty feet (30').
      6.   Minimum Detached Rear Loaded Garage Setback: Twenty feet (20') from
paved edge of alley or lane, with one exception. In this case, no detached rear
loaded garage shall be closer than two feet (2') to any lot line. The detached
rear loaded garage setback exception shall apply to the following areas:
         a.   South of the Illinois and Michigan Canal and north of Donelson
Street (also known as Donaldson Street).
         b.   South of the CSX Railroad tracks and north of the Illinois and
Michigan Canal.
         c.   South of 2853rd Road (also known as Richard Hallett Road), north
of the CSX Railroad tracks, west of Division Street (also known as Illinois
Route 178) and east of Northwest Street.
      7.   Minimum Corner Lot Setback: Twenty five feet (25') from all public
streets and thoroughfares. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009)
10-7A-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Off Street Parking And Loading: There shall be provided in the R-
1 residential district adequate off street parking and loading in accordance
with the provisions in chapter 14 of this title.
   B.   Fences: Fences may be constructed in or projected into yards; provided
that: 1) no fence or planting more than three feet (3') high or thirty percent
(30%) solid shall be located within thirty feet (30') of a street intersection;
2) no fence more than four feet (4') high may be located closer to the front of
the lot than the principal building; and 3) no fence higher than six feet (6')
shall be allowed on any part of the lot, with the exception of fences
surrounding tennis courts or ball fields. All fences so constructed shall be
designed in such a manner that the posts of the fence shall be on the interior
of the fence and face the property of the owner or tenant responsible for
authorizing the construction of the fence. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009; amd. 2013
Code)
ARTICLE B. R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7B-1: Purpose
10-7B-2: Permitted Uses
10-7B-3: Special Uses
10-7B-4: Accessory Buildings And Uses
10-7B-4-1: Private Garages
10-7B-5: Lot Standards
10-7B-6: Performance Standards
10-7B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-2 two-family residential district is to provide an area
for low density residential uses and those public and semipublic uses normally
considered an integral part of the residential neighborhood they serve. (Ord.
2009-08, 3-11-2009)
10-7B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in the R-1 residential district.
Accessory uses incidental to the permitted uses including garages of not more
than one thousand (1,000) square feet and in no case larger than the principal
structure.
Shipping containers which are defined as containers or boxes made of steel or
other metals, that are commonly used for the storage and movement of materials
in the fright transportation system.
Two-family dwellings.
Unlighted real estate signs of not more than six (6) square feet of sign area.
(Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009; amd. Ord. 2021-31, 9-30-2021)
10-7B-3: SPECIAL USES:
Any special uses permitted in the R-1 residential district. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-
11-2009)
10-7B-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES:
   A.   General Regulations: The following regulations shall apply to all
accessory buildings, unless the structure is an integral part of the principal
structure. If an accessory buildings is attached to a principal structure, it
shall follow all applicable standards of that zoning district for the principal
structure.
      1.   Ownership: Accessory uses shall be operated and maintained under the
same ownership and on the same lot, or adjoining lots, as the principal use or
structure.
      2.   Building Permit And Fee Required: All accessory buildings require a
building permit and payment of required fees.
      3.   Location:
         a.   Accessory uses shall only be located and operated in side and
rear yards.
         b.   No accessory use shall be closer than six feet (6') to any lot
line, with one exception. In this case notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, no accessory use shall be closer than two feet (2') to any side or
rear lot line. The accessory use setback exception shall apply to the following
areas:
            (1)   South of the Illinois and Michigan Canal and north of
Donelson Street (also known as Donaldson Street).
            (2)   South of the CSX Railroad tracks and north of the Illinois
and Michigan Canal.
            (3)   South of 2853rd Road (also known as Richard Hallett Road),
north of the CSX Railroad tracks, west of Division Street (also known as
Illinois Route 178) and east of Northwest Street. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009)
      4.   Maximum Area/Height: Maximum area of accessory buildings shall be
two hundred (200) square feet each. Maximum number of accessory buildings on a
lot shall be two (2). All accessory buildings shall not exceed a side wall
height of eight feet (8') and a ridge height of twelve feet (12') in any R-
2 district. Bathhouses, constructed as part of inground swimming pool projects,
shall be considered accessory buildings and shall not exceed a ridge height of
fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 2013-18, 5-8-2013)
      5.   Minimum Distance Requirements:
         a.   From principal building: Ten feet (10').
         b.   From side lot line: Six feet (6').
         c.   From rear lot line: Six feet (6').
      6.   Ground Floor Area: The total ground floor area of all detached
garages and accessory buildings located in a rear yard shall not exceed twenty
five percent (25%) of the area of such rear yard.
   B.   Corner Lots:
      1.   Accessory buildings shall not encroach upon the side yard adjacent
to the street of a corner lot.
      2.   Accessory buildings shall not encroach upon the side yard setback in
the rear yard adjacent to the street. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009)
   C.   Through Lots: Accessory buildings may not encroach upon the rear yards
of a through lot unless six foot (6') high screening, the type of which is to
be approved by the zoning enforcement officer, is provided. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-
11-2009; amd. 2013 Code)
   D.   Easements: It is the responsibility of permit holders to determine the
presence and use of all easements. Any violations of easement rights may result
in the removal of all improvements at the owner's expense. Easement holders
shall be entitled to the unrestricted use of easement areas.
   E.   Exceptions: When a lot which is an official lot of record at the
effective date hereof does not comply with the area, yard, or other
requirements of this section and the plat of subdivision has been previously
approved and contains setback lines, then that plat of subdivision shall
supersede this section where inconsistent. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009; Ord. 2021-
31, 9-30-2021)
10-7B-4-1: PRIVATE GARAGES:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   This section shall pertain to attached and detached garages as
indicated.
      2.   Attached or detached garages that are over one thousand (1,000)
square feet shall not have floor drains connected to the sanitary sewer unless
an oil interceptor is installed pursuant to the Illinois plumbing code. (Ord.
2009-08, 3-11-2009)
      3.   Any garage with over twenty eight (28) linear feet of garage doors
shall be required to screen the doors by one of the following methods:
landscaping, turning the garage so the doors do not face the street, fence, or
a combination of these. The purpose of the screening shall be to lessen the
visual impact of a large area of garage doors to neighbors. Plans indicating
screening method must be submitted and approved by the zoning enforcement
officer as part of the permit process. It is strongly recommended, but not
required, that a garage with over twenty (20) linear feet of garage doors
comply with this requirement.
      4.   Garage doors shall be residential in appearance. Commercial looking
garage doors are not allowed, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer.
(Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009; amd. 2013 Code)
      5.   The total area of all garages, detached or attached, and all
accessory structures (total combined garage area) shall not be larger than the
ground floor area of the primary residence and also not exceed the allowable
maximum total square footage per the following table based on lot size, not
including street or alley right-of-way areas adjacent to the lot:
Lot Size:  Total Combined Garage Area Allowed = Less than Ground Floor Area
             of Primary Residence and Less Than:
Lot Size:        Total Combined Garage Area Allowed = Less than Ground Floor
                    Area of Primary Residence and Less Than:
0 - 0.25 Acres      1,500 S.F.
0.26 - 0.50 Acres   1,800 S.F.
0.51 - 0.75 Acres   2,100 S.F.
0.76 - 1.00 Acres   2,400 S.F.
1.01 - 1.50 Acres   2,600 S.F.
1.51 - 2.00 Acres   2,800 S.F.
2.01 - 2.50 Acres   3,000 S.F.
2.51 - 3.00 Acres   3,200 S.F.
3.01 - 4.00 Acres   3,600* S.F.
4.01 - 5.00 Acres   4,000* S.F.
5.01 - 7.50 Acres   5,000* S.F.
7.51 - 10.00 Acres  6,000* S.F.
10.01 - 15.00 Acres 8,000* S.F.
15.01 - 20.00 Acres 10,000* S.F.
20.01 Acres or More 12,500* S.F.
 
(* = Less than Ground Floor Area of Primary Residence does not apply.)
      6.   No garage doors shall be installed over ten feet (10') tall without
a variance.
   B.   Attached Private Garages: The following regulations shall apply to all
attached garages. Variations to these requirements may be sought through the
variance process.
      1.   Maximum Height: The maximum height shall be the same as the primary
structure indicated for the residential district.
      2.   Minimum Setback Distance: Minimum setback distance requirements
shall be the same as for the primary building.
      3.   Exterior Finish Materials: Exterior finish materials used on
attached garages shall be consistent with materials used on the primary
structure unless those materials are no longer available, in which case, the
materials shall be complementary to the primary structure. Materials used other
than those consistent with the primary structure must be approved by the zoning
enforcement officer prior to the start of construction. Owners that take issue
with materials not approved may go through the variance process.
   C.   Detached Private Garages: The following regulations shall apply to all
detached garages. Variations to these requirements may be sought through the
variance process.
      1.   Building Permit And Fee Required: All detached garages require
building permits and payment of required fees.
      2.   Maximum Height: Garages shall not exceed a height of twenty two feet
(22') in R-1 single-family, detached dwelling district and not more than
eighteen feet (18') in all other residential districts if the garage has a
sloped roof. Garages shall not exceed a height of twelve feet (12') in any
residential district if the garage has a flat roof. The garage shall not exceed
the height of the primary structure.
      3.   Minimum Distance Requirements:
         a.   From principal building: Ten feet (10').
         b.   From side property line: Six feet (6').
         c.   From rear property line: Thirty feet (30').
         d.   No accessory use shall be closer than six feet (6') to any lot
line, with one exception. In this case notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, no accessory use shall be closer than two feet (2') to any side or
rear lot line. The accessory use setback exception shall apply to the following
areas:
            (1)   South of the Illinois and Michigan Canal and north of
Donelson Street (also known as Donaldson Street).
            (2)   South of the CSX Railroad tracks and north of the Illinois
and Michigan Canal.
            (3)   South of 2853rd Road (also known as Richard Hallett Road),
north of the CSX Railroad tracks, west of Division Street (also known as
Illinois Route 178) and east of Northwest Street.
      4.   Ground Floor Area: The total ground floor area of all detached
garages and accessory structures located in the rear yard shall not exceed
twenty five percent (25%) of the area of such rear yard.
      5.   Exterior Finish Materials: Exterior finish materials used on
detached garages shall be consistent with materials used on the primary
structure or complementary to the structure. The zoning enforcement officer
must approve such material prior to issuing a permit. Owners that take issue
with materials not approved may go through the variance request. (Ord. 2009-08,
3-11-2009; amd. 2013 Code; Ord. 2021-31, 9-30-2021)
10-7B-5: LOT STANDARDS:
   A.   Maximum Building Height: No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/
2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height unless each side yard is
increased over the required minimum by two feet (2') for every one foot (1'),
or fraction thereof, of additional height over thirty five feet (35'). In no
case shall the building height exceed fifty feet (50').
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: Five thousand four hundred (5,400) square feet per
dwelling unit for two-family dwellings and ten thousand eight hundred (10,800)
square feet for single-family dwellings for all subdivisions final platted
after November 9, 2005. Three thousand (3,000) square feet per dwelling unit
for two-family dwellings and six thousand (6,000) square feet for single-family
dwellings for all subdivisions final platted prior to November 9, 2005.
   C.   Minimum Lot Width: Ninety feet (90') for all subdivisions final platted
after November 9, 2005, and sixty feet (60') for all subdivisions final platted
prior to November 9, 2005.
   D.   Minimum Floor Area: Nine hundred (900) square feet per dwelling unit.
   E.   Maximum Impervious Coverage: Fifty percent (50%) for lots not in the
100-year floodplain and forty percent (40%) for lots within the 100-year
floodplain.
   F.   Minimum Setbacks:
      1.   Minimum front yard setback: Twenty five feet (25').
      2.   Minimum detached front loaded garage setback: Fifteen feet (15')
behind the front facade of the house.
      3.   Maximum front yard setback: None.
      4.   Minimum side yard setback: Six feet (6').
      5.   Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty five feet (25').
      6.   Minimum detached rear loaded garage setback: Twenty feet (20') from
paved edge of alley or lane.
      7.   Minimum corner lot setback: Twenty five feet (25') from all public
streets and thoroughfares. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009)
10-7B-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Off Street Parking And Loading: There shall be provided in the R-
2 residential district adequate off street parking and loading in accordance
with the provisions in chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009; amd.
2013 Code)
   B.   Fences: Fences may be constructed in or projected into yards; provided,
that: 1) no fence or planting more than three feet (3') high or thirty percent
(30%) solid shall be located within thirty feet (30') of a street intersection;
2) no fence more than four feet (4') high may be located closer to the front of
the lot than the principal building; and 3) no fence higher than six feet (6')
shall be allowed on any part of the lot, with the exception of fences
surrounding tennis courts or ball fields. All fences so constructed shall be
designed in such a manner that the posts of the fence shall be on the interior
of the fence and face the property of the owner or tenant responsible for
authorizing the construction of the fence. (Ord. 2009-08, 3-11-2009)
ARTICLE C. R-3 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7C-1: Purpose
10-7C-2: Permitted Uses
10-7C-3: Special Uses
10-7C-4: Accessory Uses
10-7C-5: Lot Standards
10-7C-6: Performance Standards
10-7C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-3 residential district is to provide an area for medium to
high density multiple-family residential uses and those public and semipublic
uses normally considered an integral part of the residential neighborhood they
serve. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-7C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in the R-1 and R-2 residential districts.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Unlighted signs as described in the R-1 residential district. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-
22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-7C-3: SPECIAL USES:
Bed and breakfast establishments.
Hospitals, nursing homes, retirement homes, and other similar uses.
Mobile home parks; provided, that:
   A.   At least four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet for individual
singlewide mobile homes and five thousand (5,000) square feet for doublewide
mobile homes is provided.
   B.   Mobile homes shall be separated by a minimum distance of twenty feet
(20') from another mobile home or from an accessory structure.
   C.   Each individual mobile home shall have a setback of at least twenty
five feet (25') from any publicly dedicated street right of way.
   D.   The minimum lot size for a mobile home park shall be eight (8) acres.
   E.   Each individual mobile home site shall abut or face on an interior
street which shall have access to a public street.
   F.   All mobile home parks shall be served by public water and sewer that
meet the requirements of applicable agencies, such as the Illinois department
of public health, the LaSalle County health department, and the Illinois
environmental protection agency.
   G.   Each mobile home park owner/operator shall provide lighting of one
hundred (100) watt lamps, with lights no more than one hundred feet (100')
apart and located no more than twenty feet (20') above the ground.
   H.   Common open space equal to two hundred fifty (250) square feet per home
shall be provided at common locations throughout the park. Open space may
include community buildings and community use facilities, such as indoor
recreation areas and swimming pools. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-7C-4: ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Accessory uses shall only be located and operated in side and rear
yards.
   B.   No accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in height, shall
not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear and side yard areas, and
shall not be closer than six feet (6') to any lot line.
   C.   No accessory structures shall be permitted at individual mobile home
sites unless approved as part of the special use for mobile home parks.
However, the park may provide for such structures as recreational or storage
purposes at a common area. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-7C-5: LOT STANDARDS:
   A.   Maximum Building Height: No building shall exceed three (3) stories or
forty five feet (45') in height. No mobile home shall exceed fifteen feet (15')
in height. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
   B.   Minimum Lot Size:
      1.   The minimum lot size for a mobile home park shall be eight (8)
acres, and the minimum lot size for all other uses shall be two thousand
(2,000) square feet per dwelling unit. (Ord. 2005-42, 11-9-2005; amd. 2013
Code)
      2.   The minimum lot size shall be ten thousand eight hundred (10,800)
square feet for single-family dwellings final platted after November 9, 2005,
and six thousand (6,000) square feet for single-family dwellings final platted
prior to November 9, 2005. (Ord. 2005-42, 11-9-2005)
   C.   Minimum Lot Width: The minimum lot width for a mobile home shall be
forty feet (40'), and the minimum lot width for all other uses shall be one
hundred feet (100').
   D.   Minimum Floor Area: Five hundred (500) square feet.
   E.   Maximum Impervious Coverage: Sixty percent (60%) for lots not in the
100-year floodplain, and fifty percent (50%) for lots within the 100-year
floodplain.
   F.   Minimum Setbacks:
      1.   Minimum Front Yard Setback: The minimum front yard setback for
mobile homes shall be twenty five feet (25'), and the minimum front yard
setback for all other uses shall be thirty five feet (35').
      2.   Minimum Front Loaded Garage Setback: Six feet (6') behind the front
facade of the house.
      3.   Minimum Side Yard Setback: Six feet (6').
      4.   Minimum Rear Yard Setback: Twenty five feet (25').
      5.   Minimum Corner Lot Setback: Thirty five feet (35') from all public
streets and thoroughfares.
      6.   Minimum Detached Rear Loaded Garage Setback: Ten feet (10') from
paved edge of alley or lane. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-7C-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Off Street Parking And Loading: There shall be provided in the R-
3 residential district adequate off street parking and loading in accordance
with the provisions in chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff.
9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Buffers: Where a multiple-family dwelling adjoins a single- or two-
family dwelling, a buffer strip consisting of a dense hedge at least six feet
(6') high and/or tree plantings shall screen the multiple-family dwelling from
the single- and two-family dwelling. The trees shall be a hardy species capable
of attaining a mature height of at least forty feet (40'), shall survive more
than sixty (60) years, and be planted with a minimum diameter of two inches
(2") at a level four feet (4') above grade at intervals of thirty feet (30').
   C.   Screening For Dumpsters: On any property in the R-3 residential
district containing a garbage dumpster, there shall be erected a substantial
fence or wall to prevent the visual blight associated with this activity.
Whenever feasible, the dumpster shall be located near the back of the lot.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
ARTICLE D. R-R RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7D-1: Purpose
10-7D-2: Permitted Uses
10-7D-3: Special Uses
10-7D-4: Accessory Uses
10-7D-5: Lot Standards
10-7D-6: Performance Standards
10-7D-1: PURPOSE:
The R-R rural residential district is established to provide an opportunity for
rural residential development in the village, to maintain areas that are
developed with single-family detached housing on larger parcels, and to
preserve open space and natural features. Parcels zoned R-R should be low
density development with larger lots to accommodate the need for individual
wells and septic systems. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-7D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in the R-1 and R-2 residential districts.
Agriculture.
Unlighted real estate signs of not more than six (6) square feet of sign area.
Availability signs such as "For Sale", "Vacancy", or "For Rent" may be
permitted to announce the sale, rental, or lease of the lot where the sign is
displayed or to announce the sale, rental, or lease of one or more structures
or a portion thereof located on the lot. The signs shall conform with chapter
15 of this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-7D-3: SPECIAL USES:
Airstrips and airports.
Animal hospitals.
Cemeteries of more than twenty (20) acres in area.
Farm products sales conducted on agricultural property; provided, that:
   A.   Only those products produced or grown by the vendor may be sold on the
site.
   B.   Such sales must be conducted within a temporary structure.
   C.   The use is not larger than five hundred (500) square feet in area.
Golf courses.
Libraries, museums, art galleries, and community centers.
Nursing homes, retirement homes, and similar uses.
Public parks, playgrounds, and stables.
Schools, public and private, day or nursery, elementary, junior high and high,
and post secondary; provided, that:
   A.   The use is located on a lot at least five (5) acres in area.
   B.   No building is located within twenty five feet (25') of a side lot
line.
   C.   The use is located no closer than one thousand feet (1,000') to any
other boarding school, college, seminary, convent, or monastery.
Short-term vacation rental unit provided the lot in which such is to be located
consists of at least five (5) acres. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004;
amd. Ord. 2019-31, 11-12-2019)
10-7D-4: ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Accessory uses shall only be located and operated in side and rear
yards.
   B.   Accessory uses shall be operated and maintained under the same
ownership and on the same lot, or adjoining lots, as the principal use or
structure.
   C.   No accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in height, shall
not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of the rear and side yard areas, and
shall not be closer than twenty feet (20') to any lot line. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-
22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-7D-5: LOT STANDARDS:
   A.   Maximum Building Height: No building shall exceed three (3) stories or
forty five feet (45') in height.
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: One acre (or 43,560 square feet).
   C.   Minimum Lot Width: One hundred fifty feet (150').
   D.   Minimum Floor Area: One thousand (1,000) square feet.
   E.   Maximum Impervious Coverage: Twenty five percent (25%) for all lots.
   F.   Minimum Setbacks:
      1.   Minimum front yard setback: Fifty feet (50').
      2.   Minimum detached front loaded garage setback: Fifteen feet (15')
behind the front facade of the house.
      3.   Minimum side yard setback: Twenty feet (20').
      4.   Minimum rear yard setback: Fifty feet (50').
      5.   Minimum corner lot setback: Fifty feet (50') from all public streets
and thoroughfares.
      6.   Minimum detached rear loaded garage setback: Twenty feet (20') from
rear lot line. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-7D-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Off Street Parking And Loading: There shall be provided in the R-
R residential district adequate off street parking and loading in accordance
with the provisions in chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff.
9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Fences: Fences may be constructed in or projected into yards; provided,
that: 1) no fence or planting more than three feet (3') high or thirty percent
(30%) solid shall be located within thirty feet (30') of a street intersection;
2) no fence more than four feet (4') high may be located closer to the front of
the lot than the principal building; and 3) no fence higher than six feet (6')
shall be allowed on any part of the lot, with the exception of fences
surrounding tennis courts or ball fields. All fences so constructed shall be
designed in such a manner that the posts of the fence shall be on the interior
of the fence and face the property of the owner or tenant responsible for
authorizing the construction of the fence. (See chapter 16 of this title for
fence regulations.) (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
CHAPTER 8
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-8-1: Required Lot Standards
10-8-1: REQUIRED LOT STANDARDS:
 C-1 C-2 C-3
                   C-1                 C-2                C-3
Maximum building   3 stories or 45 ft. 21/2 stories or 35 21/2 stories or 35
height                                 ft.                ft.
Minimum lot size   None                10,000 sq. ft.     1/2 acre
Minimum lot width  None                75 ft.             100 ft.
Minimum floor area 500 sq. ft.         1,000 sq. ft.      5,000 sq. ft.
Maximum impervious None                None1              70 percent1
coverage
Minimum front yard None1               25 ft.             40 ft.
setback
Maximum front yard 10 ft.              50 ft.             75 ft.
setback
Minimum side yard  None1               10 ft.1            10 ft.1
setback
Minimum rear yard  None1               10 ft.1            10 ft.1
setback
Minimum corner lot None1               25 ft.             40 ft.
setback
 
Note:
   1.    See each district and chapter 18 of this title for exceptions.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
ARTICLE A. C-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8A-1: Purpose
10-8A-2: Permitted Uses
10-8A-3: Special Uses
10-8A-4: Accessory Uses
10-8A-5: Lot Standards
10-8A-6: Performance Standards
10-8A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the C-1 Central Business District is to provide retail and
office uses which are characteristic of and help preserve the unique heritage
of downtown North Utica. Buildings should consider the surrounding traditional
context, including scale, bulk, color, materials, texture, and fenestration
(windows). (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-8A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses or buildings incidental to the permitted uses.
Business and advertising signs, real estate, and public building signs or
bulletin boards when attached to a building pertaining to the use of the
property on which the sign is located. The signs shall conform to chapter 15 of
this title.
Business and professional offices: medical and dental offices and clinics; law
offices; insurance and real estate offices; banks, finance, and utility company
offices; pet stores; animal grooming stores; animal hospitals and clinics with
no open kennels; except for those establishments requiring a drive-through
facility.
Libraries, museums, art galleries, and community centers.
Musical instrument stores, sales, and repair.
Office supply stores.
Printing and publishing establishments.
Public or institutional uses: public buildings used by any department of the
Village, school district, Township, County, State, or Federal governments;
except for vehicle maintenance, raw materials storage, and other similar type
facilities.
Residential uses located above the ground floor.
Specialty shops: antiques; gift shops; jewelry stores; magazines, book and
stationery outlets; florist shops; camera and photography shops and studios;
sporting goods; and video sales and rentals. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-
22-2004)
10-8A-3: SPECIAL USES:
All permitted uses that require a drive-through facility, including attached
automated teller machines (ATMs).
Bakery, wellness center with specialty food sales.
Bars and taverns.
Convenience retail stores, pharmacies, drugstores, liquor stores, meat markets,
bakeries, delicatessens, and limited-item grocery stores with a maximum floor
area of four thousand (4,000) square feet and not containing gas stations on
the premises.
Hotels and motels.
Lodging house, bed and breakfast.
Restaurants.
Taproom brewery (as defined in the Alcoholic Beverage Ordinance of the Village
Code).
Tattoo and piercing parlor.
Tire stores, sales, and service. (Ord. 2019-03, 2-14-2019; amd. Ord. 2022-08,
3-10-2022; Ord. 2022-29, 9-8-2022)
10-8A-4: ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Accessory uses shall be operated and maintained under the same
ownership and on the same lot, or adjoining lots, as the principal use or
structure.
   B.   No accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in height, shall
not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of the rear and side yard areas, and
shall not be closer than five feet (5') to any lot line.
   C.   Outdoor display of items intended for direct sale to the public shall
be permitted as an accessory use only. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-
2004)
10-8A-5: LOT STANDARDS:
   A.   Maximum Building Height: No building shall exceed three (3) stories or
forty five feet (45') in height.
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: None.
   C.   Minimum Lot Width: None.
   D.   Minimum Floor Area: Five hundred (500) square feet.
   E.   Maximum Impervious Coverage: None.
   F.   Setbacks:
      1.   Minimum front yard setback: No setback is required for a front yard,
except to provide for a sidewalk of at least eight feet (8') in width between
the building and street.
      2.   Maximum front yard setback: Ten feet (10').
      3.   Minimum side yard setback: No setback is required for a side yard,
except for a building that abuts a residential district. A building that abuts
a residential district shall have a side yard setback of a minimum of twenty
feet (20'). A building that abuts a public street shall provide a sidewalk of
at least eight feet (8') in width between the building and street.
      4.   Minimum rear yard setback: No setback is required for a rear yard,
except for a building that abuts a residential district. A building that abuts
a residential district shall have a rear yard setback of a minimum of twenty
feet (20').
      5.   Minimum corner lot setback: No setback is required for a corner lot,
except to provide for sidewalks of at least eight feet (8') in width between
the building and any streets. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-8A-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Off Street Parking And Loading: There shall be provided in the C-
1 central business district adequate off street loading in accordance with the
schedule in chapter 14 of this title. Off street loading may be located only in
the rear yards of the C-1 central business district. Off street parking in the
C-1 central business district is not required and should be located in
consolidated locations near the district.
   B.   Mobility Impaired Accessible Parking: All developments that serve the
public shall allocate parking spaces that are accessible to people with
disabilities. Accessible parking shall be provided for any building or use
initiated after the effective date hereof.
   C.   Lighting: The level of illumination at any point in the parking lot
shall not be more than one foot-candle, measured at the pavement. Any lighting
used to illuminate an off street parking area shall be so arranged as to
reflect the light away from adjoining property. Lighting should only be used to
illuminate entries, signage, pedestrian areas, or historical areas.
   D.   Landscaping And Screening:
      1.   Within the C-1 central business district, a five foot (5')
landscaped divider strip shall be placed between all parking areas and
sidewalks.
      2.   Within or adjacent to a residential district, all open off street
parking areas for six (6) or more cars shall be effectively screened by a wall,
a solid fence, or a densely planted compact hedge along any side which is
adjacent to property in residential use unless that use is across a public
street or alley from such parking area.
      3.   All service entrances, dumpsters, air conditioning units, and any
storage items shall be located at the rear of buildings and screened from view.
   E.   Entrances: The main entrance to all buildings shall face the main
street, with secondary entrance(s) as necessary from off street parking
facilities.
   F.   Fencing:
      1.   Low wrought iron fencing and/or masonry walls are recommended
surrounding outdoor dining/display areas and parking lots and should be
utilized in conjunction with landscaping.
      2.   Wood fencing may be used to hide service entrances, dumpsters, air
conditioning units, and any storage items. The wood fencing should be solid and
either painted or stained.
      3.   Chainlink fencing shall not be used within the C-1 central business
district.
   G.   Outdoor Storage And Enclosure Requirements: Outdoor storage of items
not intended for direct sale to the public shall not be permitted. All other
business, servicing, and processing, except for off street parking and loading
and drive-through facilities, shall be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
ARTICLE B. C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8B-1: Purpose
10-8B-2: Permitted Uses
10-8B-3: Special Uses
10-8B-4: Accessory Uses
10-8B-5: Lot Standards
10-8B-6: Performance Standards
10-8B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the C-2 general commercial district is to provide for a wide
range of retail facilities and services of such a nature as to be fully
compatible in the proximity they must enjoy in the local business area or in
neighborhood shopping areas. The C-2 general commercial district is intended to
provide for a higher volume and higher intensity commercial uses than the C-
1 central business district. It is also intended that the C-2 general
commercial district be located only along collectors and arterials in order to
ensure that the traffic generated by such uses does not adversely impact nearby
residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-8B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in a residential district or the C-1 central business
district; except, that residential uses may be located only on the second or
higher floor.
Accessory uses or buildings incidental to the permitted uses.
Automated teller machines (ATMs).
Automobile parts and accessory stores.
Business and advertising signs, real estate signs, and public building signs or
bulletin boards pertaining to the use of the property on which the sign is
located. The signs shall conform to chapter 15 of this title.
Farm equipment sales and service.
Funeral homes and mortuaries.
Greenhouses, nurseries, garden supplies, and seed stores.
Major retail outlets: furniture, department, clothing, dry goods, shoe and
variety stores; hardware, electric appliance, paint and wallpaper stores.
Marinas.
Radio, television, and recording studios.
Recreation centers, health clubs, athletic clubs, and fitness centers not
exceeding a floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
Restaurants with seating for seventy five (75) persons or less.
Self-Service Ice/Water Vending Machines if located on the same lot as an
existing commercial business provided under common ownership or a written lease
with the owner(s) of the lot.
Theaters and indoor auditoriums.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. Ord. 2025-08, 5-1-2025)
10-8B-3: SPECIAL USES:
Animal Experience Attractions, provided the animals used within the exhibit are
those that are domesticated and/or common farm animals and does not include
exotic animals
Any permitted use or special use permitted in a residential district or the C-
1 central business district.
Business and professional offices requiring a drive-through facility.
Car wash establishments; provided, that no more than four (4) cars may be
washed at the same time.
Convenience retail stores, pharmacies, drugstores, liquor stores, meat markets,
bakeries, delicatessens, and grocery stores with a floor area of greater than
three thousand (3,000) square feet or containing gas stations on the premises.
Gas stations, but not including automobile vehicle repair.
Lodging and institutional: lodging houses, clubs, lodges, hospitals, and
institutions.
Parking lots as a principal use.
Recreation uses: places of amusement and assembly and commercial recreation.
Restaurants with seating for more than seventy five (75) persons.
Self-Service Ice/Water Vending Machines, if located on a lot without an
existing operating commercial business.
Service uses: laundromats, dry cleaning and laundry pick up stations,
barbershops and beauty shops, dressmaking and millinery shops, shoe repair and
tailor shops, indoor storage and transfer establishments, repair shops for
appliances and small articles, print, furnace, heating, typewriter, sheet
metal, plumbing, and fire shops employing not more than five (5) persons.
Sluice box/gem cleaning station.
Tattoo and piercing parlor.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. Ord. 2009-20, 7-8-2009; Ord.
2021-24, 7-8-2021; Ord. 2022-08, 3-10-2022; Ord. 2025-08, 5-1-2025)
10-8B-4: ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Accessory uses shall be operated and maintained under the same
ownership and on the same lot, or adjoining lots, as the principal use or
structure.
   B.   No accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in height, shall
not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of the rear and side yard areas, and
shall not be closer than five feet (5') to any lot line.
   C.   Outdoor display of items intended for direct sale to the public shall
be permitted as an accessory use only. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-
2004)
10-8B-5: LOT STANDARDS:
   A.   Maximum Building Height: No building shall exceed two and one- half
(21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height.
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
   C.   Minimum Lot Width: Seventy five feet (75').
   D.   Minimum Floor Area: One thousand (1,000) square feet.
   E.   Maximum Impervious Coverage: There is no maximum impervious coverage
for buildings less than two (2) acres in size. For buildings two (2) acres in
size or greater, no more than seventy percent (70%) of the lot shall be covered
by impervious materials, except for planned unit developments (chapter 11 of
this title).
   F.   Setbacks:
      1.   Minimum front yard setback: Twenty five feet (25').
      2.   Maximum front yard setback: Fifty feet (50').
      3.   Minimum side yard setback: At least ten feet (10') from the property
line. A building that abuts a residential district shall have a side yard
setback of a minimum of twenty feet (20').
      4.   Minimum rear yard setback: At least ten feet (10') from the property
line. A building that abuts a residential district shall have a rear yard
setback of a minimum of twenty feet (20').
      5.   Minimum corner lot setback: Twenty five feet (25') from all public
streets and thoroughfares. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-8B-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Off Street Parking And Loading: There shall be provided in the C-
2 general commercial district adequate off street parking and loading in
accordance with the schedule in chapter 14 of this title.
   B.   Mobility Impaired Accessible Parking: All developments that serve the
public shall allocate parking spaces that are accessible to people with
disabilities. Accessible parking shall be provided for any building or use
initiated after the effective date hereof.
   C.   Lighting: The level of illumination at any point in the parking lot
shall not be more than one foot-candle, measured at the pavement. Any lighting
used to illuminate an off street parking area shall be so arranged as to
reflect the light away from adjoining property. Lighting should only be used to
illuminate entries, signage, pedestrian areas, or historical areas.
   D.   Landscaping And Screening:
      1.   Within the C-2 general commercial district, a five foot (5')
landscaped divider strip shall be placed between all parking areas and
sidewalks.
      2.   Within or adjacent to a residential district, all open off street
parking areas for six (6) or more cars shall be effectively screened by a wall,
a solid fence, or a densely planted compact hedge along any side which is
adjacent to property in residential use unless that use is across a public
street or alley from such parking area.
      3.   All service entrances, dumpsters, air conditioning units, and any
storage items shall be located at the rear of buildings and screened from view.
   E.   Fencing: Wood fencing may be used to hide service entrances, dumpsters,
air conditioning units, and any storage items. The wood fencing should be solid
and either painted or stained. Chainlink fencing shall not be used within the
C-2 general commercial district. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
ARTICLE C. C-3 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8C-1: Purpose
10-8C-2: Permitted Uses
10-8C-3: Special Uses
10-8C-4: Accessory Uses
10-8C-5: Lot Standards
10-8C-6: Performance Standards
10-8C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the C-3 highway commercial district is to provide for those
retail and service businesses that serve a trade area more distant than the
adjacent properties or neighborhoods, and that depend primarily on highway
travel and those highway service uses that provide vehicle service, food, and
lodging for the highway travelers. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-8C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in the commercial districts; except, that permitted
residential uses shall be limited to owner occupancy in combination commercial/
residential structures and only on the second floor or in the rear of the
building, and signs shall be permitted only in accordance with the
specifications of this section.
Accessory uses or buildings.
Business and advertising signs, real estate signs, and public building signs or
bulletin boards pertaining to the use of the property on which the sign is
located. The signs shall conform to chapter 15 of this title.
Restaurants with seating for one hundred twenty five (125) persons or less.
Self-Service Ice/Water Vending Machines if located on the same lot as an
existing commercial business provided under common ownership or a written lease
with the owner(s) of the lot.
Trades or equipment: electrical, masonry, sheet metal, plumbing, air
conditioning, and heating shops.
Vehicle drive-in and vehicle service and sales: drive-in theaters, refreshments
stands, garages, and filling stations, provided all pumps are located fifteen
feet (15') from the street right of way and lot lines; underground bulk storage
of petroleum products provided in connection with service station usage; new
and used car sales and storage, not including outdoor, unfenced storage (nor
junk, waste products, salvage or wrecked automobiles).
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. Ord. 2025-08, 5-1-2025)
10-8C-3: SPECIAL USES:
   A.   The following Special Uses may be granted in the C-3 Highway Commercial
District only at locations that are North of U.S. Route 6. No Special Uses
shall be considered for locations South of U.S. Route 6:
Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization. Subject to the Adult-Use Cannabis
provisions set forth in Section
10-4-7 of this Code.
Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization. Subject to the Adult-Use Cannabis
provisions set forth in Section
10-4-7 of this Code.
Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization. Subject to the Adult-Use Cannabis
provisions set forth in Section
10-4-7 of this Code.
Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization. Subject to the Adult-Use Cannabis
provisions set forth in Section
10-4-7 of this Code.
Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower Organization. Subject to the Adult-Use Cannabis
provisions set forth in Section
10-4-7 of this Code.
Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Organization. Subject to the Adult-Use Cannabis
provisions set forth in Section
10-4-7 of this Code.
Family entertainment and/or amusement centers.
Hotels and motels.
Operation of a craft distillery.
Restaurants with seating for more than one hundred twenty five (125) persons.
Retail businesses engaged in the sale of products containing Cannabidiol
(“CBD”) and/or Tetrahydrocannabinol (“THC”) at levels that are not regulated by
the State of Illinois.
Self-Service Ice/Water Vending Machines, if located on a lot without an
existing operating commercial business.
Tattoo and piercing parlor.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. Ord. 2006-79, 12-13-2006; Ord.
2016-17, 8-17-2016; Ord. 2021-32, 9-30-2021; Ord. 2021-36, 11-10-2021; Ord.
2022-08, 3-10-2022; amd. Ord. 2025-08, 5-1-2025)
10-8C-4: ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Accessory uses shall be operated and maintained under the same
ownership and on the same lot, or adjoining lots, as the principal use or
structure.
   B.   No accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in height, shall
not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of the rear and side yard areas, and
shall not be closer than five feet (5') to any lot line.
   C.   Outdoor display of items intended for direct sale to the public shall
be permitted as an accessory use only. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-
2004)
10-8C-5: LOT STANDARDS:
   A.   Maximum Building Height: No building shall exceed two and one- half
(21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height.
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: One-half (1/2) acre.
   C.   Minimum Lot Width: One hundred feet (100').
   D.   Minimum Floor Area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
   E.   Maximum Impervious Coverage: No more than seventy percent (70%) of the
lot shall be covered by impervious materials, except for planned unit
developments (chapter 11 of this title).
   F.   Setbacks:
      1.   Minimum front yard setback: Forty feet (40').
      2.   Maximum front yard setback: Seventy five feet (75').
      3.   Minimum side yard setback: At least ten feet (10') from the property
line. A building that abuts a residential district shall have a side yard
setback of a minimum of twenty feet (20').
      4.   Minimum rear setback: At least ten feet (10') from the property
line. A building that abuts a residential district shall have a rear yard
setback of a minimum of twenty feet (20').
      5.   Minimum corner lot setback: Forty feet (40') from any public street
or thoroughfare. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-8C-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Off Street Parking And Loading: There shall be provided in the C-
3 highway commercial district adequate off street parking and loading in
accordance with the schedule in chapter 14 of this title.
   B.   Mobility Impaired Accessible Parking: All developments that serve the
public shall allocate parking spaces that are accessible to people with
disabilities. Accessible parking shall be provided for any building or use
initiated after the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-
2004)
   C.   Lighting: The level of illumination at any point in the parking lot
shall not be more than one foot-candle, measured at the pavement. Any lighting
used to illuminate an off street parking area shall be so arranged as to
reflect the light away from adjoining property. Lighting should only be used to
illuminate entries, signage, parking, pedestrian areas, or historical areas.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
   D.   Landscaping And Screening:
      1.   Within the C-3 highway commercial district, a five foot (5')
landscaped divider strip shall be placed between all parking areas and
sidewalks.
      2.   Within or adjacent to a residential district, all open off street
parking areas for six (6) or more cars shall be effectively screened by a wall,
a solid fence, or a densely planted compact hedge along any side which is
adjacent to property in residential use unless that use is across a public
street or alley from such parking.
      3.   All service entrances, dumpsters, air conditioning units, and any
storage items shall be located at the rear of buildings and screened from view.
   E.   Fencing: Wood fencing may be used to hide service entrances, dumpsters,
air conditioning units, and any storage items. The wood fencing should be solid
and either painted or stained. Chainlink fencing shall not be used within the
C-3 highway commercial district. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
CHAPTER 9
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-9-1: Required Lot Standards
10-9-1: REQUIRED LOT STANDARDS:
    I   I-2
                              I-1                    I-2
Maximum building height     40 ft.1                   40 ft.1
Minimum lot size            10,000 sq. ft.            20,000 sq. ft.
Minimum lot width           75 ft.                    100 ft.
Minimum floor area          1,000 sq. ft.             1,000 sq. ft.
                            75% for lots 2 acres or   85% for lots 2 acres or
Maximum impervious coverage less 60% for lots greater less 75% for lots greater
                            than 2 acres              than 2 acres
Minimum front yard setback  35 ft.                    35 ft.
Minimum side yard setback   15 ft.1                   15 ft.1
Minimum rear yard setback   15 ft.1                   15 ft.1
Minimum corner lot setback  35 ft.                    None
 
Note:
   1.    See each district and chapter 18 of this title for exceptions.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
ARTICLE A. I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-9A-1: Purpose
10-9A-2: Permitted Uses
10-9A-3: Special Uses
10-9A-4: Accessory Uses
10-9A-5: Lot Standards
10-9A-6: Performance Standards
10-9A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the I-1 light industrial district is to provide for limited
commercial use, office uses, storage, and any manufacturing use not normally
creating a nuisance discernible beyond its property. The intent of providing
for an I-1 district is to assure an area for light industrial, office, and
research uses that are of such quality which will complement the surrounding
existing community, enhance the tax base, and foster employment opportunities.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-9A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses incidental to the permitted uses.
Automobile sales, servicing, painting, upholstering, tire retreading or
recapping, and battery manufacturing, not including gas stations.
Brewery.
Building material sales establishment and storage area.
Contractor's equipment storage, offices, and shops.
Farm equipment sales and service.
Food and beverage distribution and catering establishments.
Food mixing plant.
Greenhouses and nurseries.
Industrial trade or vocational school when not objectionable due to noise,
odor, vibration, dust, smoke, or other similar causes.
Laboratories: experimental, photo or motion picture film, research, or testing.
Landscape gardener's sales area or business, provided no odor, dust, noise or
glaring light is noticeable outside any lot in this district.
Laundry plant.
Lumber storage, millwork, and sales.
Machine shops.
Machinery repairing, sales, and display, including, but not limited to, small
appliances, furnace, heating, plumbing, press, and sheet metal.
Manufacture, fabricating, compounding, canning, packaging or treatment of
products including, but not limited to, small appliances, bakery goods, candy,
clothing, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, food products, glass and ceramics,
perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, plastic and fiberglass, signs,
sheet metal, soft drinks, toiletries, tools, and wood products; but not
including the following products which may be offensive or obnoxious due to
particular odors, noise, vibrations, dust, smoke, or gas: fish and meat
products, sauerkraut, vinegar and yeast, except in conjunction with a general
food products manufacturing company; and not including the rendering of fats
and oils or slaughter of animals.
Manufactured home sales.
Manufacturing of electrical, musical, scientific, or precision equipment and
instruments.
Office parks.
Printing, lithographing, type composition, ruling, and binding establishment.
Public stables.
Repair shops, other than a railroad major repair shop.
Self-storage service facilities.
Sporting goods manufacturing.
Transit facilities.
Veterinary establishments.
Wholesale business. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-9A-3: SPECIAL USES:
Adult oriented uses; provided, that:
   A.   No adult oriented use is located within one thousand three hundred
twenty feet (1,320') of a place of worship, public or private school,
residential district, cemetery, licensed daycare center, public park, or any
business serving alcoholic beverages.
   B.   The property on which adult oriented uses are located shall be at least
one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') from any other property with an
adult use.
   C.   The use shall not be located within a building also used for
residential purposes.
   D.   All signs shall comply with the regulations within chapter 15 of this
title.
   E.   Adult oriented uses which were lawfully established prior to the
effective date hereof shall be considered legal, nonconforming uses and shall
comply with the regulations of chapter 13 of this title.
   F.   No adult oriented use shall be conducted in a manner that permits the
observation of any material depicting, describing, or relating to sexual
activities or anatomical areas from any public way or any property not utilized
for an adult oriented use.
Antennas over thirty five feet (35') in height.
Fertilizer distribution plants.
Gas stations, including automobile service repair.
Landscape waste and composting facilities; provided, that no landscape waste
and composting facility is located within five hundred feet (500') of a
residential district, an appropriate landscaped buffer is provided around its
perimeter, no hazardous materials are handled, and all licenses from any
applicable local, state, and federal agencies are obtained.
Licensed crematories, subject to any local, state, or federal health and
environmental protection requirements.
Limited retail sales of goods manufactured or assembled on the site shall be
permitted, provided not more than ten percent (10%) of the total floor area is
dedicated to such retail sales. Retail uses may include, but are not limited
to, uses intended to serve only the employees of the industrial office park
such as a restaurant or coffee shop, or residential uses limited to facilities
for caretakers, watchmen, or on call service personnel.
Manufacturing business engaged in the production of products containing
Cannabidiol ("CBD") and/or Tetrahydrocannabinol ("THC") at levels that are not
regulated by the State of Illinois.
Planned unit developments.
Public utility facilities.
Recycling centers; provided, that no recycling center is located within two
hundred feet (200') of a residential district and is conducted within an
enclosed building or surrounded by a solid, sightproof fence not less than six
feet (6') in height, or the height of the materials being screened, whichever
is higher, and where no materials shall be piled or stacked to a height in
excess of ten feet (10') above the ground level.
Storage of materials with the exception of explosive materials, dead animals,
or garbage.
Telecommunications towers.
Welding or machine shops. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; Ord. 2021-
32, 9-30-2021)
10-9A-4: ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Accessory uses shall be operated and maintained under the same
ownership and on the same lot, or adjoining lots, as the principal use or
structure.
   B.   No accessory building shall exceed twenty feet (20') in height, shall
not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear and side yard areas, and
shall not be closer to any lot line than the principal building.
   C.   Accessory uses may include, but not be limited to, fences, cafeterias
for employee and client use, parking garages and off street parking areas,
recreation space for employee and client use, vehicle repair subordinate to the
principal use, storage of materials produced within the principal building, and
signs in accordance with chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004,
eff. 9-22-2004)
10-9A-5: LOT STANDARDS:
   A.   Maximum Building Height: No building in the I-1 district shall exceed
forty feet (40') in height unless the side and rear yards are increased two
feet (2') for every one foot (1') or fraction thereof of additional height over
forty feet (40'). In no case shall the building exceed fifty feet (50').
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
   C.   Minimum Lot Width: Seventy five feet (75').
   D.   Minimum Floor Area: One thousand (1,000) square feet.
   E.   Maximum Impervious Coverage: For lots of two (2) acres or less,
impervious materials shall not cover more than seventy five percent (75%) of
the lot. For lots of greater than two (2) acres, impervious materials shall not
cover more than sixty percent (60%) of the lot.
   F.   Minimum Setbacks:
      1.   Minimum front yard setback: Thirty five feet (35').
      2.   Minimum side yard setback: At least fifteen feet (15') from the
property line. A building which abuts a residential district shall have a
minimum side yard setback of sixty feet (60').
      3.   Minimum rear yard setback: At least fifteen feet (15') from the
property line. A building which abuts a residential district shall have a
minimum rear yard setback of sixty feet (60').
      4.   Minimum corner lot setback: Thirty five feet (35') from all public
streets and thoroughfares. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-9A-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Off Street Parking And Loading: There shall be provided in the I-
1 industrial district adequate off street parking and loading in accordance
with the schedule in chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff.
9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Mobility Impaired Accessible Parking: All developments that serve the
public shall allocate parking spaces that are accessible to people with
disabilities. Accessible parking shall be provided for any building or use
initiated after the effective date hereof.
   C.   Lighting: The level of illumination at any point in the parking lot and
areas used for business operations shall not be less than two (2) foot-candles
or more than three (3) foot- candles, measured at the pavement. Any lighting
used to illuminate an off street parking area shall be so arranged as to
reflect the light away from adjoining property. Lighting should only be used to
illuminate entries, signage, pedestrian areas, or historical areas. (Ord. 2004-
26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
   D.   Landscaping And Screening:
      1.   Parking Lots: Within the I-1 district, a five foot (5') landscaped
divider strip shall be placed between all parking areas and sidewalks. Within
or adjacent to a residential district, all open off street parking areas for
six (6) or more cars shall be effectively screened by a wall, a solid fence, or
a densely planted compact hedge along any side which is adjacent to property in
residential use unless that use is across a public street or alley from such
parking area. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
      2.   Adjacent And On Site Uses:
         a.   Whenever such industrial property adjoins or abuts a lot zoned
for residential or commercial uses, a landscaped buffer strip shall be
provided, located on the industrial lot for the full length of the boundary
line. It shall be at least fifteen feet (15') in width, devoted to screen
plantings, and at least six feet (6') in height, except where the buffer strip
adjoins the front lot line. It shall not be used for parking, loading, or
unloading, and shall not be included in the measurement of any minimum yard.
         b.   All service entrances, dumpsters, air conditioning units, and any
storage items shall be located at the rear of buildings and screened from view.
   E.   Enclosed, Shielded Nuisances: All activities involving the storage or
manufacture of materials or products shall be within completely enclosed
buildings or properly shielded from view so as not to be a nuisance by any
noise, odor, and vibration emissions.
   F.   Noise: No industrial activity shall create noise at levels as to create
a nuisance for adjacent districts.
   G.   Smoke And Particulate Matter: The emission of smoke or particulate
matter in such a manner or quantity as to be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort, or welfare is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and shall be prohibited. Particulate matter emissions caused by the
wind from open storage areas, yards, or roads within the lot lines shall be
kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, wetting, and other means,
or shall be eliminated.
   H.   Odors: No offensive odors shall be emitted in such quantities as to be
readily detectable at any point along any lot lines.
   I.   Fire Hazards: All industrial activities which contain fire or explosive
hazards shall comply with the standards prescribed by the National Fire
Protection Association. All buildings shall have proper setbacks near adjoining
zoning districts.
   J.   Noxious Matter: No industrial activity shall, for any period of time,
discharge across the boundaries of the lot wherein it is located, toxic or
noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to
property or business.
   K.   Glare And Heat: Operations producing intense light or heat shall be
performed within a completely enclosed building and shall not create a public
nuisance beyond the lot lines.
   L.   Vibrations: No use shall create any earthborne vibrations which are
noticeable across any adjacent zoning district. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff.
9-22-2004)
ARTICLE B. I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-9B-1: Purpose
10-9B-2: Permitted Uses
10-9B-3: Special Uses
10-9B-4: Accessory Uses
10-9B-5: Lot Standards
10-9B-6: Performance Standards
10-9B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the I-2 heavy industrial district is to provide for industrial
uses not allowed in any other district; provided, that within this district,
uses of a hazardous nature or those producing smoke or odor shall not be
located so that the general hazard or nuisance affects a large segment of the
community. The industrial uses shall be provided adequate space,
transportation, and storage facilities. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-
2004)
10-9B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Any uses permitted within the I-1 district.
Aircraft factory, landing field, or hangar.
Boot and shoe manufacturing, including shoe polish.
Cloth products manufacturing.
Concrete, cement, brick, and asphalt manufacturing.
Iron or steel or other metal manufacture or processing, foundry or fabrication
plant and heavyweight casting, including galvanizing and other treatment.
Killing or dressing and/or packaging of poultry and rabbits.
Manufacture, fabrication and maintenance of electric and neon signs,
billboards, commercial advertising structures; sheet metal products including
heating and ventilating ducts and equipment; cornices, eaves, and the like, and
also including plumbing, heating or electrical contracting business.
Manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, assembling or treatment of bone,
canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn,
leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, shell,
textiles, tobacco, yarns and wood, or articles of merchandise made therefrom.
Paint products manufacturing.
Soap and detergent manufacturing.
Sodium compounds manufacturing.
Tool and die manufacturing.
Transit facilities, including railroad repair shops.
Truck terminals.
Woodworking, wood products manufacturing, and planing mills. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-
22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-9B-3: SPECIAL USES:
Any special use permitted within the I-1 industrial district.
Foundries and forges.
Grain storage and processing.
Incinerators.
Manufacturing business engaged in the production of products containing
Cannabidiol ("CBD") and/or Tetrahydrocannabinol ("THC") at levels that are not
regulated by the State of Illinois.
Mining, quarry, and gravel operations.
Petroleum products manufacturing.
Public utility facilities.
Rail service.
Rubber manufacturing.
Salvage yards and vehicle wrecking yards; provided, that no salvage yard or
vehicle wrecking yard is located within five hundred feet (500') of a
residential district and is conducted within an enclosed building or surrounded
by a solid sightproof fence not less than ten feet (10') in height or the
height of the materials being screened, whichever is greater, and where no
materials shall be piled or stacked to a height in excess of fifteen feet (15')
above the ground level.
Tar products manufacturing. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; Ord.
2021-32, 9-30-2021)
10-9B-4: ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Accessory uses shall be operated and maintained under the same
ownership and on the same lot, or adjoining lots, as the principal use or
structure.
   B.   No accessory building shall exceed twenty feet (20') in height, shall
not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear and side yard areas, and
shall not be closer to any lot line than the principal building.
   C.   Accessory uses may include, but not be limited to, fences, cafeterias
for employee and client use, parking garages and off street parking areas,
recreation space for employee and client use, vehicle repair subordinate to the
principal use, storage of materials produced within the principal building, and
signs in accordance with chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004,
eff. 9-22-2004)
10-9B-5: LOT STANDARDS:
   A.   Maximum Building Height: No building in the I-2 district shall exceed
forty feet (40') in height unless the side and rear yards are increased two
feet (2') for every one foot (1') or fraction thereof of additional height over
forty feet (40'). In no case shall the building exceed fifty feet (50').
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
   C.   Minimum Lot Width: One hundred feet (100').
   D.   Minimum Floor Area: One thousand (1,000) square feet.
   E.   Maximum Impervious Coverage: For lots of two (2) acres or less,
impervious materials shall not cover more than eighty five percent (85%) of the
lot. For lots of greater than two (2) acres, impervious materials shall not
cover more than seventy five percent (75%) of the lot.
   F.   Minimum Setbacks:
      1.   Minimum front yard setback: Thirty five feet (35').
      2.   Minimum side yard setback: At least fifteen feet (15') from the
property line. A building which abuts a residential district shall have a
minimum side yard setback of sixty feet (60').
      3.   Minimum rear yard setback: At least fifteen feet (15') from the
property line. A building which abuts a residential district shall have a
minimum rear yard setback of sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff.
9-22-2004)
10-9B-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Off Street Parking And Loading: There shall be provided in the I-
2 industrial district adequate off street parking and loading in accordance
with the schedule in chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff.
9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Mobility Impaired Accessible Parking: All developments that serve the
public shall allocate parking spaces that are accessible to people with
disabilities. Accessible parking shall be provided for any building or use
initiated after the effective date hereof.
   C.   Lighting: The level of illumination at any point in the parking lot and
areas used for business operations shall not be less than two (2) foot-candles
or more than three (3) foot- candles, measured at the pavement. Any lighting
used to illuminate an off street parking area shall be so arranged as to
reflect the light away from adjoining property. Lighting should only be used to
illuminate entries, signage, pedestrian areas, or historical areas. (Ord. 2004-
26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
   D.   Landscaping And Screening:
      1.   Parking Lots: Within the I-2 district, a five foot (5') landscaped
divider strip shall be placed between all parking areas and sidewalks. Within
or adjacent to a residential district, all open off street parking areas for
six (6) or more cars shall be effectively screened by a wall, a solid fence, or
a densely planted compact hedge along any side which is adjacent to property in
residential use unless that use is across a public street or alley from such
parking area. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
      2.   Adjacent And On Site Uses:
         a.   Whenever such industrial property adjoins or abuts a lot zoned
for residential or commercial uses, a landscaped buffer strip shall be
provided, located on the industrial lot for the full length of the boundary
line. It shall be at least fifteen feet (15') in width, devoted to screen
plantings, and at least six feet (6') in height, except where the buffer strip
adjoins the front lot line. It shall not be used for parking, loading, or
unloading, and shall not be included in the measurement of any minimum yard.
         b.   All service entrances, dumpsters, air conditioning units, and any
storage items shall be located at the rear of buildings and screened from view.
   E.   Enclosed, Shielded Nuisances: All activities involving the storage or
manufacture of materials or products shall be within completely enclosed
buildings or properly shielded from view so as not to be a nuisance by any
noise, odor, and vibration emissions.
   F.   Noise: No industrial activity shall create noise at levels as to create
a nuisance for adjacent districts.
   G.   Smoke And Particulate Matter: The emission of smoke or particulate
matter in such a manner or quantity as to be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort, or welfare is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and shall be prohibited. Particulate matter emissions caused by the
wind from open storage areas, yards, or roads within the lot lines shall be
kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, wetting, and other means,
or shall be eliminated.
   H.   Odors: No offensive odors shall be emitted in such quantities as to be
readily detectable at any point along any lot lines.
   I.   Fire Hazards: All industrial activities which contain fire or explosive
hazards shall comply with the standards prescribed by the National Fire
Protection Association. All buildings shall have proper setbacks near adjoining
zoning districts.
   J.   Noxious Matter: No industrial activity shall, for any period of time,
discharge, across the boundaries of the lot wherein it is located, toxic or
noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to
property or business.
   K.   Glare And Heat: Operations producing intense light or heat shall be
performed within a completely enclosed building and shall not create a public
nuisance beyond the lot lines.
   L.   Vibrations: No use shall create any earthborne vibrations which are
noticeable across any adjacent zoning district. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff.
9-22-2004)
CHAPTER 10
SPECIAL USES
SECTION:
10-10-1: Purpose
10-10-2: Authority
10-10-3: Application For Special Use
10-10-4: Public Hearing; Review And Decision
10-10-5: Conditions Of Special Use
10-10-1: PURPOSE:
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to provide the mechanism whereby
certain structures and/or uses that are necessary and desirable but are of a
unique, special, or nonrecurring nature may be permitted within any zoning
district. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-10-2: AUTHORITY:
The village board may permit special uses of land and/or structures within any
district subject to conditions contained herein if it finds that the proposed
location and establishment of any such special use will be desirable or
necessary to the public convenience or welfare and will be harmonious and
compatible with other uses adjacent to and in the vicinity of the selected site
or sites and will further community development in accordance with the
comprehensive plan. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-10-3: APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL USE:
   A.   Application Filed; Fee: The applicant shall file an application for a
special use with the village clerk, accompanied by a filing fee to be
established by the village board.
   B.   Contents:
      1.   The application shall set forth the facts and details concerning the
proposed special use and shall have attached thereto a diagram or plan showing
the result the proposed special use would have on the subject property and
surrounding properties. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
      2.   The application shall contain the following requirements:
         a.   A legal description of the property, common address, and parcel
identification number (PIN).
         b.   Any photos of the property and the specific area of the property
seeking the special use shall be submitted with the application.
         c.   A statement indicating the need for the special use.
         d.   Eleven (11) copies of the preliminary development plan and site
plan at a scale of not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') showing
adjacent property owners, including rights of way; the zoning of adjacent
properties; existing improvements and structures; and streets, railroads,
waterways, and other necessary physical features. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004,
eff. 9-22-2004; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-8-2007)
   C.   Date Of Filing: The application shall be filed prior to the date the
notice of hearing specified has been published in the local newspaper.
   D.   Date Of Hearing; Notice: The village planning commission, through its
chairperson, shall set a regular date, time, and place for a public hearing on
the application and shall inform the applicant of the same. The chairperson has
the option of changing the time and/or date if there is a conflict with other
meetings held concurrently at the village hall. Notice of the public hearing of
the petitioner's application is to be given in the following manner: (Ord.
2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
      1.   By publishing the notice of the date, time, and place of such
hearing in a paper of general circulation in the village at least fifteen (15),
but not more than thirty (30), days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-
2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
      2.   By causing the notice to contain the particular location for which
the special use is requested as well as a brief statement describing the
proposed special use. The legal description shall, in addition to the required
metes and bounds or lot and block description, contain a simple description of
the property as to area and location of such a nature to enable the ordinary
reader to accurately locate such property. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-
2004)
      3.   The petitioner shall post a sign on the property that is subject to
the special use application at least ten (10), but not more than thirty (30),
days prior to the hearing. The village will supply a sign upon payment by the
petitioner of a fifty dollar ($50.00) deposit. The sign shall be displayed in a
prominent location on the property until the conclusion of the hearing. The
village reserves the right to specify the location on the property of the
placement. The deposit shall be returned to the petitioner upon return of the
sign, in the same condition as when issued. (Ord. 2007-24, 8-8-2007; amd. 2013
Code)
10-10-4: PUBLIC HEARING; REVIEW AND DECISION:
   A.   Hearing:
      1.   No special use, in any case, shall be granted by the village board
without a public hearing by the planning commission as required herein, nor
without a report having been made by the commission to the village board, and
every report shall be accompanied by findings of fact specifying the reasons
for the reported recommendations.
      2.   The planning commission shall review the application, the
recommendation of the zoning enforcement officer, and the testimony at the
public hearing and shall recommend approval, recommend approval subject to
specified conditions, or recommend denial of the special use. If the planning
commission neither approves nor disapproves the special use within sixty (60)
days after the same has been submitted, it shall be considered to be approved
by the commission. However, the commission may extend this time for the purpose
of continuing the public hearing.
   B.   Planning Commission Findings Of Fact: In considering all appeals, all
proposed special uses, and a review by the zoning enforcement officer, the
commission shall, before recommending that the village board grant any special
use in a specific case, first determine and make findings of fact that the
proposed special use:
      1.   Is necessary or desirable to provide a service which is in the
interest of public convenience.
      2.   Will cause no additional threat to public health, safety, or welfare
or creation of a nuisance.
      3.   Will cause no additional public expense for flood protection, fire
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      4.   Will not unduly increase traffic congestion on public roads and
highways.
      5.   Will not alter the essential character of the property or
neighborhood in question.
      6.   Meets other requirements of this title, such as parking and
landscaping.
      7.   Is consistent with the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan.
   C.   Village Board Action: Upon the report of the planning commission and
the zoning enforcement officer, the village board, without further public
hearing, may adopt or deny any proposed special use or may refer the report
back to the commission for further consideration. No special use shall become
effective unless it receives a simple majority vote of the village board. (Ord.
2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-10-5: CONDITIONS OF SPECIAL USE:
   A.   Conditions May Be Imposed: Issuance of a special use permit may be made
subject to such conditions as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this
title and to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property in the
neighborhood, including, but not limited to, limitations on size and location,
hours of operation, requirements for landscaping, and lighting.
   B.   Term Of Permit; Expiration:
      1.   Special use permits may be valid for an indefinite duration or a
specific duration. Prior to the expiration of a time limit of a particular
permit, the property owner may apply to the village board for a time extension.
      2.   No special use permit shall be deemed valid unless a building permit
is issued and construction has begun within one year of the approval of the
special use permit. However, the person requesting the special use and the
village board may mutually agree to an extension of time.
   C.   Transfer Of Permit: All special use permits shall be approved for the
specific tract or parcel of land, and may not be transferred to any other
location. An approved special use permit is transferable to any subsequent
landowner unless previously stated otherwise. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-
22-2004)
CHAPTER 11
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
10-11-1: Purpose
10-11-2: Types Of Planned Unit Developments
10-11-3: Permitted Uses
10-11-4: General Provisions
10-11-5: Site Requirements And Performance Standards
10-11-6: Density Incentives
10-11-7: Preapplication Meeting
10-11-8: Preliminary Development Plan
10-11-9: Final Development Plan
10-11-1: PURPOSE:
Planned unit developments are a specific type of special use recommended by the
planning commission and approved by the village board. Particular purposes
include:
   A.   Providing flexibility in the development of land and in the design of
structures located on the land, and permit planned diversification in the
location of such structures that might not otherwise be achieved due to the
strict applications of this title.
   B.   Preserving common open space and recreation facilities.
   C.   Preserving natural vegetation areas, topography, and geologic features
by using a creative and efficient use of land.
   D.   Providing quality construction that is compatible with and enhances the
character of the surrounding properties.
   E.   Providing a rational and economical public utilities system and
ensuring that traffic circulation is safe and convenient. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-
2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-11-2: TYPES OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
The following are types of planned unit developments:
   A.   Residential planned unit developments.
   B.   Mixed use planned unit developments. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-
22-2004)
10-11-3: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Residential Planned Unit Developments:
Any permitted uses and special uses within any district as provided in chapter
7 of this title.
Up to ten percent (10%) of the total land area may be used for commercial
permitted and special uses as provided in chapter 8 of this title.
   B.   Mixed Use Planned Unit Developments:
Any permitted uses and special uses within a commercial or industrial district
as provided within chapters 8 and 9 of this title.
Combination commercial/residential structures may be permitted if the
commercial uses are only restricted to the ground level.
Up to twenty percent (20%) of the total land area may be used for residential
permitted and special uses as provided in chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 2004-
26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-11-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
Both residential planned unit developments and mixed use planned unit
developments are subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Location: Planned unit developments are allowed as a special use within
any land use district, though the primary land use shall be the district in
which the planned unit development is located.
   B.   Ownership: The site of a proposed planned unit development shall be
controlled under one owner or under unified ownership.
   C.   Total Lot Size: The minimum size of a planned unit development shall be
at least two (2) acres. The planning commission may waive this requirement if
there are certain special site restrictions, such as topographical changes,
heavily wooded areas, wetlands, floodplains, soil conditions, or utility
easements. No minimum lot size is required for individual buildings; except,
that single-family detached dwellings shall not be less than five thousand
(5,000) square feet in lot area on average, and single-family attached
dwellings shall not be less than three thousand (3,000) square feet in lot area
per unit on average.
   D.   Lot Width: The minimum lot width of the entire planned unit development
shall be at least two hundred feet (200'). (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-
2004)
   E.   Parking: The parking requirements for individual uses permitted within
the planned unit development shall be consistent with the requirements for each
particular use. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
   F.   Traffic: Adequate provision shall be made to provide the least amount
of pedestrian and automobile traffic congestion possible on the public streets.
   G.   Design: The general design of the planned unit development shall not
endanger the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.
   H.   Signs: All signs shall conform to the provisions provided in chapter 15
of this title.
   I.   Utilities: Whenever possible, all planned unit developments shall
provide for the underground installation of utilities. The appropriate design,
construction, and location of storm sewers, water lines, retention areas,
electric lines, and telephone service shall be provided. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-
2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-11-5: SITE REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Maximum Building Height: The maximum building height for all buildings
shall be consistent with the requirements for each particular district in which
the building is to be located.
   B.   Maximum Impervious Coverage: The total impervious coverage in all
residential buildings shall not exceed forty five percent (45%) of the lot area
and must be consistent with the character of the surrounding existing developed
areas. The total impervious coverage in all commercial and industrial buildings
shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of the lot area.
   C.   Setbacks: The front, side, and rear setbacks of the planned unit
development shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the
district(s) in which the use(s) is located along the perimeter of the planned
unit development and along all public streets. If single-family detached
dwellings are part of the planned unit development, at least fifty feet (50')
shall be provided between the front and rear of each dwelling unit, and at
least twenty feet (20') shall be provided between the sides of abutting
dwelling units. However, the planning commission may modify these requirements
to encourage residential cluster developments.
   D.   Lighting: All off street parking lots shall have adequate lighting. The
level of lighting shall be consistent with the requirements for each particular
use.
   E.   Landscaping And Screening:
      1.   For all uses within the planned unit development, a five foot (5')
landscaped divider strip shall be placed between all parking areas and
sidewalks. Within or adjacent to a residential district or residential uses,
all open off street parking areas for six (6) or more cars shall be effectively
screened by a wall, a solid fence, or a densely planted, compact hedge along
any side which is adjacent to property in residential use unless that use is
across a public street or alley from such parking area.
      2.   All service entrances, dumpsters, air conditioning units, and any
storage items shall be located at the rear of buildings and screened from view.
   F.   Common Open Space:
      1.   The open space of the planned unit development shall not be less
than twenty percent (20%) of the total land area. Of the open space provided,
at least ten percent (10%) of the total land area within the planned unit
development shall be usable open space.
      2.   The area of each parcel of open space shall not be less than six
thousand (6,000) square feet in area nor less than thirty feet (30') in its
smallest dimension. Also, at least fifty percent (50%) of the common open space
shall be contiguous or connected via pedestrian/bicycle paths.
      3.   The common open space should be distributed equitably throughout the
planned unit development and be highly accessible, as much as is practical.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-11-6: DENSITY INCENTIVES:
The planned unit development may be eligible for an increase in the percentage
of residential, commercial, or industrial impervious coverage up to ten percent
(10%) if certain design elements are met. The planning commission shall make a
recommendation to the village board about the increase in percentage of
impervious coverage, if any, to be allowed for any particular incentive. Each
design element is worth a maximum of five percent (5%) in increased impervious
coverage. The applicant can request two (2) of the following incentives:
   A.   At least five percent (5%) more of the usable open space is provided
above the minimum standard.
   B.   Creative site design, planning, and preservation of existing natural
vegetation and terrain.
   C.   Providing additional recreational amenities such as tennis courts, golf
courses, ball fields, swimming pools, or community centers.
   D.   At least twenty percent (20%) of the residential dwelling units are
allocated for people with low income levels as determined by the latest U.S.
census data.
   E.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the minimum parking requirements are
met using underground parking structures.
   F.   At least fifty percent (50%) more of the parking lot landscaping is
provided above the minimum standard.
   G.   Part of the planned unit development provides public access to the
Illinois River or I&M Canal. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-11-7: PREAPPLICATION MEETING:
A preapplication meeting is required with the zoning enforcement officer along
with the planning commission and/or village engineer and/or village officials
to discuss the planned unit development proposal. This meeting is required for
the developer to generally discuss the planned unit development proposal with
the zoning enforcement officer and commission and to receive general comments
regarding the proposal and regulations of this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004,
eff. 9-22-2004)
10-11-8: PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   A.   Application Requirements:
      1.   Application Filed; Fee: The applicant shall file an application for
a planned unit development with the village clerk, accompanied by a filing fee
to be established by the village board. The fee does not include the fees for
the individual buildings where building permits must also be obtained. (Ord.
2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
      2.   Contents Of Application:
         a.   The application shall set forth the facts and details concerning
the proposed planned unit development and shall have attached thereto a diagram
or plan showing the result the proposed planned unit development would have on
the subject property(ies) and surrounding properties.
         b.   Eleven (11) copies of the preliminary development plan shall be
included with the application and forwarded to the planning commission. The
application shall contain the following requirements within the preliminary
development plan along with all fees:
            (1)   A legal description of the property, common address, and
parcel identification number (PIN).
            (2)   The names and addresses of all owners of the site proposed
for development as well as the names and addresses of all professional site
planners, architects, engineers, surveyors, or other consultants.
            (3)   A general plan drawing reflecting the intended use and future
street locations for adjacent areas when the proposed planned unit development
is intended to represent a single phase of a longer range development.
            (4)   A site plan of the proposed development (at a scale of not
less than 1 inch equals 50 feet, including north arrow) including the general
location of the following:
               (A)    An indication of the existing conditions on the tract
including contour lines (2 foot intervals), watercourses and existing drainage
facilities, existing wooded areas and isolated trees to be retained and
proposed new vegetation, walks or other improvements, and existing buildings
and structures with an indication of those which will be removed and those
which will be retained as part of the development.
               (B)    Adjacent property owners, including rights of way.
               (C)    An indication of the area surrounding the site showing
land use, peculiar physical features, public facilities, and existing and
proposed zoning (if applicable).
               (D)    All buildings, structures, and other improvements,
including building setbacks and distance between buildings.
               (E)    Common open space, including recreation areas and
facilities.
               (F)    Off street parking facilities and number of spaces to be
provided.
               (G)    Location and dimensions of all driveways, pedestrian
walkways, streets, and off street parking and loading facilities.
               (H)    Landscaping and screening of the development, including
the perimeters and off street parking and loading facilities. The phasing of
landscape installation and planting methods shall be indicated.
               (I)    Location, height, design, and illumination
characteristics of all external lighting fixtures.
               (J)    Location and dimensions of all public streets and uses,
including, but not limited to, schools, parks, churches, and public buildings.
               (K)    Other documents or plans as determined necessary by the
zoning enforcement officer, village engineer, and planning commission.
            (5)   Quantitative data indicating the following:
               (A)    Total number of dwelling units by type (if applicable).
               (B)    Total number of dwelling units by number of bedrooms per
unit.
               (C)    Proposed lot coverage of buildings and structures
(percent of total).
               (D)    Approximate gross and net residential densities,
excluding all streets and roadways (if applicable).
               (E)    Total number of off street parking spaces provided.
               (F)    Total amount of usable open space area provided.
               (G)    Other calculations as determined necessary by the zoning
enforcement officer, village engineer, and planning commission.
            (6)   Elevation or perspective drawings of all buildings and
general architectural character of the buildings.
            (7)   A development schedule indicating:
               (A)    The approximate date when construction of the project
will begin. This schedule is not binding to the applicant, but shall be a basis
for the village to use for constructing any public utility facilities, if
necessary.
               (B)    The stages in which the project will be built and the
approximate date when construction of each stage will begin.
               (C)    The approximate dates when the development of each of the
stages will be completed.
               (D)    The area and location of common open space that will be
provided at each stage.
            (8)   A statement shall be presented to the planning commission if
the applicant intends to sell or lease all or a portion of the planned unit
development after the project is approved. The conditions of sale and
maintenance of such developed properties shall be stipulated. Any covenants,
deed restrictions, or other similar agreements between the applicant and future
owners shall be presented. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. Ord.
2007-24, 8-8-2007)
      3.   Date Of Filing: The application shall be filed prior to the date the
notice of hearing specified has been published in the local newspaper.
   B.   Review Of Application; Recommendation To Planning Commission: The
village clerk shall send a copy of the planned unit development application to
all appropriate village and county officials for comment. After receipt of a
complete application for a planned unit development, the zoning enforcement
officer and village engineer shall complete the review of the application and
shall send a recommendation to the planning commission. The recommendation
shall set forth whether the planned unit development application should be
granted or denied. The recommendation shall state the grounds for any such
recommendations as they relate to the standards and the purposes of the zoning
district classifications of the village in which the planned unit development
would be located closest.
   C.   Date Of Hearing; Notice: The village planning commission, through its
chairperson, shall set a regular date, time, and place for a public hearing on
the application and shall inform the applicant of the same. The chairperson has
the option of changing the time and/or date if there is a conflict with other
meetings held concurrently at the village hall. Notice of the public hearing of
petitioner's application is to be given in the following manner:
      1.   By publishing the notice of the date, time, and place of such
hearing in a paper of general circulation in the village at least three (3),
but not more than thirty (30), days prior to the hearing. The planning
commission shall be given at least fifteen (15) days to review the preliminary
development plans.
      2.   By causing the notice to contain the particular location for which
the planned unit development is requested as well as a brief statement
describing the proposed planned unit development. The legal description shall,
in addition to the required metes and bounds or lot and block description,
contain a simple description of the property as to area and location of such a
nature to enable the ordinary reader to accurately locate such property. (Ord.
2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
      3.   The petitioner shall post a sign on the property that is subject to
the planned unit development application at least ten (10), but not more than
thirty (30), days prior to the hearing. The village will supply a sign upon
payment by the petitioner of a fifty dollar ($50.00) deposit. The sign shall be
displayed in a prominent location on the property until the conclusion of the
hearing. The village reserves the right to specify the location on the property
of the placement. The deposit shall be returned to the petitioner upon return
of the sign, in the same condition as when issued. (Ord. 2007-24, 8-8-2007;
amd. 2013 Code)
   D.   Public Hearing:
      1.   No planned unit development, in any case, shall be granted by the
village board without a public hearing by the planning commission as required
herein, nor without a report having been made by the commission to the village
board, and every report shall be accompanied by findings of fact specifying the
reasons for the reported recommendations. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-
2004)
      2.   The planning commission shall review the application, the
recommendation of the zoning enforcement officer and village engineer, and the
testimony at the public hearing and shall recommend approval, recommend
approval subject to specified conditions, or recommend denial of the
preliminary development plan. If the planning commission neither approves nor
disapproves the amendment within sixty (60) days after the same has been
submitted, it shall be considered to be approved by the commission. (Ord. 2004-
26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
   E.   Planning Commission Findings Of Fact: In considering all appeals and a
review by the zoning enforcement officer and village engineer, the commission
shall, before recommending that the village board approve any preliminary
development plan in a specific case, first determine and make findings of fact
that the proposed planned unit development:
      1.   Is necessary or desirable to provide a service which is in the
interest of public convenience.
      2.   Will cause no additional threat to public health, safety, or welfare
or the creation of a nuisance.
      3.   Will cause no additional public expense for flood protection, fire
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      4.   Will not unduly increase traffic congestion on public roads and
highways.
      5.   Will not alter the essential character of the property in question.
      6.   Will not adversely affect the adjacent properties.
      7.   Meets other requirements of this title, such as parking and
landscaping.
      8.   Is consistent with the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan.
   F.   Village Board Action:
      1.   Upon the report of the planning commission and the zoning
enforcement officer or village engineer, the village board, without further
public hearing, may adopt or deny the proposed preliminary development plan for
a planned unit development or may refer the report back to the commission for
further consideration.
      2.   No preliminary development plan shall be considered approved unless
it receives a simple majority vote of the village board.
      3.   Approval of the preliminary development plan by the village board
does not constitute approval of the plan, but is merely an authorization to
proceed with the preparation of the final development plan. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-
22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-11-9: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   A.   Time For Submission; Contents:
      1.   Within one year following the approval of the preliminary
development plan by the village board, the applicant shall submit the final
development plan with the village engineer. Eleven (11) copies of the final
development plan shall be filed containing all information, plans, and data as
required by this chapter and as follows:
         a.   All material listed in section
10-11-8 of this chapter for the preliminary development plan.
         b.   Certificates, seals, and signatures required for the dedication
of land, covenants, easements, recording the documents, and such other legal
documents as may be required.
         c.   Accurate tabulations on the use of the area including land area,
number of buildings, number of dwelling units per acre (if applicable), total
common open space, percentage of paved area, and total number of parking spaces
provided.
         d.   Any other plans or specifications that may be necessary for final
engineering approval of drainage, street design, and other facilities by the
village engineer or planning commission.
         e.   (1)    A development schedule indicating:
               (A)    The date when construction of the project will begin.
               (B)    The stages in which the project will be built and the
approximate dates when construction of each stage will begin.
               (C)    The approximate dates when the development of each of the
stages will be completed.
               (D)    The area and location of common open space that will be
provided at each stage.
            (2)   Failure to maintain the schedule may allow for revocation of
the approval for the planned unit development, and no further building permits
or occupancy permits shall be granted.
      2.   If the applicant intends to sell or lease all or a portion of the
planned unit development after the project is approved, a statement shall be
presented to the village board. The conditions of sale and maintenance of such
developed properties shall be stipulated. Any covenants, deed restrictions, or
other similar agreements between the applicant and future owners shall be
presented.
      3.   The applicant shall set forth in detail the proposal for the
perpetual maintenance of common areas and other community facilities, such as,
but not limited to, landscaped areas, pedestrian walkways, recreation
facilities, parking areas, project gates, project security or protective
devices, wastewater treatment facilities, or potable water supply. This
proposal for such maintenance may include one or more of the following devices:
mandatory homeowners' association or community association permanent trust,
public ownership and maintenance of the fee or a lesser interest, public
utility maintenance or operation by the landlord, a combination of one or more
of these arrangements, or a similar device. The proposal for perpetual
maintenance shall be subject to village approval, with or without modification,
deemed necessary to ensure perpetuity.
   B.   Planning Commission Review And Action: The planning commission shall
review the final development plan and the recommendation of the zoning
enforcement officer and village engineer and shall approve, approve subject to
specified conditions, or deny the final development plan. The decision shall be
based on whether the final development plan is in sufficient compliance with
the preliminary development plan. If the planning commission neither approves
nor disapproves the amendment within sixty (60) days after the same has been
submitted, it shall be considered to be approved by the commission. However,
the person requesting the special use and the commission may mutually agree to
an extension of time.
   C.   Village Board Action: Upon the report of the planning commission and
the zoning enforcement officer or village engineer, the village board, without
further public hearing, may adopt or deny the proposed final development plan
for a planned unit development or may refer the report back to the commission
for further consideration. No final development plan shall be considered
approved unless it receives a simple majority vote of the village board.
   D.   Changes To Approved Plan:
      1.   No changes may be made in the final development plan during the
construction of a planned unit development except upon application to the
village clerk, who shall refer it to the planning commission. Minor changes in
the location, siting, and height of buildings and structures may be authorized
by the planning commission without additional public hearings, if required by
engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was
approved. No change authorized by this chapter may cause any of the following:
         a.   A change in the use or character of the development.
         b.   An increase in overall coverage of structures.
         c.   An increase in the intensity of use.
         d.   A reduction in approved open space.
         e.   A reduction of off street parking and loading spaces.
         f.   An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and public
utilities.
         g.   A reduction in approved pavement widths.
      2.   All other changes in use, or rearrangement of lots, blocks and
building tracts, or any changes in the provision of common open space, and all
other changes, must be made by the village board after a public hearing and a
recommendation by the planning commission. Any changes which are made to the
final development plan shall be made as amendments to the recorded copy of the
final development plan. Such amendments may be made only if they are shown to
be required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the final plan
was approved, or by changes which are approved in the final plan, and must be
recorded as amendments in accordance with the provisions provided in section
10-3-4 of this title.
   E.   Lapse Of Plan; Extension:
      1.   The applicant shall conform to the development schedule as required
in this chapter. If no construction has begun or no approved principal use is
established in the planned unit development within one year from the approval
of the final development plan by the village board, the approval of the formal
development plan shall lapse and be voided and no longer be in effect.
      2.   In its discretion and for good cause, the planning commission may
recommend to the village board the extension, for one additional year, of the
period for the beginning of construction, the establishment of an approved
principal use, or completion of a phase of development as indicated in the
development schedule. If a final development plan lapses under the provisions
of this chapter, the zoning enforcement officer shall notify the applicant, at
the address given on the plan submitted, of the revocation of approval of the
planned unit development. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
CHAPTER 12
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Statute Authority; Purpose
10-12-2: Definitions
10-12-3: Duties Of Zoning Enforcement Officer
10-12-4: Base Flood Elevation
10-12-5: Development Permit
10-12-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Damages
10-12-7: Protecting Buildings
10-12-8: Subdivision And Other Development Requirements
10-12-9: Public Health And Other Standards
12-12-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
10-12-11: Variances
10-12-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
10-12-13: Violations; Penalties
10-12-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
10-12-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY; PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the village by
the Illinois municipal code 1 , in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   A.   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   B.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   C.   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   D.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   E.   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   F.   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   G.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate floodwater and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 2011-19, 7-13-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
10-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
10-12-4 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year.
CRITICAL FACILITY: A. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
   B.   Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be
required include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police
stations); schools; hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities;
major roads and bridges; critical utility sites (telephone switching stations
or electrical transformers); and hazardous materials storage facilities
(chemicals, petrochemicals, and hazardous or toxic substances).
DEVELOPMENT: A. Any manmade change to real estate including, but not
necessarily limited to:
      1.   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
      2.   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
      3.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
      4.   Installation of utilities and construction of roads, bridges,
culverts or similar projects;
      5.   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
      6.   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
      7.   Storage of materials, including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height, or velocity of floodwaters or surface waters.
   B.   "Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date hereof.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within
the village. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood, plus one
foot (1') of freeboard, at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): A. These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the village of North Utica,
Illinois (the "village"), the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village, or
that may be annexed into the village that are subject to inundation by the base
flood. The floodplains of the village are generally identified as such on panel
number(s) 482, 484, 485, 495, and 525 of the countywide flood insurance rate
map of LaSalle County, Illinois, prepared by the federal emergency management
agency and dated July 18, 2011. Floodplain also includes those areas of known
flooding as identified by the village.
   B.   The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated LaSalle County that
are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be
annexed into the village are generally identified as such on the flood
insurance rate map prepared for LaSalle County by the federal emergency
management agency and dated July 18, 2011.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the Illinois River and Clark's Run
Creek shall be as delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of
LaSalle County prepared by FEMA and dated July 18, 2011. The floodways for each
of the remaining floodplains of the village shall be according to the best data
available from federal, state, or other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
   C.   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency.
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water resources.
IDNR/OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM: Illinois department of natural resources/office
of water resources has jurisdiction over any stream serving a tributary area of
six hundred forty (640) acres or more in an urban area, or in the floodway of
any stream serving a tributary area of six thousand four hundred (6,400) acres
or more in a rural area. Construction on these streams requires a permit from
the department. (Ill. adm. code title 17, section 3700.30.) The department may
grant approval for specific types of activities by issuance of a statewide
permit which meets the standards defined in section
10-12-6 of this chapter.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
10-12-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date hereof and includes any subsequent improvements of
such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date hereof.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the effective date hereof equals
or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes "repetitive
loss" buildings as defined in this section.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: A. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place subsequent to the effective date hereof
in which the cumulative percentage of improvements:
      1.   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started; or
      2.   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
   B.   "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure.
   C.   The term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
   D.   The term does not include:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or the Illinois register of historic places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
required federal, state, and/or local permits and elevation certification is
presumed to be in violation until such time as the documentation is provided.
(Ord. 2011-19, 7-13-2011)
10-12-3: DUTIES OF ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The zoning enforcement officer shall be responsible for the general
administration of this chapter and shall ensure that all development activities
within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the village meet the
requirements of this chapter. Specifically, the zoning enforcement officer
shall:
   A.   Process development permits in accordance with section
10-12-5 of this chapter;
   B.   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
10-12-6 of this chapter;
   C.   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
10-12-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as built"
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   D.   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
10-12-8 of this chapter;
   E.   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
10-12-9 of this chapter;
   F.   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
10-12-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   G.   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
10-12-13 of this chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   H.   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   I.   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse;
   J.   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   K.   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   L.   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies
of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development
activities subject to this chapter;
   M.   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   N.   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 2011-19, 7-13-2011)
10-12-4: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   A.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Illinois River and
Clark's Run Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
countywide flood insurance study of LaSalle County prepared by the federal
emergency management agency and dated July 18, 2011.
   B.   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH zone"
or an "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the countywide
flood insurance rate map of LaSalle County.
   C.   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance rate map of LaSalle
County shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or
other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   D.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated LaSalle County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the village of North Utica or that may be annexed into the village shall be
as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of
LaSalle County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated
July 18, 2011. (Ord. 2011-19, 7-13-2011)
10-12-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit And Compliance Required: No person, firm, corporation, or
governmental body not exempted by law shall commence any development in the
floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the zoning
enforcement officer. The zoning enforcement officer shall not issue a
development permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements
of this chapter.
   B.   Application For Permit: The application for development permit shall be
accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
10-12-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   C.   Review Of Application: Upon receipt of an application for a development
permit, the zoning enforcement officer shall compare the elevation of the site
to the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown
by survey data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has
not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map is
not in the floodplain and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this
chapter. In addition, any development located on land shown to be below the
base flood elevation and hydraulically connected to a flood source, but not
identified as a floodplain on the current flood insurance rate map, is subject
to the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Records Of Ground Elevation: The zoning enforcement officer shall
maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site
and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site's first flood insurance rate map identification.
   E.   Additional Required Permits: The zoning enforcement officer shall be
responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal,
state, and local permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may be
required for this type of activity. The zoning enforcement officer shall not
issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been
obtained. (Ord. 2011-19, 7-13-2011)
10-12-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development, will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat
to public health and safety. The following specific development activities
shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 2.
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 3.
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 4.
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit
number 5.
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities such as underground utility lines,
light poles, signposts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet and
raising buildings on the same footprint which do not involve fill and any other
activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 6.
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 7.
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 8.
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 9.
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 10.
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11.
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 12.
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 13.
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   B.   Other development activities not listed in subsection A of this section
may be permitted only if:
      1.   The permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 2011-19, 7-13-2011)
10-12-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: In addition to the state permit and damage
prevention requirements of section
10-12-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the effective date hereof. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the effective date hereof. If
substantially damaged, the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section within twenty four (24) months of the date the damage
occurred.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
10-12-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Residential And Nonresidential Buildings:
      1.   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
         a.   The building may be constructed on permanent landfill in
accordance with the following:
            (1)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above
the flood protection elevation;
            (2)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
            (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure;
            (4)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not
incorporate debris or refuse material; and
            (5)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties, and when necessary, stormwater
management techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
         b.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with
the following:
            (1)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts,
piles, walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters;
            (2)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation;
            (3)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood
protection elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening
of each wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2)
openings. The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
below the base flood elevation; and
            (4)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
               (A) All structural components below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
               (B) Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed;
               (C) The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space; or
               (D) In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
         c.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below
the flood protection elevation; provided, that the following conditions are
met:
            (1)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
            (2)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entrance and exit of floodwaters. There shall be a minimum of one opening on
each wall having a total net area of not less than one square inch per one
square foot of enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1')
above grade;
            (3)   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood
protection elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade;
            (4)   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the
interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed
four feet (4') at any point;
            (5)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event;
            (6)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
            (7)   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above
the flood protection elevation.
      2.   a. Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in
lieu of elevation), provided a licensed professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
            (1)   Below the flood protection elevation, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the base flood.
            (2)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and
the impact from debris and ice.
            (3)   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
         b.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection B2.
   C.   Manufactured Homes Or Travel Trailers: Manufactured homes or travel
trailers to be permanently installed on site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection B1 of this section; and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile
home tie-down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section
870.
   D.   Travel Trailers And Recreational Vehicles: Travel trailers and
recreational vehicles on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per
year shall meet the elevation requirements of subsection C of this section
unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck;
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches;
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling;
      5.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet;
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated;
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement off the floodplain;
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick disconnect;
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model; and
      10.   The vehicle must either:
         a.   Be entirely supported by jacks; or
         b.   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by a block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   E.   Garages, Sheds Or Other Minor Accessory Structures: Garages, sheds or
other minor accessory structures constructed ancillary to an existing
residential use may be permitted, provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in market value or replacement cost, whichever is greater, or less
than five hundred seventy six (576) square feet (24 feet by 24 feet).
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 2011-19, 7-13-2011)
10-12-8: SUBDIVISION AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The village board of trustees shall take into account hazards, to the
extent that they are known, in all official actions related to land management
use and development.
   B.   1. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protection standards
of sections
10-12-6 and
10-12-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
         a.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain.
Where the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the
applicant shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
         b.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
         c.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 .
      2.   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be
located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural
streams and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included
within parks or other public grounds. (Ord. 2011-19, 7-13-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
10-12-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   A.   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
10-12-6 and
10-12-7 of this chapter, the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer, or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
10-12-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation, whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   B.   All other activities defined as "development" shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 2011-19, 7-
13-2011)
10-12-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained. In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 2011-19, 7-13-2011)
10-12-11: VARIANCES:
   A.   Authority: Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship
on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the village
board of trustees for a variance. The village board of trustees may refer the
matter to the village planning commission to review the applicant's request for
a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the village board of
trustees. The board of trustees may attach such conditions to the granting of a
variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
   B.   Standards For Variance Request: No variance shall be granted unless the
applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health or safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      7.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   C.   Variances From Building Protection Standards Generally: The zoning
enforcement officer shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from
the requirements of the building protection standards of section
10-12-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a
building will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability. (Ord. 2011-19, 7-13-2011)
   D.   Historic Landmarks: Variances to the building protection requirements
of section
10-12-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a "historic structure", as defined in section
10-12-2 of this chapter, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
10-12-6 and
10-12-7 of this chapter, subject to the conditions that: (Ord. 2011-19, 7-13-
2011; amd. 2013 Code)
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
   E.   Agriculture: Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall
be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's
unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as
well as those criteria and conditions set forth in this chapter. In order to
minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to public
health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance
issued for agricultural structures that are constructed at grade and wet
floodproofed:
      1.   All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that the
varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other
alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement
facilities, such as farmhouses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
      2.   Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in zone A only as identified on the village flood insurance rate map
(FIRM).
      3.   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall
framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood
elevation must be built with flood resistant materials in accordance with
section
10-12-7 of this chapter.
      4.   The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with
section
10-12-7 of this chapter. All of the building's structural components must be
capable of resisting specific flood related forces including hydrostatic,
buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
      5.   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with section
10-12-7 of this chapter.
      6.   The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the
100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters in accordance with subsection 10-12-7B1 of this chapter.
      7.   The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway provisions of section
10-12-6 of this chapter. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures
within any designated floodway.
      8.   Wet floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the zoning enforcement officer and a registered professional
engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development
permit for construction. (Ord. 2011-19, 7-13-2011)
10-12-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
made lawfully hereunder. (Ord. 2011-19, 7-13-2011)
10-12-13: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation: Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain
or failure to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be
deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
   B.   Determination And Notice Of Violation: Upon due investigation, the
zoning enforcement officer may determine that a violation of the minimum
standards of this chapter exists. The zoning enforcement officer shall notify
the owner in writing of such violation.
   C.   Injunction And Penalty: If such owner fails, after ten (10) days'
notice, to correct the violation:
      1.   The village shall make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter;
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense;
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues; and
      4.   The village shall record a notice of violation on the title of the
property.
   D.   Insurance Suspension: The zoning enforcement officer shall inform the
owner that any violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages
and, therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.
   E.   Suspension Of Development:
      1.   Stop Work Order: The zoning enforcement officer is authorized to
issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop
work order shall be in writing, indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall
order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop
work order. The stop work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      2.   Hearing:
         a.   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the board of trustees. Written notice of
such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
            (1)   The grounds for the complaint and the reasons for suspension
or revocation; and
            (2)   The time and place of the hearing.
         b.   At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on his behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of
trustees shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   F.   Other Remedies: Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking
such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord.
2011-19, 7-13-2011)
10-12-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the village to
fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance program including
ordinance 2001-10, adopted August 15, 2001, and ordinance 2004-26, adopted
September 22, 2004. However, this chapter does not repeal the original
resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program, nor does
this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinances, easements,
covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 2011-19, 7-13-2011)
CHAPTER 13
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
SECTION:
10-13-1: Purpose
10-13-2: Authority To Continue Nonconforming Buildings And Uses
10-13-3: Authority To Continue Nonconforming Signs
10-13-4: Change Of Nonconforming Buildings And Uses
10-13-5: Residential Nonconforming Uses
10-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to identify buildings and uses that existed
prior to the effective date hereof and that fail to conform to one or more of
the provisions of this title. This chapter identifies how the nonconforming
buildings and uses may be continued, altered, or expanded. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-
2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-13-2: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES:
Any lawful use of land or structure existing or under construction at the
effective date hereof, or subsequent amendments, that does not conform to the
regulations found within the district in which it is located shall be
considered nonconforming. Any lawful use of land or structure existing at the
effective date hereof, or subsequent amendments, may be continued with the
following limitations:
   A.   Expansion Limited: Any structure containing a nonconforming use shall
not be expanded nor subsequently remodeled. Ordinary repairs and maintenance
may be made to the structure if they are necessary to strengthen and restore
the building or structure to a safe condition, are required by law, or to make
the building or structure more closely conform to the regulations found within
the district in which it is located.
   B.   Alterations Or Additions: A structure may be altered or enlarged;
provided, that it conforms with the regulations found within the district in
which it is located.
   C.   Relocation: No nonconforming building shall be moved, in whole or in
part, to any other lot unless the entire nonconforming building shall conform
to the regulations found within the district in which it is moved.
   D.   Abandonment Or Discontinuance: No nonconforming use shall be
reestablished after having been discontinued for one year, regardless of any
intent to resume or not abandon such use. Vacating of premises or building or
nonoperative status shall be evidence of a discontinued use. Subsequent uses of
the building, structure, or lot shall conform to the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
   E.   Change Of Use: No nonconforming use may be substituted for any other
nonconforming use.
   F.   Nonconforming Accessory Uses: No use which is accessory to a principal
nonconforming use shall continue after such principal use shall cease or
terminate.
   G.   Damage Or Destruction:
      1.   Rebuilding Regulated: Any nonconforming structure, which has been
damaged to the extent of sixty percent (60%) of its current fair market value
as estimated immediately prior to damage by the zoning enforcement officer or
building inspector, shall not be repaired or reconstructed except in conformity
with this title.
      2.   Repair Permitted: If a building or other structure containing a
nonconforming use or if a nonconforming structure is damaged by any means to an
extent less than sixty percent (60%) of its replacement value at that time, it
may be repaired, and the previous use may be continued. However, no parking,
yard, space, or bulk nonconformity shall be created or increased.
      3.   Prompt Repair Required: Repair of a damaged building or other
structure, as permitted in subsection G2 of this section, must be started
within a period of one year from the occurrence of the damage and diligently
pursued to completion.
   H.   Exceptions: The following exceptions to the regulations of this section
are hereby established:
      1.   Any building or structure built prior to the year 1940, in sound,
well maintained condition, and remaining essentially unchanged from that date
shall not be classified as a nonconforming building or structure but shall be
classified as a conforming building or structure.
      2.   Any building or structure built prior to the year 1940 and remaining
essentially unchanged from that date may be continued, enlarged, or transferred
in the same manner as any special use, provided it conforms with the
regulations found in chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff.
9-22-2004)
10-13-3: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Subject to the limitations and termination provisions hereinafter set forth,
any lawful, existing nonconforming sign may be continued so long as it
otherwise remains lawful after the effective date hereof. No nonconforming sign
shall be:
   A.   Changed or altered in any manner which would increase the degree of its
nonconformity.
   B.   Expanded. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
   C.   Changed or altered to prolong its useful life; except, that routine
maintenance and painting is allowed, provided the content of the sign is not
altered. (Ord. 2007-24, 8-8-2007)
   D.   Moved, in whole or in part, to any other location where it would remain
nonconforming. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-13-4: CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES:
   A.   Change In Character: A nonconforming use of any building, structure, or
part thereof may be changed to a use of the same or of a more restricted
character but may not be changed to any less restricted use.
   B.   Establishment Of Abandoned Use: The establishment or reestablishment of
a use that is of the same or less intensity than the abandoned previous use in
a structure not designed for a permitted use may be allowed if it meets certain
standards. The following shall be used to determine the intensity of a use:
      1.   Floor area.
      2.   Hours of operation.
      3.   Volume and type of sales.
      4.   Type of processing activity.
      5.   Nature and location of storage.
      6.   Transportation requirements by volume, type, and characteristics.
      7.   Parking and loading requirements.
      8.   Noise, smoke, odor, glare, vibration, radiation, and fumes. (Ord.
2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-13-5: RESIDENTIAL NONCONFORMING USES:
A single-family home and those allowed accessory structures that are a
nonconforming use in any zoning district can be rebuilt if damaged or destroyed
by action that is without the wilful intent of the owner or his/her agent or if
such structure is taken or threatened to be taken by eminent domain; provided,
that the residence is occupied by the owner thereof and there is conformance
with all other provisions of this title regarding nonconformance. (Ord. 2010-
18, 7-14-2010)
CHAPTER 14
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
10-14-1: Purpose
10-14-2: General Parking And Loading Requirements
10-14-3: Joint Parking Facilities
10-14-4: Additional Off Street Parking Requirements
10-14-5: Mobility Impaired Accessible Parking
10-14-6: Schedule Of Required Parking
10-14-7: Additional Off Street Loading Requirements
10-14-8: Schedule Of Required Loading
10-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent the congestion of public streets by
requiring minimum standards for off street parking and loading spaces. (Ord.
2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-14-2: GENERAL PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Site Plan Required: All new construction or expansions requiring a
building permit and allowed within this title shall provide adequate
circulation and off street parking and loading spaces. The building permit
application shall include a site plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned,
showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided and all proposed or
existing streets and curbs, easements, and rights of way in compliance with the
requirements of this title.
   B.   Future Uses; Existing Building Permit: All buildings or structures
erected after the effective date hereof shall provide off street parking and
loading spaces. Parking or loading facilities shall be required for a building
or structure for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective
date hereof if construction is begun thereon within six (6) months of the
effective date hereof and diligently pursued to completion.
   C.   Existing Uses: All off street parking and loading facilities in
existence on or before the effective date hereof and located on the same lot as
the building or structure shall not hereafter be reduced below the similar
requirements for a similar new building or structure under the provisions of
this title.
   D.   Increase In Intensity Of Use: When the intensity of use of any
building, structure, or premises shall be increased through the addition of
dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other units of
measurement specified, parking and loading facilities as required herein shall
be provided for such increase in intensity of use and for at least fifty
percent (50%) of any existing deficiency in parking or loading facilities.
   E.   Change Of Use: Whenever the existing use of a building or structure is
changed to a new use, the appropriate off street parking and loading facilities
shall be provided for the new use. However, if the building or structure was
erected prior to the effective date hereof, then any additional off street
parking and loading facilities are mandatory only if the requirements for the
new use exceed those for the previous use.
   F.   Damage Or Destruction: Any building, structure, or use which is in
existence on the effective date hereof, and which subsequently shall be damaged
or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion, or other cause, may be
reconstructed, reestablished, or repaired if the parking and loading facilities
meet or exceed the requirements established in this chapter.
   G.   Location And Ownership Of Facilities: Except as provided in section
10-14-3 of this chapter, all off street parking and loading facilities shall be
located on the same lot, on an adjacent lot, or across a public street or alley
from the principal use it serves. Off street parking spaces may be located on
surface lots, underground, under a building, or in parking structures.
   H.   Exceptions: Unless otherwise specified, off street parking facilities
are not required for uses within the C-1 central business district and may only
be located in the rear yards of lots. Curb cuts and driveways are not
recommended in order to consolidate parking space in appropriate locations and
ensure a compact C-1 district. Dwelling units located in this district shall
provide two (2) off street parking spaces per dwelling unit. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-
22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-14-3: JOINT PARKING FACILITIES:
Off street parking for separate uses may be provided collectively in any
district if the total number of spaces provided meets or exceeds the
requirements for each separate use. The village board may reduce the number of
joint parking spaces by up to twenty percent (20%) if shared parking lots are
utilized and the respective hours of operation do not substantially overlap.
The property owners of the respective uses must prove that there is no
substantial overlap in the hours of operation. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff.
9-22-2004)
10-14-4: ADDITIONAL OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Design:
      1.   Dimensional Requirements: All off street parking lots shall be
governed by the dimensional requirements for parking lots specified in
"Architectural Graphic Standards", current edition, and shall meet the minimum
requirements of a "parking space", as defined in section
10-2-2 of this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
      2.   Vertical Clearance: Each space shall have a vertical clearance of
not less than seven feet (7').
      3.   Access: Each off street parking space shall open directly to an
aisle or driveway in order to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular
access. All off street parking facilities shall provide safe access to a public
street or alley. No driveway or curb cut in any district shall exceed thirty
feet (30') in width.
      4.   Surfacing And Striping:
         a.   All open off street parking areas and driveways, except those
accessory to rural residential district dwellings, shall be improved by
constructing with either:
            (1)   Eight inches (8") of compacted gravel base surfaced with
three inches (3") of asphaltic concrete; or
            (2)   Six inches (6") of concrete laid over a firm base.
         b.   Striping of the surface to define the parking space shall be
provided and visible at all times.
      5.   Screening And Landscaping:
         a.   Within any district and visible from any public or private
street, a five foot (5') landscaped divider strip shall be placed between all
sidewalks and parking areas containing six (6) or more cars. The landscaping
must contain one ornamental or evergreen tree and four (4) bushes for every
thirty feet (30') of frontage.
         b.   In addition to the perimeter screening, within any lot containing
at least twenty five (25) parking spaces, one ornamental or evergreen tree and
four (4) shrubs shall be planted for every one hundred (100) square feet of all
parking spaces to be located on an interior strip of private property at a
width of at least ten feet (10'). At least five percent (5%) of the interior
parking lot shall be landscaped. Trees shall be evenly spaced whenever
possible.
         c.   Within or adjacent to a residential district, all open off street
parking areas containing six (6) or more cars shall be effectively screened by
a wall, a solid fence, or a densely planted compact hedge along any side which
is adjacent to property in residential use unless that use is at least seventy
five feet (75') from the nearest residential property line. The screening shall
be at least ten feet (10') from any driveway opening and shall not interfere
with the visibility of vehicles or pedestrians.
   B.   Computation Of Spaces: The determination of the required number of
parking spaces shall be based on the principal use on the zoning lot. When
determination of the number of required off street parking spaces results in a
requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half
(1/2) shall be disregarded and any fraction over one-half (1/2) shall be
interpreted as one parking space.
   C.   Signs: Signs may be displayed in any nonresidential district if they
are not larger than six (6) square feet in area, do not exceed six feet (6') in
height, located not more than ten feet (10') from any driveway or alley which
leads to the parking area, and not located within the public right of way. No
signs shall be displayed in any parking area within any residential district
except such as may be necessary for the orderly use of the parking facilities.
   D.   Lighting: The level of illumination at any point in the parking lot
shall not be less than one foot-candle or more than three (3) foot-candles,
measured at the pavement. See each district for specific regulations. Any
lighting used to illuminate an off street parking area shall be so arranged as
to reflect the light away from adjoining property.
   E.   Drainage: Proper drainage and grading shall be provided to dispose of
all runoff water. For any parking area in excess of six (6) parking spaces, all
runoff water shall be disposed of in an approved stormwater sewer or other
maintenance free system. Any drainage shall conform to the provisions specified
in chapter 12 of this title.
   F.   Maintenance: All parking lots and landscaping shall be maintained and
kept free of weeds, litter, potholes, broken wheel stops, broken curbing, other
surface irregularities, dirt, and snow, whenever possible. All signs used to
indicate traffic movement and location shall be kept in a neat and legible
condition. In addition, all adjacent sidewalks shall be kept free of litter,
dirt, and snow. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-14-5: MOBILITY IMPAIRED ACCESSIBLE PARKING:
   A.   Description: All developments which serve the public shall allocate
parking spaces which are accessible to people with disabilities. Accessible
parking shall be provided for any building or use initiated after the effective
date hereof. Appropriate signage shall accompany the mobility impaired
accessible parking spaces.
   B.   Size: A required mobility impaired accessible off street parking space
shall be an area of not less than sixteen feet (16') in width by twenty feet
(20') in length. Each accessible parking space shall be located in close
proximity to the most accessible entrance to the principal building.
   C.   Required Spaces: The following minimum requirements shall be provided
according to the following table:
Total Off Street Parking Spaces Provided Accessible Spaces Required
Total Off Street Parking Spaces Provided Accessible Spaces Required
1 to 25                                  1
26 to 50                                 2
51 to 75                                 3
76 to 100                                4
101 to 150                               5
151 to 200                               6
201 to 300                               7
301 to 400                               8
401 to 500                               9
501 to 1,000                             2 percent of total parking spaces
                                         provided
 
Source: Americans With Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) For
Buildings And Facilities.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-14-6: SCHEDULE OF REQUIRED PARKING:
Paved off street automobile parking shall be provided on any lot on which any
of the following uses are hereafter established. Such space shall be provided
with vehicular access to a street or alley. The following are minimum
requirements for specific uses:
Type Of Use Number Of Parking Spaces
Type Of Use                              Number Of Parking Spaces
Agricultural:
                                         1 space per 400 square feet of sales
 Farm product sales                     area with a minimum of 4 spaces per
                                         establishment
 Greenhouse, lumberyard, and nursery    1 space per 400 square feet of floor
                                         area
Commercial:
 Adult oriented establishment           1 space per 200 square feet of floor
                                         area
 Animal hospital or clinic              1 space per 400 square feet of floor
                                         area
                                         1 space per every 2,000 square feet of
                                         interior or exterior sales, display,
 Automobile dealership                  or storage area up to a total of 20
                                         spaces, plus 1 space per each employee
                                         on the maximum shift
                                         1 space per 500 square feet of floor
 Automobile repair and service          area, plus 1 space per service bay,
                                         plus 1 space per employee on the
                                         maximum shift
 Banks, financial, and insurance        1 space per 300 square feet of floor
  institutions                           area
 Barbershop and beauty parlor           1 space per employee on the maximum
                                         shift, plus 1.5 spaces per chair
 Bars                                   1 space per 200 square feet of floor
                                         area
 Bed and breakfast                      2 spaces, plus 1 space per guestroom
 Bookstore                              1 space per 300 square feet of floor
                                         area
                                         1 space per each employee on the
 Car wash                               minimum shift, plus 1 space per each 2
                                         bays or stalls
 Doctor's clinic and health center      1 space per 300 square feet of floor
                                         area
 Drugstore, convenience store, or       1 space per 300 square feet of floor
  liquor store                           area
 Dry cleaning establishment and         1 space per 250 square feet of floor
  laundromat                             area
                                         1.5 spaces per fueling bay, plus 1
                                         space per 250 square feet of floor
                                         area devoted to offering retail goods,
                                         plus 1 space per employee on the
 Gas station                            maximum shift. Gas stations providing
                                         automobile repair and services shall
                                         also comply with the parking
                                         requirements for automobile repair and
                                         service facilities
                                         1 space per 250 square feet of floor
 Grocery store or supermarket           area up to 7,500 square feet of floor
                                         area;
                                         1 space per 300 square feet of floor
                                       area for more than 7,500 square feet
                                         of floor area
                                         1 space per 300 square feet of floor
 Hardware store                         area, including outdoor sales and
                                         display, up to 7,500 square feet of
                                         floor area;
                                         1 space per 400 square feet of floor
                                       area for more than 7,500 square feet
                                         of floor area
                                         1 space for every 300 square feet of
 Home occupation                        floor area with a maximum of 3 spaces
                                         specifically for the home occupation
                                         1 space per room, plus 1 space per
                                         each employee on the maximum shift,
 Hotel or motel                         plus 1 space per 500 square feet of
                                         convention space or restaurants (if
                                         applicable)
                                         1 space per 300 square feet of floor
 Offices and office buildings           area up to 15,000 square feet of floor
                                         area;
                                         1 space per 400 square feet of floor
                                       area for more than 15,000 square feet
                                         of floor area
 Restaurant and tavern                  1 space per 200 square feet of floor
                                         area, including outdoor seating
                                         1 space per 50 square feet of floor
 Restaurant, drive-in                   area or a minimum of 10 spaces,
                                         whichever is greater
 Restaurant, fast food                  1 space per 100 square feet of floor
                                         area, including outdoor seating
                                         1 space per 400 square feet of floor
 Other retail sales and service         area up to 7,500 square feet of floor
                                         area;
                                         1 space per 500 square feet of floor
                                       area for more than 7,500 square feet
                                         of floor area
Entertainment:
 Art gallery or museum                  1 space per 300 square feet of floor
                                         area
 Banquet hall or meeting hall           1 space per 200 square feet of seating
                                         area
                                         2 spaces per each billiard table, plus
 Billiard hall                          1 space per each employee on the
                                         maximum shift
 Boat launch                            8 spaces per boat ramp
                                         3 spaces per each alley or lane, plus
 Bowling alley                          1 space per every 4 seats within an
                                         accessory restaurant
 Clubs, lodges, and fraternal buildings 1 space per 200 square feet of floor
                                         area intended for guests
 Conference center or convention center 1 space per 200 square feet of
                                         convention space
                                         4 spaces per each hole, plus 1 space
 Golf course                            per every 4 seats within an accessory
                                         restaurant
 Golf driving range                     1 space per each tee
                                         1 space per 200 square feet of
 Health club                            exercise area, plus 1 space per each
                                         employee on the maximum shift
 Miniature golf course                  2 spaces per each hole
 Movie theater                          1 space per 5 seats, plus 1 space per
                                         each employee on the maximum shift
                                         1 space per 5,000 square feet of land
 Public park and playground             area or a minimum of 5 spaces,
                                         whichever is greater
                                         1 space per 100 square feet of water
 Swimming facility                      area, plus 1 space per each employee
                                         on the maximum shift
 Tennis facility                        3 spaces per each court
Industrial:
 Contractor office                      1 space per 300 feet of floor area
 Recycling facility                     1 space per employee, plus 1 space per
                                         500 feet of storage processing area
 Salvage yard and landfill              1 space per employee on the maximum
                                         shift
                                         1 space per 20 rental units or a
 Self-storage facility                  minimum of 5 spaces, whichever is
                                         greater
 Transit facility                       1 space per 250 square feet of waiting
                                         room space
  Other industrial and manufacturing     1 space per employee on the maximum
 uses                                   shift, plus 1 space per vehicle owned
                                         and stored on the premises
Institutional or quasi-public:
 Auditorium or stadium                  1 space per 4 seats provided
                                         1 space per 4 seats provided in the
 Cemetery                               chapel or assembly area, plus 1 space
                                         per employee on the maximum shift
 Community building                     1 space per 300 square feet of floor
                                         area
                                         1 space per every 10 children at
 Daycare center or nursery school       maximum capacity, plus 1 space per
                                         employee on the maximum shift
                                         1 space per employee on the maximum
 Fire station                           shift, plus 1 space per vehicle
                                         customarily used in operation of the
                                         use or stored on the premises
                                         1 space per 4 permanent seats, plus 1
 Funeral home or crematory              space per 50 square feet of temporary
                                         seating area
                                         1 space per each bed, plus 1 space per
 Hospital                               each doctor and employee on the
                                         maximum shift
 Library                                1 space per 600 square feet of floor
                                         area
 Marina                                 1 space per each boat slip
 Place of worship                       1 space per 5 seats provided
                                         1 space per employee on the maximum
                                         shift, plus 1 space per vehicle
 Police station                         customarily used in operation of the
                                         use or stored on the premises, plus a
                                         minimum of 3 visitor spaces
                                         1 space per 300 square feet of floor
 Post office                            area or a minimum of 5 spaces,
                                         whichever is greater
 Schools:                                
                                         1 space per each classroom, plus 1
                                         space per each nonteaching employee on
 Elementary and middle school           the maximum shift, plus 1 space per 15
                                         seats provided in an auditorium or
                                         gymnasium
                                         1 space per each classroom, plus 1
                                         space per each nonteaching employee on
 High school                            the maximum shift, plus 1 space per
                                         every 5 students based on the maximum
                                         capacity
                                         1 space per each classroom, plus 1
                                         space per each nonteaching employee on
 Vocational school                      the maximum shift, plus 1 space per
                                         every 2 students based on the maximum
                                         capacity
Residential:
                                         1 space per every 3 bedrooms, plus 1
 Community residence or senior housing  space per each employee on the maximum
                                         shift
                                         1 space per every 3 bedrooms, plus 1
 Lodging house or group home            space per each employee on the maximum
                                         shift
 Mobile home                            1.5 spaces per each dwelling unit
 Multiple-family dwellings              1.5 spaces per each dwelling unit
 Single-family dwellings                2 spaces per each dwelling unit
 Two-family dwellings, duplexes, and    2 spaces per each dwelling unit
  townhouses
 
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
10-14-7: ADDITIONAL OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Location: All required off street loading berths shall be located on
the same zoning lot as the use served. No loading berth shall be located closer
than forty feet (40') from any residential property lot line or from the
nearest point of an intersection of two (2) streets. Any loading berth located
adjacent to a residential district shall be effectively screened from view by a
wall, a solid fence, or a densely planted compact hedge at least six feet (6')
in height.
   B.   Size: All required off street loading berths shall be not less than
fifteen feet (15') in width, fifty five feet (55') in length, exclusive of
access aisles and maneuvering space, and fourteen feet (14') in height.
   C.   Surfacing: All open off street loading berths shall be improved by
construction with a weatherproof and dustproof surface equal to the paving
material of the street onto which it opens. If a berth opens onto two (2) or
more streets, the more substantial paving material shall be used.
   D.   Access: All required off street loading berths shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movement.
   E.   Utilization: Space allocated to an off street loading berth shall not
satisfy the space requirements for any off street parking facilities.
   F.   Computation Of Berths: The determination of the required number of off
street loading berths shall be based on the principal use on the zoning lot.
When determination of the number of required off street loading berths results
in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-
half (1/2) shall be disregarded and any fraction over one-half (1/2) shall be
interpreted as one loading berth.
   G.   Minimum Facilities: Uses for which off street loading facilities are
required herein, but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the
minimum prescribed for such required facilities, shall be provided with
adequate receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent
alley, service drive, or open space on the same zoning lot.
   H.   Exceptions: Every building or structure shall provide off street
loading spaces with the following use exceptions:
      1.   Single-family and two-family residential uses.
      2.   Multi-family residential uses with less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet of floor area.
      3.   Bed and breakfast.
      4.   Car wash.
      5.   Landfill.
      6.   Self-storage facility.
      7.   Transit facility. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-14-8: SCHEDULE OF REQUIRED LOADING:
The minimum off street loading spaces shall be provided according to the
following requirements:
         Floor Area Of Use (In Minimum Number Of One Additional Loading
Land Use Square Feet)          Loading Berths    Berth For Each Additional
                                                 (In Square Feet)
                                                           One Additional
Land Use              Floor Area Of Use  Minimum Number Of Loading Berth For
                      (In Square Feet)   Loading Berths    Each Additional (In
                                                           Square Feet)
Commercial:
  Banks, financial
 institutions,       10,000 to 100,000  1                 ---
  medical clinics,
  and offices
 Hotel               10,000 to 150,000  1                 150,000
 Restaurant, tavern, 10,000 to 100,000  1                 100,000
  and entertainment
  Other commercial                                         15,000 up to 50,000,
 uses                5,000 to 15,000    1                 and 100,000 in
                                                           excess of 500,000
Institutional,        5,000 to 100,000   1                 100,000
hospital
Manufacturing and     5,000 to 40,000    1                 ---
industrial
                    40,000 to 100,000  2                 100,000
Residential, multi-   10,000 to 200,000  1                 200,000
family
 
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
CHAPTER 15
SIGNS
SECTION:
10-15-1: Intent
10-15-2: Definitions
10-15-3: Permit Requirements; Exemptions
10-15-4: General Requirements
10-15-5: Prohibited Signs
10-15-6: Signs Permitted In Residential Districts
10-15-7: Signs Permitted In Commercial And Industrial Districts
10-15-8: Signs Requiring Special Use Permit
10-15-9: Temporary Signs
10-15-10: Variances
10-15-11: Nonconforming Signs
10-15-12: Removal Of Signs
10-15-1: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to regulate the size, location, type, number, and
maintenance of signs within the village and to promote the public's health,
safety, and welfare. This chapter strives to provide adequate community
identification and advertising while maintaining an attractive appearance.
(Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009)
10-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which has been discontinued for a period of ninety (90)
days, regardless of the intent to resume or not to abandon such use.
ADVERTISING SIGN/BILLBOARD: An off premises sign directing the public attention
which displays the business, entertainment, profession, or service offered at a
location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
AWNING, CANOPY, OR MARQUEE SIGN: Any sign made of cloth or other nonrigid
material attached to and projecting from a building and including structures
which are fixed or so erected as to permit their being raised or retracted to a
position against the building when not in use.
BANNER SIGN: A temporary sign made of cloth, paper, or plastic attached to a
pole or building, such not exceeding six (6) feet in horizontal length and
twelve (12) feet in vertical height as measured from the ground.
BUSINESS SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession
conducted or to a commodity, service, or entertainment sold or offered upon the
premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign in which a message board can be changed manually
or automatically.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign on the premises on which construction is
taking place indicating the name of a contractor or other firms assisting with
the project.
DEVELOPMENT SIGN: A temporary sign on the premises on which construction is
taking place indicating the sale, lease, or rental of lots or units within a
residential, commercial, or industrial development.
EVENT SIGN: A temporary sign indicating the location and/or time of an event.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign that is supported by one or more braces, poles, or
uprights and is not attached to any building.
GOVERNMENT SIGN: A sign located either on premises or off premises indicating
necessary information required by state, local, or federal statute or
ordinance.
HOME OCCUPATION SIGN: A temporary sign containing only the name and occupation
of a permitted home occupation.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign in which the characters, letters, or figures are
illuminated by artificial or natural light, is maintained stationary and
constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, and may
contain electronically changing messages.
INFLATABLE SIGN: A sign which is attached to or painted on a device which can
be inflated.
MEMORIAL SIGN: A temporary sign or statue helping to remember a person or
event.
MONUMENT SIGN: A ground mounted detached freestanding sign that sits low to the
ground and incorporates architectural detailing.
NAMEPLATE SIGN: An on premises nonelectric sign identifying only the name and
occupation or profession of the occupant on which the sign is located.
NEON SIGN: A sign made of glass tubing, which is electrified to cause
fluorescent agents to glow in various colors.
POLITICAL SIGN: A temporary sign supporting political candidates for local,
county, state, or national elections.
PORTABLE SIGN: A temporary sign not affixed to a building that can be moved
from site to site.
PRIVATE PROPERTY SIGN: A sign mounted to a building or permanent object affixed
to the ground that identifies an area or areas on a lot that are not to be
trespassed on or to be used for dumping objectionable commodities.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign mounted or attached to a building or wall projecting at
least twelve inches (12") from the building or wall.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign indicating the sale, lease, or rental on the
premises on which it is located.
ROOF SIGN: A sign mounted or attached to a roof of a building.
SIGN: An outdoor advertising that is a structure or that is attached to or
painted on a building or that is leaned against a structure or displayed on a
premises.
SIGN AREA: The gross surface area within the sign frame, exclusive of the frame
or support structure. The sign area of a sign with back to back faces shall be
computed using only one face. The sign area of a multiple faced sign or an
irregular shaped sign shall be computed on the basis of the gross surface area
of each face.
SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A monument sign identifying a subdivision,
apartment, or other multi-family residential complex.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign which is only intended to be displayed for a short
period of time.
UNIFIED CENTER IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign identifying the name of a shopping
center and may include the identities of one or more of the businesses located
within the development.
WALL SIGN: A sign mounted to, attached to, or painted on an exterior wall of a
building.
WINDOW PROMOTIONAL SIGN: A sign attached to the inside of a window that is
visible from the exterior of a building.
YARD, GARAGE, RUMMAGE SALE, OR OPEN HOUSE SIGN: A temporary sign located either
on premises or off premises indicating the location and hours of a yard sale,
garage sale, rummage sale, or open house. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009; amd. Ord.
2022-37, 11-17-2022)
10-15-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: No sign shall be constructed, erected, originally
painted, converted, altered, rebuilt, enlarged, remodeled, relocated, or
expanded until a permit for such sign has been obtained in accordance with the
standards and procedures set forth by the village. No sign shall be installed
before a permit is issued.
   B.   Application For Permit: The applicant shall file an application for a
sign permit with the zoning enforcement officer, accompanied by a filing fee to
be established by the village board. The application shall contain the
following requirements:
      1.   The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the applicant, owner, and
person or firm erecting the sign.
      2.   Location of the building or structure for which the sign is
proposed.
      3.   A drawing of the proposed sign, to scale, indicating height,
dimensions, wording, and elevation and which shall state specifically the type
of sign, location on the lot, and any landscaping of a freestanding sign base.
The drawing should show the entire lot complete with setbacks to all property
lines, existing building footprint, signs, north arrow, and scale.
   C.   Review Of Application; Approval Or Denial: The zoning enforcement
officer shall review the sign permit application to determine whether it
complies with all of the applicable regulations of this chapter. The zoning
enforcement officer shall decide whether the sign permit application shall be
granted or denied as it relates to the standards and the purposes of the sign
classifications of the village.
   D.   Expiration Of Permit; Extensions: All sign permits issued for permanent
signs shall expire, without further action by the village or its
representatives, on the ninety first day following the date of issuance of the
permit. The zoning enforcement officer may grant up to an additional ninety
(90) days for a permit to be valid, in his/her sole discretion, based upon the
particular reasons for the request and the factors particular to the permit.
This subsection does not apply to temporary sign permits issued under section
10-15-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009)
   E.   Inspections: All signs shall be inspected by the zoning enforcement
officer to ensure compliance with the application filed with the village. (Ord.
2009-14, 5-13-2009; amd. 2013 Code)
   F.   Exemptions From Permit:
      1.   A sign permit is not required for minimal alterations to an existing
sign, regular maintenance, or painting, provided the content of the sign is not
altered.
      2.   The following signs shall not require a permit to erect a sign:
         a.   Temporary construction signs:
            (1)   A sign shall not exceed a sign area of sixteen (16) square
feet, except in cases where the architect, engineer, and contractor(s) are
designated on a single sign, and such single sign shall not exceed forty (40)
square feet in area.
            (2)   No temporary construction sign shall be more than six feet
(6') above grade level.
            (3)   Such signs shall be removed before the structure(s) is
occupied.
         b.   Temporary yard, garage, or rummage sale signs:
            (1)   The total gross surface area shall not exceed six (6) square
feet per lot or three (3) square feet per sign.
            (2)   Signs shall not be erected more than three (3) days prior to
an event, and shall be removed within one day following the event. Further,
signs shall not be erected for greater than three (3) consecutive days, and the
property owner(s) is limited to four (4) periods of such signage in a calendar
year.
            (3)   Signs shall not be more than four feet (4') above grade
level.
            (4)   Signs may only be displayed on private property with the
owner's consent.
         c.   Temporary political signs:
            (1)   The total gross surface area shall not exceed thirty two (32)
square feet per sign.
            (2)   Signs may only be located on private property with the
owner's permission.
            (3)   Signs are allowed only during the period beginning forty five
(45) days before the election and ending seven (7) days after the election.
            (4)   Political signs shall be limited to not more than one sign
per candidate or issue per lot.
         d.   Temporary real estate and open house signs:
            (1)   One sign is permitted per interior lot.
            (2)   Two (2) signs are permitted per corner lot, provided there is
only one sign per street frontage.
            (3)   Signs shall not exceed a sign area of six (6) square feet per
sign.
            (4)   Signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of the sale or
lease of the premises upon which the sign is located.
            (5)   Signs shall not be illuminated.
         e.   Temporary portable signs:
            (1)   One sign is permitted per establishment in the C-1, C-2, and
C-3 districts.
            (2)   Signs shall not exceed a sign area of eight (8) square feet
per sign.
            (3)   No sign shall be more than four feet (4') above grade level.
            (4)   For the C-2 and C-3 districts, signs shall only advertise the
business, entertainment, profession, or service offered, and the sign must be
located on the premises. For the C-1 district, the sign can only advertise the
business, entertainment, profession, or service offered, and the location of
the sign must be on the premises or directly in front of the main entrance of
the premises.
            (5)   Signs shall only be permitted during the operating hours of
the establishment. However, signs located on private property may remain in
place during non-operating hours unless determined to be a safety hazard by the
zoning enforcement officer. If a sign is located on private property other than
that owned by the establishment, permission of the owner must be obtained. If
the sign is located on village property or right of way, written permission of
the zoning enforcement officer must be obtained as to location and appearance.
            (6)   Signs shall not be illuminated.
            (7)   Signs shall be removed upon order of the zoning enforcement
officer if determined to be a safety and/or traffic hazard.
            (8)   Vendors/peddlers located on a lot shall be allowed one sign
unless located on a corner lot, in which case, two (2) signs shall be allowed.
The zoning enforcement officer shall have the right to specify the location of
the sign(s) if necessary for public safety. Signs shall be allowed for the
duration of a vendor/peddler permit.
            (9)   Any sign which does not meet the criteria contained in this
subsection F2e shall require a special use permit pursuant to section
10-15-8 of this chapter.
         f.   Commemorative plaques located on designated historical or other
similar properties.
         g.   Government or municipal signs pertaining to necessary signs
directed by any statute or ordinance.
         h.   Private property signs not exceeding a sign area of one and one-
half (11/2) square feet and not more than four (4) signs per lot.
         i.   Signs within completely enclosed buildings and not visible from
the outside of the building.
         j.   Home occupation signs not exceeding a sign area of two (2) square
feet per lot and not illuminated and mounted flat against the wall of the
principal building.
         k.   Nameplate signs not exceeding a sign area of one square foot per
lot.
         l.   Temporary inflatable signs permitted in the C-3 district and
subject to the provisions provided in subsection
10-15-7H of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009; amd. Ord. 2010-09, 4-14-
2010; 2013 Code; Ord. 2022-37, 11-17-2022)
10-15-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Illumination:
      1.   All illuminated signs shall be designed so as to reflect light away
from a residential district. Illuminated signs located on a lot adjacent to any
residential district shall not be operated between the hours of eleven o’clock
(11:00) P.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. In the event the premises on which
the sign is specifically operating is engaged in the operation of its business,
this requirement shall not apply.
      2.   No illuminated sign shall cause a traffic hazard for any passing
motorists. The sign shall not interfere with a driver’s ability to see
approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic. All illuminated signs shall
concentrate the illumination upon the area of the sign and shall minimize glare
upon the street or adjacent property.
      3.   The level of illumination shall not be more than fifty (50) foot-
candles measured perpendicular to the sign face at a distance equal to the
narrowest dimension of such sign face.
      4.   Changeable copy signs (manual or automatic) advertising a product,
service, or event are permitted as long as the sign message is not changed more
than twice during a twenty-four (24) hour period, the message remains depicted
for a minimum of six (6) seconds, the sign is attached to the primary sign, and
a Special Use is granted. The gross surface area of the changeable copy sign
shall be considered part of the total permitted sign area for the district in
which the sign is located. A permit shall not be required to change the copy on
a message board. A changeable copy sign for a public governmental entity does
not require a Special Use.
      5.   No flashing or blinking signs or continuously scrolling messages
shall be permitted, unless a Special Use is granted. Unless otherwise stated,
all illuminated signs shall give off an illumination which is not intermittent
and which is kept stationary or consistent in color.
      6.   All illuminated signs shall be subject to the provisions of the
national electrical code.
   B.   Location:
      1.   No freestanding sign shall be located closer than twenty five feet
(25') from any other sign located on another lot. No freestanding sign shall be
located closer than one hundred fifty feet (150') from any other sign located
on the same lot.
      2.   No sign shall be located closer than ten feet (10') from any public
right of way.
      3.   No sign shall be erected within twenty feet (20') of any line
conductors, service drops or power lines without the consent of the power
company.
      4.   All signs or advertising structures shall be located on the premises
for which the sign is advertising, with the exception of billboards according
to subsection
10-15-8A of this chapter.
      5.   Signs or advertising structures shall not be located on or project
over the roof of a structure.
      6.   Signs shall not be painted directly on the wall of any structure
except as permitted in Section
10-15-7C.
      7.   Signs or advertising structures that require the use of hoisting
machines over the sidewalk shall require, for the protection of the public, the
sidewalk to be roped off during the work in question. Under no circumstances,
when work is being done pursuant to this chapter, shall any hoisting machine be
permitted to occupy the sidewalk area.
      8.   Signs shall not be permitted which prevent free ingress or egress
from any door, window or fire escape. No signs of any kind shall be attached to
a standpipe or fire escape.
      9.   a.   Signs or other advertising structures shall not be placed in a
public right of way; however, projecting signs and awnings for marquees, when
approved by the village board, may overhang a public sidewalk, but shall have a
minimum of eight feet (8') vertical clearance above the walk and have a minimum
of three feet (3') horizontal clearance from the face of the curb or edge of
the roadway.
         b.   Signs or other advertising structures shall not be erected in
such a location where pedestrian/vehicle conflicts occur.
         c.   Signs or other advertising structures shall not be erected at the
intersection of any street or in such a manner as to distract or obstruct the
visibility of traffic signs or signals or the flow of traffic.
         d.   Signs or other advertising structures shall not be so worded,
phrased or lighted in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse
traffic.
   C.   Electrical Components: All signs in which electrical wiring and
connections are required shall not endanger the health and safety of the public
and shall be subject to the provisions of the national electrical code.
   D.   Structural Components: All signs and the corresponding structural
components shall not endanger the health and safety of the public. Fire
resistant material shall be used, and all letters and figures shall be securely
attached to the sign structure.
   E.   Height:
      1.   The bottom of every awning, canopy, or marquee shall be at least
eight feet (8') above grade level. Any sign shall have a minimum of three feet
(3') horizontal clearance from the face of the curb or edge of roadway.
      2.   Any freestanding sign located within fifteen feet (15') of a public
right of way shall have a clearance between three feet (3') and eight feet (8')
above grade level.
      3.   Any freestanding sign located within thirty feet (30') of a lot
corner formed by an intersection of any two (2) or more streets shall have a
clearance between three feet (3') and eight feet (8') above grade level.
      4.   The height of each sign shall conform to the regulations provided
within each district in which the sign is located.
   F.   Maintenance:
      1.   The owner of a sign, whether or not a permit is required, shall be
required to maintain the sign in good structural and material condition, as
determined by the zoning enforcement officer. The sign and sign supports must
be regularly painted to prevent rust and corrosion.
      2.   The area around the sign, including any landscaping, shall be kept
free of debris and weeds and shall not obstruct the view of traffic.
      3.   Any sign not maintained in compliance with these standards may be
ordered to be removed by the zoning enforcement officer.
   G.   Landscaping: All permanent freestanding signs shall contain and be
located within a landscaped area. A minimum of one square foot of landscaping
area shall be required for every two (2) square feet of sign area, with a
minimum of thirty (30) square feet of landscaping per freestanding sign. The
proposed landscaping shall be submitted with the sign permit application. (Ord.
2009-14, 5-13-2009; amd. 2013 Code; Ord. 2022-37, 11-17-2022)
10-15-5: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs are prohibited in all districts in the village:
   A.   Abandoned signs which have not been in use for a period of ninety (90)
days, regardless of the intent to resume or not to abandon such use. Such signs
shall be removed within ten (10) days of the determination that the sign is
abandoned. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Flashing or blinking signs, except as provided in this chapter.
   C.   Portable signs, except as permitted in the C-1 district.
   D.   Roof signs.
   E.   Signs displaying indecent, immoral, or obscene matter.
   F.   Signs displaying words or phrases which may confuse or interfere with
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   G.   Signs attached to a tree, utility pole, fire hydrant, or other objects
located on or projecting over public property, with the exception of private
property signs.
   H.   Signs that, because of poor maintenance, structure, or disrepair, are
deemed unsafe.
   I.   Permanent signs which must be inflated.
   J.   Signs mounted or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers which are parked
so as to be visible from a public right of way where the apparent primary
purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a business activity
located on the same or nearby property. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009)
10-15-6: SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
The following signs are permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-R districts:
   A.   Exempt Signs: Exempt signs not requiring a permit subject to the
provisions provided in subsection 10-15-3F of this chapter.
   B.   Monument Subdivision Identification Signs:
      1.   Multiple-family residential complexes containing at least six (6)
residential units shall be allowed one freestanding monument sign.
      2.   Lettering shall not be more than one foot (1') in height and shall
only indicate the address and name of the building, complex, or neighborhood.
      3.   No subdivision identification sign shall exceed twenty four (24)
square feet in sign area.
      4.   No subdivision identification sign shall be more than six feet (6')
above grade level.
      5.   All signs shall be at least eight feet (8') from the front, side, or
rear lot lines.
      6.   As a condition of constructing and installing a subdivision
identification sign, the developer or a duly established homeowners'
association for said subdivision shall own and maintain the sign. They shall
execute an agreement acceptable to the village board providing for such
maintenance. Failure of developer or homeowners' association to satisfactorily
follow such agreement shall constitute grounds for the village to cause the
sign's removal.
   C.   Noncommercial Signs:
      1.   All signs shall be at least eight feet (8') from the front, side, or
rear lot lines.
      2.   Only one freestanding or attached sign shall be allowed per lot.
      3.   A single freestanding or attached sign shall not exceed eight (8)
square feet in gross surface area.
      4.   No freestanding noncommercial sign shall be more than six feet (6')
above grade level. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009)
10-15-7: SIGNS PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
A commercial or industrial establishment may incorporate one awning, canopy, or
marquee sign or one wall or projecting sign in the C-1 district. A commercial
or industrial establishment may incorporate one awning, canopy, or marquee sign
or one wall sign and one freestanding sign or one monument sign in the C-2, C-
3, I-1, and I-2 districts. A minimum of twelve (12) square feet of attached or
freestanding signs shall be maintained for all establishments. The following
signs are permitted within the C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, and I-2 districts:
   A.   Exempt Signs: Exempt signs not requiring a permit subject to the
provisions provided in subsection 10-15-3F of this chapter.
   B.   Awning, Canopy, Or Marquee Business Signs:
      1.   One awning, canopy, or marquee business sign shall be permitted per
establishment.
      2.   In the C-1 and C-2 districts, no sign shall exceed fifty (50) square
feet in sign area or one square foot per each one foot (1') of frontage,
whichever is less. In the C-3, I-1, and I-2 districts, no sign shall exceed one
hundred (100) square feet or one square foot per each one foot (1') of
frontage, whichever is less.
      3.   Each sign shall be at least eight feet (8') above grade level and
shall not exceed twenty feet (20') above grade level.
      4.   No sign may extend over a public street or thoroughfare and shall
not extend farther than six feet (6') from the wall.
   C.   Wall Business Signs:
      1.   One wall business sign shall be permitted per establishment. If a
property is located on a corner lot, one wall business sign shall be permitted
per each side fronting a public street.
      2.   No wall business sign shall exceed one hundred twenty (120) square
feet in gross surface area or one square foot of sign area per each one foot
(1') of building frontage, whichever is less.
      3.   No sign shall exceed twenty feet (20') above grade level.
      4.   All signs to be attached shall be affixed firmly to the wall and may
not extend over the top or ends of the wall more than eighteen inches (18")
from which they are affixed. All signs to be painted on the exterior wall of
the establishment must be painted only on the sides of the building facing a
public right-of-way and are subject to the maximum square footage requirements
of this Title and shall require a Special Use.
      5.   A sign shall display only the name and information pursuant to the
business conducted on the single user lot.
      6.   Signs may be illuminated subject to the provisions provided in
subsection
10-15-4A of this chapter.
   D.   Projecting Business Signs:
      1.   One projecting business sign shall be permitted per establishment.
If a property is located on a corner lot, one projecting business sign shall be
permitted per each side fronting a public street.
      2.   No projecting business sign shall exceed forty (40) square feet in
gross surface area or one square foot of sign area per each one foot (1') of
building frontage, whichever is less.
      3.   No sign shall exceed twenty feet (20') above grade level.
      4.   All signs shall be affixed firmly to the wall and shall be at least
eight feet (8') above grade level.
      5.   A sign shall display only the name and information pursuant to the
business conducted on the single user lot.
      6.   The sign shall be extended at a ninety degree (90°) angle from the
facade of the structure and shall not be extended more than four feet (4') from
the structure.
      7.   Signs may be illuminated subject to the provisions provided in
subsection
10-15-4A of this chapter.
   E.   Freestanding Business Signs:
      1.   One freestanding business sign shall be permitted per establishment
in the C-2, C-3, I-1, and I-2 districts. In commercial and industrial districts
where properties abut two (2) or more streets, two (2) freestanding signs are
permitted. All freestanding signs shall be at least one hundred fifty feet
(150') apart from signs located on the same premises. Freestanding signs are
not permitted in the C-1 district.
      2.   No freestanding business sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square
feet or one square foot of sign area per each one foot (1') of building
frontage, whichever is less.
      3.   No sign shall exceed fifteen feet (15') above grade level in the C-
2, I-1, and I-2 districts or twenty feet (20') above grade level in the C-
3 district.
      4.   Changeable (manual or automatic) copy is permitted on freestanding
signs only after approval by the zoning enforcement officer. Such copy may not
exceed one-half (1/2) of the permitted total sign area.
      5.   Signs may be illuminated subject to the provisions provided in
subsection
10-15-4A of this chapter.
   F.   Monument Business Signs:
      1.   One monument business sign shall be permitted per lot in the C-2, C-
3, I-1, and I-2 districts. In commercial and industrial districts where
properties abut two (2) or more streets, two (2) monument business signs are
permitted per each side fronting a public street. Monument signs are not
permitted in the C-1 district.
      2.   No monument business sign shall exceed seventy five (75) square feet
or one square foot of sign area per each one foot (1') of building frontage,
whichever is less. In cases where two (2) monument signs are permitted, the
aggregate sign area shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
      3.   No sign shall exceed ten feet (10') above grade level. No sign shall
interfere with the visibility of passing motorists.
      4.   All monument signs shall be securely attached to the ground.
      5.   Whenever possible, monument signs should incorporate similar
materials of the surrounding buildings and signs.
      6.   Signs may be illuminated subject to the provisions provided in
subsection
10-15-4A of this chapter.
   G.   Unified Center Identification Signs:
      1.   One unified center identification sign shall be permitted for all
joint commercial developments of at least three (3) acres in the C-3 district,
not including the permitted signs for the individual business signs located
within the development. All unified center identification signs shall be at
least one hundred fifty feet (150') from any other freestanding signs.
      2.   The unified center identification sign shall only identify the name
and location of the development, though the identities of the individual
businesses located within the development may be shown if the sign area of the
individual business signs is not more than half of the sign area of the unified
center identification sign.
      3.   No unified center sign shall exceed one hundred twenty (120) square
feet or one square foot of sign area per each one foot (1') of building
frontage, whichever is less.
      4.   No sign shall exceed fifteen feet (15') above grade level. No sign
shall interfere with the visibility of passing motorists.
      5.   Unified center identification signs shall be monument signs.
Whenever possible, unified center identification signs should incorporate
similar materials of the surrounding buildings and signs.
      6.   Signs may be illuminated subject to the provisions provided in
subsection 10-15-4A of this chapter.
   H.   Temporary Inflatable Signs:
      1.   One temporary inflatable sign shall be permitted per lot in the C-
3 district. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009)
      2.   No sign shall exceed a sign area of thirty (30) square feet. The
device on which the sign is attached shall not exceed an area of one hundred
fifty (150) square feet. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009; amd. 2013 Code)
      3.   Such signs shall not be erected more than twenty four (24) hours
prior to an event or advertised sale and shall be removed within twenty four
(24) hours following an event or advertised sale. Such signs shall only be
erected for a total of ten (10) days per event or advertised sale.
      4.   No sign or inflatable device shall exceed twenty feet (20') above
grade level.
      5.   Only two (2) signs shall be permitted per lot per year.
      6.   All inflatable devices shall be affixed firmly to the ground or to a
pole and shall not interfere with the public's health and safety.
   I.   Banner Signs:
      1.   Up to three (3) single-pole banner signs, not to exceed six feet
(6') in horizontal length and twelve feet (12') in vertical height as measured
from the ground, are permitted on private property in the C-1, C-2, and C-
3 Districts, except for locations in the C-1 District, located on Mill Street,
in which only one (1) single-pole banner sign is permitted. They can only
advertise the business, products, and/or services offered on the site. The
zoning enforcement officer has the authority to remove or cause to be moved any
banner sign that he/she deems, in his/her sole discretion, to be a safety
hazard.
      2.   Applicants seeking a permit for a banner sign in the C-1, Central
Business District, (Section
10-8A-3), or in C-2, General Commercial District, (Section
10-8B-3), and the C-3, Highway Commercial District, (Section
10-8C-3), may seek an Administrative Variance as to the number permitted.
Administrative Variances shall require the same application and all standards
and requirements of this ordinance shall apply. An Administrative Variance is
to be granted only by the zoning enforcement officer, or his/her designee in
his/her absence, with any restrictions or conditions he/she deems appropriate.
If the zoning enforcement officer, or his/her designee fails to approve any
application within fifteen (15) days of its receipt by the Village, then it is
deemed denied and the Applicant may seek a variance from the Planning
Commission and Village Board of Trustees.
The granting of an Administrative Variance shall not be considered a precedent
for future Applicants as such determination is made on a case-by-case basis.
(Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009; amd. Ord. 2022-37, 11-17-2022)
10-15-8: SIGNS REQUIRING SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
The following signs require the approval of a special use permit subject to the
provisions provided in chapter 10 of this title and this section:
   A.   Advertising Signs/Billboards:
      1.   Location:
         a.   Advertising signs/billboards shall only be permitted on lots in
the C-3 and I-2 districts.
         b.   No sign shall be located closer than fifteen feet (15') from any
public right of way.
         c.   No sign shall be located closer than two hundred fifty feet
(250') from any residential district, public park, or recreation area.
         d.   No sign shall be located closer than one thousand feet (1,000')
of another advertising sign/billboard.
         e.   No sign shall be located closer than two hundred feet (200') of
any on premises freestanding sign.
         f.   No sign shall be located closer than one hundred feet (100') of
any intersection of two (2) or more streets.
      2.   Number: Only one advertising sign/billboard shall be permitted per
lot.
      3.   Size: No advertising sign/billboard shall exceed two hundred (200)
square feet in area.
      4.   Height: No sign shall exceed twenty feet (20') above grade level.
      5.   Supporting Structures: All signs shall be firmly attached by braces,
poles, or uprights, and shall not be attached to a wall or roof.
      6.   Illumination: Signs may be illuminated subject to the provisions
provided in subsection 10-15-4A of this chapter.
   B.   Signs Painted On Walls: Signs painted directly on the walls of any
structure.
   C.   Temporary Signs: Temporary signs to be erected without the fourteen
(14) days' elapse period set forth in subsection 10-15-9F8 of this chapter.
   D.   Freestanding Signs In C-1 District: A freestanding or monument sign in
the C-1 district. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009; amd. 2013 Code; Ord. 2022-37, 11-
17-2022)
10-15-9: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
   A.   Conflicting Provisions: If the regulations of this section are in
conflict with any other provision of this title, the regulations of this
section shall take precedence.
   B.   Application Of Provisions: Temporary signs shall be subject to the
provisions provided within this section.
   C.   Safety Requirements: All temporary signs shall be erected and
maintained in a safe manner.
   D.   Location: No temporary sign with a height of at least four feet (4')
and not exceeding six feet (6') shall be located closer than ten feet (10') of
a public right of way and shall not extend above or beyond any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare, with the exception of temporary banner
signs only after approval from the zoning enforcement officer. No temporary
sign with a height of less than four feet (4') shall be closer than five feet
(5') of a public right of way. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009)
   E.   Auctions Events:
      1.   Auctioneers are obligated to register an auction event with the
village clerk at least seven (7) days in advance of the sale.
      2.   Adequate parking must be available or arrangements must be made for
traffic control, as approved by the police department.
      3.   Each auction shall be allowed signage pursuant to subsection F of
this section. (Ord. 2010-09, 4-14-2010)
   F.   Temporary Event Signs:
      1.   Temporary event signs include, but are not limited to, banner signs
and are signs not having a permanent foundation.
      2.   Signs are permitted for an event only after approval from the zoning
enforcement officer.
      3.   Each event is allocated two (2) on or off premises event signs.
      4.   The total gross surface area of all event signs on a lot shall not
exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
      5.   A single event sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet
in gross surface area.
      6.   No temporary event sign shall be more than four feet (4') above
grade level.
      7.   An event sign shall be limited to being erected thirty (30) days
prior to an event, and such sign shall be removed within two (2) days following
an event.
      8.   A minimum of fourteen (14) days must elapse before another event
sign is issued, absent petition for and obtaining a special use permit.
      9.   In a shopping center, no more than one event sign shall be allowed
at any one time.
      10.   If on premises, the display contained on any event sign shall
pertain only to the business, industry, and pursuit conducted on the lot on
which it is located.
      11.   Event signs may be illuminated consistent with the illumination
requirements of this chapter.
   G.   Temporary Development Signs:
      1.   A permit for a development sign may be issued in connection with:
         a.   Residential projects of six (6) or more dwelling units.
         b.   Commercial areas of three (3) acres or more.
         c.   Industrial areas of ten (10) acres or more.
      2.   One sign shall be allowed on the project site, and one directional
sign shall be allowed off site.
      3.   The sign shall not exceed one hundred twenty eight (128) square feet
in gross surface area.
      4.   After such time when seventy five percent (75%) of the project is
occupied or within five (5) years from the beginning date of project
construction, whichever is first, the sign shall be removed. The zoning
enforcement officer may extend the amount of time a temporary development sign
is valid after discussion with the property owner(s).
      5.   Development signs shall not be illuminated.
   H.   Temporary Banner Signs:
      1.   A new business may advertise the business on the premises by placing
one banner sign on the premises for up to ninety (90) days from issuance of a
permit by the zoning enforcement officer. The temporary banner sign cannot be
greater than twenty five (25) square feet.
      2.   For purposes of this section, a "new business" is one applying for
the temporary banner sign within one hundred twenty (120) days of applying for
the business's first village business license.
      3.   The zoning enforcement officer may allow the temporary banner sign
to remain for an additional ninety (90) days upon request of the applicant. The
zoning enforcement officer shall base the decision on the particular reasons
for the request and the factors particular to the specific business.
      4.   Temporary banner signs shall be removed upon order of the zoning
enforcement officer if determined to be a safety and/or traffic hazard.
      5.   Any temporary banner sign which does not meet the criteria contained
herein may seek a special use permit pursuant to section
10-15-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009)
10-15-10: VARIANCES:
   A.   Justification For Variance: When a property owner or his agent shows
that a strict application of the terms of this chapter relating to the use,
construction, or alteration of signs imposes upon him practical difficulties or
particular hardship in that a literal interpretation of the provisions of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter, the property
owner or agent may apply for a sign variance. The burden of proof lies on the
applicant to clearly establish that a sign variance is necessary.
   B.   Application For Variance: An application for a sign variance shall be
made as follows:
      1.   Filing Application; Fee: The applicant shall file an application for
a sign variance with the village clerk accompanied by a filing fee to be
established by the village board.
      2.   Contents:
         a.   The application shall set forth the facts and details concerning
the proposed sign variance and shall have attached thereto a diagram or plan
showing the result the proposed sign variance would have on the subject
property and surrounding properties.
         b.   (1) The application shall contain the following requirements:
               (A) The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the applicant,
owner, and person or firm erecting the sign.
               (B) Location of the building or structure for which the sign is
proposed.
               (C) A drawing of the proposed sign, to scale, indicating height,
dimensions, wording, and elevation and state specifically the type of sign,
location on the lot, and any landscaping of a freestanding sign base. The
drawing should show the entire lot complete with setbacks to all property
lines, existing building footprint, signs, north arrow, and scale.
               (D) A statement indicating the need for the sign variance.
            (2)   These requirements may be waived if the application is part
of a new sign installation, as each of these requirements is necessary for a
sign permit.
      3.   Date Of Filing: The application shall be filed prior to the date the
notice of hearing specified has been published in the local newspaper.
   C.   Date Of Hearing; Notice And Costs: The village planning commission,
through its chairperson, shall set a regular date, time, and place for a public
hearing on the application and shall inform the applicant of the same. The
chairperson has the option of changing the time and/or date if there is a
conflict with other meetings held concurrently at the village hall. The
applicant shall pay for all associated costs. Notice of the public hearing of
the petitioner's application is to be given in the following manner:
      1.   By publishing the notice of the date, time, and place of such
hearing in a paper of general circulation in the village at least fifteen (15),
but not more than thirty (30), days prior to the hearing.
      2.   By causing the notice to contain the particular location for which
the variance is requested as well as a brief statement describing the proposed
variance. The legal description shall, in addition to the required metes and
bounds or lot and block description, contain a simple description of the
property as to area and location of such a nature to enable the ordinary reader
to accurately locate such property.
      3.   The petitioner shall post a sign on the property that is subject to
the variance at least ten (10), but not more than thirty (30), days prior to
the hearing. The village will supply a sign upon payment by the petitioner of a
fifty dollar ($50.00) deposit. The sign shall be displayed in a prominent
location on the property until the conclusion of the hearing. The village
reserves the right to specify the location on the property of the placement.
The deposit shall be returned to the petitioner upon return of the sign in the
same condition as it was issued.
   D.   Public Hearing; Review And Decisions:
      1.   Hearing:
         a.   No sign variance in any case shall be made by the planning
commission without a public hearing by the commission as required herein, and
every report shall be accompanied by findings of fact specifying the reasons
for the reported actions.
         b.   The planning commission shall review the application, the
recommendation of the zoning enforcement officer, and the testimony at the
public hearing and shall grant the sign variance, grant the sign variance
requested subject to specified conditions, or deny the sign variance.
      2.   Planning Commission Findings Of Fact: Before any sign variance is
granted, the planning commission must make findings of fact that all of the
following conditions are shown to be present:
         a.   The variance is required due to exceptional and unique
circumstances peculiar to the property and not from general neighborhood or
villagewide conditions.
         b.   The sign requested by the variance would not alter the essential
character of the locality.
         c.   The variance would not grant more relief than necessary to
alleviate the alleged hardship.
         d.   The variance would not allow the owner or occupant to enjoy some
special privilege or additional right not available to owners or occupants of
other lots subject to the same provision, nor merely the inability of the owner
to make more money from the use of the subject lot.
         e.   Result in a use or development of the subject lot that would not
be in harmony with the general and specific purposes of this chapter or the
general purpose and intent of the village comprehensive plan.
   E.   Conditions Of Variance: In granting a sign variance, the planning
commission may attach thereto any conditions and safeguards it deems necessary
or desirable in furthering the purposes of this chapter. Violation of any of
these conditions or safeguards shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
   F.   Appeals; Village Board Action:
      1.   If the planning commission denies the sign variance, the applicant
may file an appeal with the village clerk or village board within twenty (20)
days of the action appealed. All of the appeals shall be in accordance with the
regulations of section
10-3-5 of this title.
      2.   In granting a sign variance, the board may attach thereto any
conditions and safeguards it deems necessary or desirable in furthering the
purposes of this chapter. Violation of any of these conditions or safeguards
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
      3.   Failure to act on a petition by the village board within sixty (60)
days of filing shall be considered a denial unless otherwise mutually agreed to
by the parties. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009)
10-15-11: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Subject to the limitations and termination provisions hereinafter set
forth, any lawful existing nonconforming sign may be continued so long as it
otherwise remains lawful after the effective date hereof.
   B.   1. No nonconforming sign shall be:
         a.   Changed or altered in shape, size, or content which would
increase the degree of its nonconformity due to a change in the nature or name
of the business conducted on the premises.
         b.   Expanded.
         c.   Changed or altered to prolong its useful life; except, that
routine maintenance and painting is allowed, provided the content of the sign
is not altered.
         d.   Moved in whole or in part to any other location where it would
remain nonconforming.
      2.   Any nonconforming sign that meets any of the criteria set out in
subsection B1 of this section shall be subject to the provisions of this title.
   C.   Should any nonconforming sign be damaged to at least fifty percent
(50%) of its replacement cost, the sign shall not be replaced except according
to the provisions of this title, and there shall be application for a sign
permit.
   D.   All on site or off site nonconforming signs not otherwise prohibited by
the provisions of this chapter shall be removed or altered to conform to the
provisions of this chapter if they interfere with the public health, safety,
and welfare. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009)
10-15-12: REMOVAL OF SIGNS:
   A.   Discontinued Signs:
      1.   In the event the owner of a sign discontinues business at the place
where the sign is located, the sign shall be removed at the expense of the sign
owner or property owner within ten (10) days after such discontinuance. (Ord.
2009-14, 5-13-2009)
      2.   In the event said sign is not removed within ten (10) days, the
zoning enforcement officer shall cause the sign to be removed. (Ord. 2009-14,
5-13-2009; amd. 2013 Code)
      3.   The expense of the removal shall be borne by the owner of the sign
or the property owner, or the village shall have the right to place a lien
against the property for the cost of said removal.
      4.   The sign shall not be again erected unless a permit is issued for
the new installation. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009)
   B.   Prohibited Dangerous Signs; Signs Without A Permit: The zoning
enforcement officer shall cause the immediate removal of any sign that
endangers the public safety, any sign that is electrically or structurally
defective, or any sign for which no permit has been issued, or any sign for
which a permit is denied if installation has commenced. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-
2009; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Vacant Property; Obsolete Signs:
      1.   Any sign or advertising structure which is located on property which
becomes vacant and/or unoccupied or any sign which pertains to a time, event,
or purpose which no longer applies shall be removed by the property owner.
(Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009)
      2.   Upon determination of the need for removal, the zoning enforcement
officer shall provide written notification stating that removal must take place
within thirty (30) days upon receipt of such notice. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009;
amd. 2013 Code)
      3.   Failure to comply with such notice within the time specified will
cause removal of the sign. The expense of removal shall be borne by the owner
of the sign and/or the property owner. (Ord. 2009-14, 5-13-2009)
      4.   Upon removal of a sign by the village, the owner shall be notified
in writing by the zoning enforcement officer of the right to reclaim the sign.
The sign shall be returned upon payment of any fines/permit fees owing. If the
sign is not reclaimed within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice by the
zoning enforcement officer, it shall be considered abandoned, and the village
may dispose thereof in any manner deemed appropriate. (Ord. 2010-09, 4-14-2010)
CHAPTER 16
FENCES
SECTION:
10-16-1: Purpose
10-16-2: Definitions
10-16-3: Permit Requirements
10-16-4: General Requirements
10-16-5: Prohibited Fences
10-16-6: Fences In Residential Districts
10-16-7: Height Restrictions In Commercial Districts
10-16-8: Fences In Industrial Districts
10-16-9: Nonconforming Fences
10-16-1: PURPOSE:
The intent of this chapter is to regulate the size, location, type, number, and
maintenance of fences within the village and to promote the public health,
safety, and welfare. Fences should be compatible with the surrounding
environment and minimize the visual impact on both residents and visitors.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
FENCE: A structure intended as a boundary, privacy screening, a means of
containing persons or animals, a means of protection, or for landscaping
aesthetics, and is constructed of any allowable material, but does not include
hedges, shrubs, trees, or natural growth.
FENCE HEIGHT: The vertical distance from any point of natural ground level
perpendicularly to the highest edge of the fence.
OPEN FENCE: A fence, including entrance and exit gates, in which the surface
area contains at least forty percent (40%) open spaces and which does not
interfere with visibility or the free passage of air through the fence.
SOLID FENCE: A fence, including entrance and exit gates, which conceals from
outside view any roads, materials stored, or operations conducted within a
property. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-16-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required; Exemptions: No fence shall be constructed, erected,
originally painted, converted, altered, rebuilt, enlarged, remodeled,
relocated, or expanded until a permit for such fence has been obtained in
accordance with the standards and procedures set forth by the village. No fence
shall be installed before a permit is issued. A fence permit is not required
for minimal alterations to an existing fence or regular maintenance.
   B.   Application For Permit: The applicant shall file an application for a
fence permit with the zoning enforcement officer, accompanied by a filing fee
to be established by the village board. The application shall contain the
following requirements:
      1.   The name, address, and phone number of the applicant, owner, and
person or firm erecting the fence.
      2.   Location of the building or structure for which the fence is
proposed.
      3.   A drawing of the proposed fence, to scale, indicating height,
dimensions, material, and elevation, and shall state specifically the type of
fence, location on the lot, and any landscaping of the fence. The drawing
should show the entire lot complete with setbacks to all property lines,
existing building footprint, signs, north arrow, and scale.
      4.   If applicable, floodplain development permits shall be required.
   C.   Review Of Application; Approval Or Denial: The zoning enforcement
officer shall review the fence permit application to determine whether it
complies with all of the applicable regulations within this title. The zoning
enforcement officer shall decide whether the fence permit application be
granted or denied as it relates to the standards and the purposes of the fence
classifications of the village. All fences shall be inspected by the building
inspector to ensure compliance with the application filed with the village.
(Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-16-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Location:
      1.   A fence may be located within any district in the village subject to
the provisions for each district found in this chapter.
      2.   A fence, including all posts, bases, and other structural parts,
shall be located completely within the boundaries of the lot on which it is
located.
      3.   No fence shall be located closer than eighteen inches (18") from a
public sidewalk.
      4.   No fence shall be located within the visibility triangle or closer
than thirty feet (30') from any street intersection of two (2) streets if the
fence height exceeds three feet (3').
      5.   No fence shall be located closer than fifteen feet (15') from any
intersection of a street or alley and a driveway if the height exceeds three
feet (3').
      6.   Fences shall not be installed in or through a stormwater detention
or retention pond, wetlands, or water bodies, nor shall a fence be installed
less than ten feet (10') from the inlet or outlet opening or less than such
greater distance as may be required by generally accepted engineering
principles, as approved by the village engineer.
      7.   Fences may be erected for tennis courts, provided they are not more
than twelve feet (12') in height, all portions above seven feet (7') in height
are open fences, and are not closer than five feet (5') from any lot line.
      8.   Fences may be erected for ball fields, provided they are not more
than eight feet (8') in height, except for backstops. Fences may exceed eight
feet (8') to a height appropriate to safely contain the athletic activity.
Plastic tubing shall be placed around the top of any fencing eight feet (8') in
height or lower. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
      9.   Fences shall be erected completely surrounding all permanent
belowground swimming pools and all permanent aboveground swimming pools with a
water depth of at least two feet (2'), provided the swimming pools are not
located in the front yard. The fence shall be six feet (6') in height and shall
be set back at least four feet (4') from the swimming pool. A building may be
used as part of such enclosure. The fences shall not have openings large enough
for small children to pass through or under. A railing on top of the wall of an
aboveground swimming pool is allowed. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004;
amd. Ord. 2005-13, 3-9-2005)
      10.   Fences should be located so as to avoid removing existing trees and
other vegetation.
   B.   Gates Or Doors:
      1.   All gates or doors shall be equipped with self-closing and self-
latching hardware keeping the gate or door secured at all times when not in
use.
      2.   All gates or doors shall match the design and construction of the
fence.
      3.   All latches on gates shall be at least four feet (4') above ground
level.
   C.   Design:
      1.   All fences so constructed shall be designed in such a manner that
the posts of the fence shall be on the interior of the fence and face the
property of the owner or tenant responsible for authorizing the construction of
the fence. The finished side shall face away from the property.
      2.   All fences should be compatible with the adjacent building and fence
design and minimize the visual impact on the character of the village.
Chainlink fences are permitted but are not recommended.
      3.   Open fences in commercial or industrial districts adjacent to
residential districts shall be screened with berms and/or landscaping.
   D.   Colors: All fences shall be compatible with the colors of the adjacent
buildings. No colors shall be used which may interfere with pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
   E.   Safety And Maintenance:
      1.   The owner of a fence shall be required to maintain the fence in good
structural condition. The fence and fence supports must be regularly painted to
prevent rust and corrosion.
      2.   Fence posts for all chainlink fences shall be at least one and one-
half inches (11/2") in diameter.
      3.   All fence posts shall be set at least two feet (2') into the ground
in concrete.
      4.   All fences three feet (3') in height or lower shall have a wind load
design of at least ten (10) pounds per square foot.
      5.   All fences exceeding three feet (3') in height shall have a wind
load design of at least twenty (20) pounds per square foot. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-
22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-16-5: PROHIBITED FENCES:
The following fences are prohibited in all districts in the village:
   A.   Fences that constitute a traffic hazard.
   B.   Barbed wire, razor wire, chicken wire, the electrification of fencing,
and other similar fences that pose a threat to the public health and safety are
expressly prohibited. However, the zoning enforcement officer may permit
fencing which includes barbed wire on the top of fences over eight feet (8') in
height located in an industrial district if erected or maintained about
properties deemed to be in hazardous usage or in need of additional security.
   C.   Fences made of solid plywood, scrap lumber, concrete, or cinder block.
   D.   Fences that prevent natural water drainage and/or water runoff. (Ord.
2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-16-6: FENCES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Fences may be constructed in or projected into yards; provided, that:
      1.   No fence or planting more than three feet (3') high or thirty
percent (30%) solid shall be located within thirty feet (30') of a street
intersection or frontage;
      2.   No fence more than four feet (4') high may be located closer to the
front of the lot than the principal building; and
      3.   No fence higher than six feet (6') high shall be allowed on any part
of the lot.
   B.   Residential properties that abut railroad tracks or commercial or
industrial uses are allowed fences to a height of eight feet (8'). Such fences
may only be permitted along the property line(s) that abut the tracks or
commercial or industrial uses. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-16-7: HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:
The following provisions apply to fences in commercial districts:
   A.   No fence shall exceed a height of three feet (3') in a front yard and
shall only be used for decoration.
   B.   No fence shall exceed a height of six feet (6') in a side yard or eight
feet (8') in a rear yard and shall only be used for decoration or as a
screening or security feature.
   C.   Any fence exceeding three feet (3') in height shall have a setback of
at least twenty five feet (25') from any public right of way. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-
22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-16-8: FENCES IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
The following provisions apply to fences in industrial districts:
   A.   Height:
      1.   No fence shall exceed a height of five feet (5') in a front yard,
with the exception of those surrounding salvage yards, and shall only be used
for decoration or as a screening feature.
      2.   No fence shall exceed a height of eight feet (8') in a side or rear
yard and shall only be used for decoration or as a screening feature.
      3.   Any fence exceeding five feet (5') in height shall have a setback of
at least twenty five feet (25') from any public right of way.
   B.   Salvage Yards And Vehicle Wrecking Yards: Salvage yards and vehicle
wrecking yards conducted within an enclosed building shall be surrounded by a
solid sightproof fence and gate not less than ten feet (10') in height, or the
height of the materials being screened, whichever is greater, where no
materials shall be piled or stacked to a height in excess of fifteen feet (15')
above the ground level. Such fences shall have a setback of at least thirty
five feet (35') from any public rights of way or property lines.
   C.   Buffering: All fences, other than those intended for decoration or
screening, shall be buffered with berms and/or landscaping. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-
22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-16-9: NONCONFORMING FENCES:
   A.   Subject to the limitations and termination provisions set forth in this
chapter, any lawful existing nonconforming fence may be continued so long as it
otherwise remains lawful after the effective date hereof. No nonconforming
fence shall be:
      1.   Changed or altered in any manner which would increase the degree of
its nonconformity.
      2.   Expanded.
      3.   Changed or altered to prolong its useful life.
      4.   Moved in whole or in part to any other location where it would
remain nonconforming.
   B.   Any nonconforming fence that meets any of the above criteria shall be
subject to the provisions provided in this title.
   C.   Should any nonconforming fence be damaged to at least fifty percent
(50%) of its replacement cost, the fence shall not be replaced except according
to the provisions provided in this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-
2004)
CHAPTER 17
SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
10-17-1: Definition
10-17-2: Permit Requirements
10-17-3: Accessory Structure
10-17-4: Enclosure Required
10-17-5: Enforcement
10-17-1: DEFINITION:
The term "private swimming pool", when used in this chapter, shall mean a
manmade, rigid or semirigid receptacle for water having a depth at any point
greater than twenty four inches (24"), used or intended to be used for
swimming, wading or bathing, and constructed, installed or maintained in or
above the ground, and which is used exclusively by the owner or occupant of the
lot or premises in the village on which it is located, his family and his
guests. The term does not include inflatable receptacles or other swimming
pools that are of a temporary nature. "Temporary nature" means those swimming
pools that are typically removed on a seasonal basis. (Ord. 2010-09, 4-14-2010)
10-17-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A written application for a permit shall be accompanied by plans and
specifications sufficiently detailed to enable determination of compliance with
the requirements of this chapter. The fee for a permit to construct a private
swimming pool shall be as provided in subsection
2-3-1A11 of this code. (Ord. 2010-09, 4-14-2010; amd. 2013 Code)
10-17-3: ACCESSORY STRUCTURE:
A private swimming pool shall be considered an accessory structure for the
purpose of determining the side and rear yard requirements of this title. (Ord.
2010-09, 4-14-2010)
10-17-4: ENCLOSURE REQUIRED:
Every owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee of a lot or
premises located within the village upon which a private swimming pool is
situated shall maintain at all times on such lot or premises a fence or other
structure completely surrounding such pool, in accordance with the requirements
of chapter 16 of this title. (Ord. 2010-09, 4-14-2010)
10-17-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The zoning enforcement officer is charged with the duty of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter. For this purpose, the zoning enforcement officer is
authorized to enter any premises within the village to inspect any private
swimming pool at any reasonable time. (Ord. 2010-09, 4-14-2010)
CHAPTER 18
EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
SECTION:
10-18-1: Lot Of Record
10-18-2: Allowed Projections Into Yards
10-18-3: Height Of Buildings And Structures
10-18-4: Buildings Under Construction
10-18-5: Multiple Buildings On A Lot
10-18-1: LOT OF RECORD:
When a lot which is an official lot of record at the effective date hereof does
not comply with the area, yard, or other requirements of this title, and the
plat of subdivision has been previously approved and contains setback lines,
then that plat of subdivision shall supersede this title where inconsistent.
Further, such a lot may be used as a building site; provided, however, that
there is compliance, as closely as possible in the opinion of the planning
commission, with the yard and other requirements of the district. (Ord. 2008-
35, 12-10-2008)
10-18-2: ALLOWED PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS:
   A.   Architectural Features:
      1.   Architectural features of buildings, such as windowsills, cornices,
and roof overhangs, may project into the required yard, provided such
projection is not more than two feet (2').
      2.   Open fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, chimneys, and flues
may project into the rear yard not more than five feet (5').
      3.   Ground floor terraces or patios may extend into the rear yard, not,
however, to within five feet (5') of either side lot line.
   B.   Business Structures: Signs, awnings, canopies, and marquees, as
attached to and part of a building, may project into the front yard in the C-
1 central business district only and shall comply with the regulations of
chapter 15 of this title.
   C.   Accessory Buildings:
      1.   One-story accessory buildings may project into side or rear yards;
provided, that:
         a.   The building does not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of
the rear and side yards.
         b.   It projects into the side or rear yards, provided it projects no
closer than six feet (6') to the side or rear lot lines.
         c.   Garage accessory buildings entered from an alley are not closer
than twenty feet (20') to the alley line.
         d.   Projections into the front yard on corner lots are allowed where
adherence to two (2) front yards would reduce the buildable width for accessory
buildings below the minimum requirements. However, in no case shall the
buildable width for accessory buildings be reduced to less than twenty five
feet (25').
      2.   See subsection
10-7A-4A3 of this title for further exceptions.
   D.   Fences:
      1.   Fences may be constructed in or project into yards; provided, that:
         a.   No fence or planting more than three feet (3') high or thirty
percent (30%) solid shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of a street
intersection;
         b.   No fence more than four feet (4') high may be located closer to
the front of the lot than the principal building; and
         c.   No fence more than six feet (6') high shall be allowed on any
part of the lot, except in an I-2 district.
      2.   Fences shall conform to
chapter 16 of this title.
   E.   Signs:
      1.   Freestanding signs (not attached to a building), as permitted in the
particular district, may project into the front yard; except, however, no
freestanding signs shall be permitted in the C-1 central business district.
      2.   No sign in any district shall be permitted to overhang any property
line or be within ten feet (10') from any public right of way.
   F.   Fuel Pumps And Canopies:
      1.   At automobile service stations and gasoline stations, pumps, pump
islands, and associated fixtures located on the lot may be located within a
required setback, provided they are not less than fifteen feet (15') from any
right of way line and not less than forty feet (40') from the boundary of any
residential district.
      2.   Fuel pumps and pump islands may be located beneath a fixed and
permanent canopy; provided, that the leading edge of the canopy is set back
from all property lines not less than ten feet (10'), and the support
structures are situated so that clear sight distances are unobstructed along
adjacent streets.
   G.   Lighting: Light standards may be located within a required yard
setback, provided such standards are located not less than five feet (5') from
any right of way line, nor within ten feet (10') of any residential district.
Any lighting used shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from
adjoining property.
   H.   Telecommunications Towers: Telecommunications towers may be constructed
if they are located with setbacks on all sides at least one-fourth (1/4) the
height of the tower. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-18-3: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Public And Semipublic Buildings: Public buildings, places of worship,
temples, hospitals and institutions may exceed the height limit to a total
height of sixty feet (60'), provided all yards required in the particular
district are increased one foot (1') for each one foot (1') in excess of the
height limitation. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Architectural Or Mechanical Appurtenances: Chimneys, church steeples,
cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, flagpoles, monuments, stacks,
stage towers, scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, spires, radio and television
towers, wireless telecommunications towers, grain elevators, or other such
architectural and mechanical appurtenances are exempt from height regulations.
   C.   Storage Buildings: Storage buildings are exempt from the story
limitations (but not the number of feet limitation) for the district in which
they are located.
   D.   Roof Mounted Satellites Or Antennas: Roof mounted satellites or
antennas shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') above the roof line. (Ord. 2004-
26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-18-4: BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION:
Nothing in this title shall be deemed to require any change in the plans,
construction, or designated use of any building or structure upon which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date hereof and upon
which building or structure actual construction has been diligently carried on,
and provided further, that such building or structure shall be completed within
one year from the effective date hereof. If such structure, when completed and
occupied, is in conflict with any provision of this title, it shall be
classified as a nonconforming structure subject to the regulations of chapter
13 of this title. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff. 9-22-2004)
10-18-5: MULTIPLE BUILDINGS ON A LOT:
If more than one principal building, other than in a "planned unit development"
as defined in
chapter 11 of this title, is built upon a single lot, each building shall
satisfy the setback requirements of this title in the same manner and degree as
if they were on two (2) or more separate lots. (Ord. 2004-26, 9-22-2004, eff.
9-22-2004)
CHAPTER 19
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-19-1: Solar Energy System Regulations
10-19-2: Indemnification
10-19-1: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REGULATIONS:
Solar energy systems are only allowed as authorized in this section, and all
solar energy systems shall comply with the regulations set forth in this
section:
   A.   Compliance With Laws: All solar energy systems shall comply with all
applicable village, state and federal laws and regulations, including, without
limitation, the provisions of this section, this code, and all applicable
village building ordinances and regulations.
   B.   Compliance With Permits: All solar energy systems shall obtain and
comply with all applicable permits pursuant to this section, including, without
limitation, building and electrical permits, all conditions imposed by the
village as a condition of issuance of these permits shall be complied with.
   C.   Use And Energy Production Restrictions: The sole purpose of the solar
energy system shall be the production of energy for local distribution and
consumption on the property on which the solar energy system is located;
provided, however, that excess energy produced by a solar energy system may be
sold to a local electric utility company.
   D.   Interference With Utilities, Roads, And Neighboring Properties: No
solar energy system shall be operated in a manner so as to interfere with any
public right-of-way or any utility system in the village, or so as to interfere
with the reasonable use and enjoyment of any other property in the village.
   E.   Definition/Engineering Requirements: Solar energy systems shall be
defined as, and conform to, all applicable industry standards, including,
without limitation, the definitions and standards developed by the American
National Standards Institute.
   F.   All solar energy system permits must include a plan schematic which
shall include the wiring diagram indicating a separate shut-off is included for
safety. The applicant shall also submit a copy of such to the Utica Fire
Protection District.
   G.   All applicants shall provide satisfactory evidence to the village that
the local electrical utility company has been notified of the intent to install
a customer owned solar energy system.
   H.   Building-Mounted Solar Energy Systems:
      1.   Solar Energy System Permit Required: Building-mounted solar energy
systems are allowed as a permitted use in any zoning district, but only upon
issuance of a solar energy system permit in accordance with the following:
         a.   The owner of the property on which the solar energy system is
proposed to be installed shall submit an application for building permits, as
applicable, pursuant to the Village Code. Such application shall include the
minimum data requirements identified in this Title.
         b.   Upon receipt of a complete application pursuant to the village
code, and upon a determination by the village zoning enforcement officer/
building inspector that the application and the proposed building-mounted solar
energy system comply with the requirements set forth in this and the other
applicable codes of the village, he/she shall issue permits for the solar
energy system.
      2.   Location:
         a.   Solar energy systems may be mounted on the roof of a permitted
principal or accessory structure. Solar energy systems shall not be mounted
upon any other portion of any principal or accessory structure.
         b.   Solar energy systems must either be: i) an integral part of the
structure, rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting
for an architectural or structural part of the building, such as a photovoltaic
or hot water system that are contained within roofing materials, windows,
skylights, shading devices and similar architectural components; or ii) mounted
flush with, and parallel to, a finished surface, at no more than twelve inches
(12") in height above that surface.
            c.   Applications and plans for building-mounted solar energy
system within the C-l Zoning District shall also be subject to review and
approval by the Village Planning Commission.
      3.   Horizontal Projection: Solar energy systems shall not extend beyond
the exterior perimeter of the structure on which the system is mounted.
      4.   Setbacks: All portions of building-mounted solar energy systems
shall comply with the generally applicable setback restrictions for the zoning
district or building setbacks lines as established in a planned unit
development (PUD) in which the building-mounted solar energy system is located.
      5.   Height: The height of any building-mounted solar energy system shall
not exceed the lesser of: a) twelve inches (12") from the roof surface at any
point; and b) the generally applicable height restrictions for the zoning
district in which the building-mounted solar energy system is located. Also, no
portion of the building-mounted solar energy system shall extend beyond the
ridgeline of the roof at any point.
      6.   Maximum Roof Coverage: No building-mounted solar energy system shall
occupy more than eighty percent (80%) of the cumulative area of the face of the
structure on which the system is mounted, unless the system is incorporated
into, and is an integral part of, the structural elements of the face on which
it is mounted.
      7.   Aesthetics: All building-mounted solar energy systems shall be
designed to blend into the architecture of the building.
   I.   Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems: Ground-mounted solar energy
systems shall be considered special uses in all zoning districts except
residential districts in which they are prohibited. Plans for ground-mounted
solar energy systems (excepting portable energy systems for swimming pools)
shall be subject to the issuance of a special use permit as provided, as well
as review and approval by the Village Planning Commission. In addition to all
other requirements of the special use permit application, all applications from
ground-mounted solar energy systems shall include the minimum data requirements
identified in this Title. In addition, plans for ground-mounted solar energy
systems shall comply with the minimum standards as follows:
      1.   Location:
         a.   No ground-mounted solar energy system may be constructed within
any off-street parking or loading space required pursuant to this code.
         b.   Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be located on the same
lot or parcel as the principal structure and within the rear yard of that lot
or parcel.
      2.   Installation Angle: All solar panels of a ground-mounted solar
energy system shall be installed not greater than the maximum angle specified
by the manufacturer.
      3.   Setbacks: In all zoning districts, all portions of ground-mounted
solar energy systems shall comply with the generally applicable setback
restrictions for the zoning district or building setback lines as established
in a PUD in which the ground-mounted solar energy system is located, as
measured from the property line to the closest edge of the system. Ground-
mounted solar energy systems (and parts thereof) shall not be deemed a
permitted obstruction in any required yard.
      4.   Height: The height of a ground-mounted solar energy system shall not
exceed the height limitation for accessory structures.
      5.   Lot Coverage: The total solar panel surface area of each ground-
mounted solar energy system shall be included in the lot coverage calculations
for the property on which the system is located.
      6.   Screening And Bufferyards: Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall
be properly screened from adjacent lots. For the purpose of this subsection,
proper screening shall be deemed to consist of permanent vegetative screening
large enough and dense enough to substantially screen the energy system from
view from adjacent lots in a manner that is consistent with the character of
the neighborhood and existing uses on the adjacent lots.
      7.   Rotation: Ground-mounted solar energy system panels may rotate not
to exceed the maximum angle as specified by the manufacturer.
   J.   Portable Solar Energy Systems For Swimming Pools: Portable solar energy
systems for swimming pools may only be constructed and used within the village
in accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   No portable solar energy system may be constructed or used prior to
April 1 or after October 31 of any calendar year.
      2.   No portable solar energy system may be used for any purpose other
than the provision of heat for an outdoor swimming pool located within a
residential district.
      3.   Portable solar energy systems shall be constructed and used in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this title.
   K.   Decommissioning:
      1.   A solar energy system that is not capable of operating at full
capacity for a period exceeding ninety (90) consecutive days shall be deemed
abandoned. The owner of an abandoned solar energy system and the owner of the
property on which the solar energy system is located shall cause the removal of
all solar energy system structures and facilities within sixty (60) days after
receipt of a notice of abandonment from the village.
      2.   Any abandoned solar energy system that is not removed within sixty
(60) days after receipt of a notice of abandonment shall be deemed a public
nuisance, which nuisance the village shall have the right, but not the
obligation, to summarily abate by removing such system at the joint and several
expense of the owners of the system and of the property on which the system is
located. In the case of such removal, the village shall have the right, but not
the obligation, to file a lien for reimbursement of any and all expenses
incurred by the village in connection with the removal, including, without
limitation, attorney fees and accrued interest.
      3.   Upon removal of the solar energy system, the owner of record of the
subject property shall restore that portion of the subject property on which
the system was installed in accordance with the standards required by the
village's then-current applicable codes. (Ord. 2019-34, 12-5-2019)
10-19-2: INDEMNIFICATION:
The owner of each solar energy system, and the owner of the property on which
the solar energy system is located, shall jointly and severally defend,
indemnify and hold harmless the village and its officials from and against any
and all claims, demands, losses, suits, causes of action, damages, injuries,
costs, expenses and liabilities whatsoever including attorney's fees arising
out of any permit, approval, inspection, or other act or omission of the
village, or any acts or omissions of the owners concerning the operation of the
solar energy system, including, without limitation, whether said liability is
premised on contract or on tort. (Ord. 2019-34, 12-5-2019)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
SUBDIVISION PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
11-1-1: Short Title
11-1-2: Purpose And Intent
11-1-3: Application And Interpretation
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the SUBDIVISION
ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF NORTH UTICA. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the village subdivision and site development regulations is to
provide the minimum requirements for land development that will lead to a well
planned community environment, adequate municipal utilities, easily maintained
streets, and sound development of the village. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-1-3: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Jurisdiction: This title shall be considered as an implementation of
sound planning for the development of the village. The provisions of this title
shall apply to land situated within the corporate limits and to territory
within one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits of the village
as now or hereafter existing which is not included in any other municipality,
except as such jurisdiction is limited by the provisions of Illinois Compiled
Statutes or by agreement between the village and any other municipality.
   B.   Interpretation:
      1.   Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this title are
either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed
by any other provision of this title, or of any law, ordinance, resolution,
rule, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or
which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
      2.   This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or
other private agreement; provided, that where the regulations of this title are
more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such
easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of this
title shall govern.
      3.   A subdivision of land which was not lawfully existing at the
effective date hereof shall not become or be made lawful solely by reason of
adoption of this title; and to the extent that, in any manner that said
subdivision of land is in conflict with the requirements of this title, said
subdivision of land remains unlawful hereunder.
   C.   Severability: If any part or parts of this title are held to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such unconstitutionality or invalidity
shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of this title which shall
remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: General Definitions
11-2-1: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
ALLEY: A public right of way which affords a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
APPLICANT: The owner or contract purchaser of land proposed to be subdivided or
developed, or his legal representative.
BUILDING CODE: The current edition of "The BOCA National Building Code".
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the village of North Utica, Illinois, for
the construction, erection or alteration of a structure, building, parking lot
or connection to utility lines.
BUILDING SERVICE SEWER: The private property owner's sewer that connects a
residential, commercial, or industrial building with the sewer main.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: The distance from a property line within which buildings
or structures shall not be erected.
CONSTRUCTION COST: The total cost of developing the subdivision or project,
excepting engineering, surveying or legal fees, and also excepting the cost of
the land and interest on borrowed money.
CUL-DE-SAC: See definition of Street.
DETENTION STORAGE: The temporary detaining or storage of stormwater in storage
basins, on rooftops, in streets, parking lots, schoolyards, parks, open spaces,
or other areas under predetermined and controlled conditions with the rate of
drainage therefrom regulated by appropriately installed devices.
DEVELOPER: A person, group of persons, corporation, organization, or other
entity whose concern and desire is to improve land in accordance with the
regulations of the village. See definition of Subdivider.
DRY BOTTOM DETENTION BASIN: A basin designed to be completely dewatered after
having provided its planned detention of runoff during a storm event.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific
purpose.
ENGINEER: A currently registered professional engineer of the state of
Illinois.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN: A plan of the proposed site development
containing all erosion and sedimentation control measures needed to provide
protection throughout all phases of construction.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated, or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The elevation of the existing ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
FILL: Any earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other similar material that is
deposited, placed, dumped, transported, or moved by man to a new location.
FINAL PLAT: A map or plat of a subdivision and any accompanying information as
described in chapter 5 of this title.
FRONTAGE: All the property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting
streets (intersecting or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or
if the street is dead ended, then all property abutting on one side between an
intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
GRADIENT OR PERCENT OF GRADE: The vertical rise in feet per one hundred feet
(100') of horizontal distance (for example: A 1 percent grade is a rise of 1
foot in 100 feet).
HALF STREET: See definition of Street.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION OR CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION: An organization or
association established pursuant to an agreement or declaration of restrictions
consisting of persons owning or assuming responsibility for open spaces,
recreational facilities, detention/retention facilities, or other commonly
owned areas or property within a planned development or other real estate
development.
IMPROVEMENTS: Grading, street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water
mains, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, trees, and other
additions to the natural state of the land which increases its value, utility,
or habitability in accordance with the provisions of this title.
   Private Improvement: Any installed or constructed improvement for which the
responsibility of maintenance and ownership will be retained by the property
owner.
   Public Improvement: Any improvement for which it is intended that the
village or other municipal body will assume the responsibility for maintenance
and operation or which is constructed for general public use or benefit.
LAND SURVEYOR: A registered surveyor of the state of Illinois.
LOT: A parcel of land designated as a lot on a recorded plat of subdivision and
having its principal frontage upon a street.
   Corner Lot: One situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the
interior angle of such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty five
degrees (135°).
   Double Frontage Lot: One which abuts on two (2) streets but is not a corner
lot.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: See definition of Street.
MINOR STREET: See definition of Street.
OFFICIAL MAP: A village map showing required arterial streets and proposed land
use.
100-YEAR STORM: Rainstorms or rain events of varying duration or intensities
having a one percent (1%) probability of occurring in any one year.
100-YEAR STORM RUNOFF: The stormwater runoff from a 100-year storm.
OWNER: Includes the plural as well as the singular and may mean either a
natural person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public or
quasi-public corporation, or combination of any of them.
PARCEL: An individual continuous area of land.
PARKWAY: That part of the public street right of way not occupied by the street
pavement and located between the back of the curb and the property line, or the
dividing strip of land between parallel roadways.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A public right of way across a block, or providing access within
a block, to be used by pedestrians and for the installation of utility lines.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development or other permit is issued by
the village.
PERSON: Any person, firm or corporation, public or private, the state of
Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions and the United States Of
America and its agencies or instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer,
or employee of any of the foregoing.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A land development project comprehensively planned as an
entity via a unitary site plan which permits flexibility in building, mixture
of housing types and land uses, usable open spaces, and the preservation of
significant natural features.
PLANT AND LANDSCAPING MATERIAL: Permanent vegetative cover including grass
seeding, lime and fertilizer application, mulching or any other solid
stabilization planting.
PONDING: The existence of pockets or depressions which have no surface drainage
provided and, in the event of failure on the part of inlets or storm sewers,
will contain standing water. That portion of surface waters which are flowing
shall not be considered as ponding.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision as
described in chapter 5 of this title and supporting documents required for
preliminary approval of a proposed plat of subdivision.
PUBLIC AGENCY: Any public board created by authority of Illinois Compiled
Statutes.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS: Contracts, agreements or declarations restricting the
manner in which land may be used.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a road,
sidewalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil and gas pipeline, water
main, sanitary or storm sewer, or for other special uses.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a public right of way paved or otherwise surfaced
which is intended for pedestrian use only.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land, or contiguous combination thereof, where
development work is performed as a single, unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain or vegetation, constructing driveways, or
performing any other construction upon or making any other material changes in
a land site.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: Refers to the "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction", adopted by the state of Illinois, department of
transportation, current edition, as well as the "Standard Specifications For
Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois", current edition.
STANDARDS: Specifications for the preparation of plans indicating, among other
things, the optimum, minimum, or maximum dimensions of such features as rights
of way and blocks.
STORM SEWER: A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: The water derived from precipitation within a tributary
drainage basin, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels
or conduits.
STREET: A public or private right of way for providing vehicular movements over
land, providing access to individual lots or providing for through traffic. A
street includes the area within the right of way, whether improved or
unimproved, and includes, but is not limited to, curb and gutters, pavements,
and such improvements as sidewalks, drainage and street lighting. Streets are
designated on the street classification map in accordance with the following
definitions:
   Arterial Street: A public right of way with a high degree of traffic
continuity serving as an arterial trafficway between the various districts of
the village as shown on the official map.
   Collector Street: A street which carries traffic from minor streets of
residential developments and the principal circulating street within such
development.
   Cul-De-Sac: A short local street having one open end and being permanently
terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround.
   Half Street: A street bordering one or more boundary lines of a tract of
land or parcel and which is only one-half (1/2) of the required right of way
width.
   Highway: Any street designated by the state or federal government for
purposes of intrastate or interstate traffic.
   Marginal Access Street Or Frontage Road: A street which is parallel to and
contiguous with an arterial street and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection to local traffic from fast moving, through traffic on
the adjoining arterial street.
   Minor Street: A street, other than an arterial street or collector street,
which affords local access to abutting properties.
SUBDIVIDER: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, corporation,
copartnership, trust, or other legal entity commencing proceedings under this
title to effect a subdivision of land.
SUBDIVISION: Any division, excepting a tax division, by plat or otherwise, of a
tract of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer
of ownership or building development.
VACANT: Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
VILLAGE: The village of North Utica, Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD: The village board of trustees of the village of North Utica, an
Illinois municipal corporation.
WET BOTTOM DETENTION BASIN: A basin designed to retain a permanent pool of
water after having provided its planned detention of runoff during a storm
event.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The current zoning ordinance of the village. (Ord. 2005-39,
10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11-3-1: Enforcement Officer
11-3-2: Prerequisites To Building Permit Issuance
11-3-3: Variations
11-3-4: Enforcement Of Provisions
11-3-5: Penalty
11-3-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The village zoning enforcement officer is the enforcing officer of this title,
and it shall be his/her duty to enforce the provisions hereof. The enforcing
officer may call upon any department or official of the village to furnish such
information and assistance as deemed necessary for the administration or
enforcement of this title, and it shall be the duty of such department or
employee to furnish such information and assistance whenever requested. (Ord.
2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
11-3-2: PREREQUISITES TO BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE:
Before issuance of any building permits for improvements of lots within a
subdivision, the subdivider, builder or developer shall:
   A.   File with the zoning enforcement officer, the approved, final recorded
plat of subdivision. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Completely and satisfactorily install functioning sanitary sewer
systems, storm sewers and water service to each lot and street paving with the
exception of the final pavement course.
   C.   In addition, the street lighting system shall be installed and
functioning, street identification signs and traffic control signs shall be
installed; all electrical, telephone, cable television, and gas utility lines
shall be installed; and the parkway finish graded.
   D.   A spotted topographic survey of the lot must be submitted showing the
elevation at the top of the foundations, lot corners and points of change in
gradients. These elevations shall be in compliance with those indicated on the
subdivision grading plans. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-3-3: VARIATIONS:
   A.   Planning Commission Recommend: The planning commission may recommend
variations from the requirements of this title in specific cases which, in its
opinion, do not affect the general plan or the intent of this title. Such
recommendations shall be communicated to the village board in writing
substantiating the recommended variation.
   B.   Village Board Approval: The village board may approve variations from
the requirements in specific cases, which, in its opinion, do not adversely
affect the general plan or the spirit of this title. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-3-4: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Nonconforming Work: If, at any time, any work is performed which is not
in accordance with this title or a permit covered by this title, including
conditions and approved modifications thereof, a written notice to comply shall
be given by the village zoning enforcement officer stating the nature and
location of the alleged noncompliance and specifying what remedial steps are
necessary to bring the project into compliance. The responsible parties shall
have such time as may be allowed, in writing, by the village zoning enforcement
officer to correct all noted deficiencies. The time allowed shall be reasonable
and shall be determined by the nature of the deficiency and whether or not it
creates a nuisance or hazard.
   B.   Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit:
      1.   A permit may be revoked or suspended by the village zoning
enforcement officer. The permit holder may request, in writing, within ten (10)
days of the permit revocation, a public hearing before the village board or its
designated committee. The permit holder shall have an opportunity to be heard,
present evidence, and cross examine witnesses at such public hearing. The
decision of the village board or its designated committee shall be final, and
any further appeal shall be in the circuit court of LaSalle County. Written
notice shall be given to the permit holder specifying the grounds for such
contemplated revocation or suspension, and advising the permit holder of the
date, place, and time of the hearing before the village board. (Ord. 2005-39,
10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
      2.   A permit may be revoked or suspended upon the occurrence of any one
of the following events:
         a.   Violation of any condition of the permit; or
         b.   Violation of any provision of this title or any other applicable
law or ordinances; or
         c.   Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting
or creating a nuisance, hazard, or endangering human life or property of
others. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
      3.   Upon revocation of any permit and in cases where a permit is
suspended, the village zoning enforcement officer shall issue a stop work order
on all construction activity on the permit holder's property which is being
performed pursuant to any permits, licenses, franchises or contracts issued or
approved by the village. Notices and orders required by this title shall be
served upon the parties concerned, either personally or by certified mail,
addressed to the individual contracting party or permit holder at the address
given on the contract document or permit application filed with the village.
(Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Civil Action: The village may institute actions or proceedings at law
or in equity for the enforcement of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2005-
39, 10-12-2005)
11-3-5: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this title shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
ARTICLE A. SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
SECTION:
11-3A-1: Permit Required; Exemptions
11-3A-2: Application For Permit
11-3A-3: Utility Requirements
11-3A-4: Bond
11-3A-5: Fees
11-3A-6: Approval Or Disapproval Of Permit
11-3A-7: Appeals
11-3A-8: Nonliability Of Village
11-3A-9: Expiration Of Permit
11-3A-10: Inspections
11-3A-11: Exceptions
11-3A-12: Special Precautions
11-3A-13: Violation; Penalty
11-3A-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall commence
or perform any grading, stripping, excavating, filling or paving of land
without first obtaining a site development permit.
   B.   A site development permit shall not be required in the following cases:
      1.   All single-family residences shall not be required to obtain a site
development permit, but shall be required to take adequate erosion and
sedimentation control measures and shall present a grading plan for the
property which shows existing and final earth elevations, proposed top of
foundation elevations and existing curb elevations, and shall obtain a building
permit; or (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
      2.   When a site development permit is deemed not necessary by the
village zoning enforcement officer after considering the detrimental effect, if
any, upon neighboring property. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
11-3A-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   No site development permit shall be issued until the applicant submits
an erosion and sedimentation control plan, together with other submissions
required by this article, and certifies that any land clearing, construction,
or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with such
plan and submissions.
   B.   Each application for a site development permit shall be made by the
owner of the property or his authorized agent to the zoning enforcement officer
on a form furnished for that purpose. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013
Code)
   C.   Each application shall be accompanied by the following:
      1.   A vicinity map in sufficient detail to enable easy location in the
field of the site for which the permit is sought, and including the boundary
line and approximate acreage of the site, existing zoning and a legend and
scale.
      2.   A development plan of the site showing:
         a.   Existing topography of the site and adjacent land within
approximately one hundred feet (100') of the boundaries, drawn at no greater
than two foot (2') contour intervals, and clearly portraying the conformation
and drainage pattern of the area.
         b.   The location of existing buildings, structures, utilities, water
bodies, floodplains, drainage facilities, vegetative cover, paved areas and
other significant natural or manmade features on the site and adjacent land
within approximately one hundred feet (100') of the boundary.
         c.   A general description of the predominant soil types on the site,
their location and their limitations for their proposed use.
         d.   Proposed use of the site; areas of excavation, grading and
filling; proposed contours; provisions for storm drainage, including the
control of accelerated runoff, with a drainage area map and computations; and
areas and acreages proposed to be covered, sodded or seeded, vegetatively
stabilized or left undisturbed.
      3.   A stormwater drainage plan in accordance with section
11-6B-9 of this title.
      4.   An erosion and sedimentation control plan when required pursuant to
section
11-7-3 of this title. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-3A-3: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Telephone, Electric And TV Lines And Gas Mains: All telephone, electric
service and cable TV lines, as well as gas mains, shall be in accordance with
section
11-6B-2 of this title.
   B.   Water Service: All water mains, service lines and appurtenances shall
be in accordance with section
11-6B-7 of this title.
   C.   Sanitary Sewers: All sanitary sewers and appurtenances shall be in
accordance with section
11-6B-8 of this title.
   D.   Storm Drainage Facilities: All storm drainage facilities shall be in
accordance with section
11-6B-9 of this title. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-3A-4: BOND:
The applicant shall be required to file with the village clerk an improvement
security, in accordance with subsections 11-6C-2A1, A2 and A3 of this title, in
the amount deemed sufficient by the village zoning enforcement officer to cover
all the costs of improvements, and village fees. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005;
amd. 2013 Code)
11-3A-5: FEES:
Fees for services provided by the village zoning enforcement officer,
consisting of plan review and filing fees, shall be as follows: (Ord. 2005-39,
10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   A.   One percent (1%) of the construction cost when such cost is less than
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
   B.   One percent (1%) of the first fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) of
construction cost of the improvement; plus 0.75 percent of the next two hundred
thousand dollars ($200,000.00) of construction cost of the improvement; plus
0.50 percent of all construction costs over two hundred fifty thousand dollars
($250,000.00).
   C.   Inspection fees shall be in accordance with subsection 11-6C-1C of this
title. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-3A-6: APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF PERMIT:
To further the specific purposes of this article, the following review
procedures are established. The village zoning enforcement officer shall review
all site development applications. Following such review, the village zoning
enforcement officer may: (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   A.   Approve the site development application if he finds it to be in
conformance with the provisions of this title, and issue a permit; (Ord. 2005-
39, 10-12-2005)
   B.   Approve the site development application subject to such reasonable
conditions the village zoning enforcement officer may deem necessary to secure
substantially the objectives of this title, and issue a permit subject to those
conditions; or (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Disapprove the site development application and require resubmittal
that meets the conditions of this title. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-3A-7: APPEALS:
   A.   The applicant may appeal the decision of the village zoning enforcement
officer, including any lack of action by the village zoning enforcement
officer, to the planning commission. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Upon receipt of an appeal, the planning commission shall schedule and
hold a public hearing, after giving notice thereof.
   C.   Within thirty (30) days following said hearing, the planning commission
shall transmit its findings and recommendations to the village board for final
disposition. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-3A-8: NONLIABILITY OF VILLAGE:
Failure of the village officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend denial of the site development permit, or of the
village zoning enforcement officer or planning commission to deny said permit,
shall not relieve the permittee from responsibility for the condition or damage
resulting therefrom, and shall not result in the village, its officers or
agents, being responsible for any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
(Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
11-3A-9: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
Every site development permit shall expire by limitation and become null and
void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within one
hundred eighty (180) days or is not completed within one year from date of
issue; except, that the village zoning enforcement officer may, if the permit
holder presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented
work being started or completed within the specified time limits, grant a
reasonable extension of time if written application is made before the
expiration date of the permit. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
11-3A-10: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   The village zoning enforcement officer shall inspect the site and shall
either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee
that the same fails to comply with the approved plan.
   B.   When it is found by inspection that conditions are not substantially as
stated or as shown in the said plan, the village zoning enforcement officer may
order that further work be stopped until nonconforming conditions are
corrected. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Plans for grading work and the site development permit shall be
maintained at the site during progress of the grading.
   D.   Until the final inspection is made, a permit issued by the village
indicating permission to construct has been granted by the village shall be
prominently displayed on the front property line of the property involved and
be visible from the street on which the property fronts. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-
2005)
   E.   In order to obtain inspections in accordance with the following
schedule, the permittee shall notify the village zoning enforcement officer at
least two (2) full working days before the said inspection is to be made for:
(Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
      1.   Stripping and clearing;
      2.   Rough grading, when all rough grading has been competed;
      3.   Final grading; and
      4.   Final inspection, when all work, including installation of all
drainage and other structures and required planting, has been completed. (Ord.
2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-3A-11: EXCEPTIONS:
The village board, after recommendation by the planning commission, may
authorize exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in
this article upon the following conditions:
   A.   Application For Exception: Application for any exception shall be made
by petition of applicant stating fully the grounds for the application. Such
petition shall be filed with the site development permit application.
   B.   Findings Of Fact: In order for the land referred to in the petition to
come within the provision of this section, it shall be necessary that the
planning commission find all of the following facts with respect thereto:
      1.   That the land is of such shape or size or is affected by such
physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record that it
is impossible or impractical for the developer to comply with all of the
regulations of this article.
      2.   That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right of the petitioner.
      3.   That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject
property. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
   C.   Referral Of Proposed Exception: Each proposed exception shall be
referred to the village zoning enforcement officer, and the village zoning
enforcement officer shall transmit to the planning commission recommendations,
which recommendations shall be reviewed prior to the granting of any exception.
(Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   D.   Planning Commission Recommendation: After public hearing thereon, the
planning commission may recommend approval of the site development permit
application with the exceptions and conditions it deems necessary, or it may
recommend disapproval of such site development permit application and exception
application, or it may take such other action as is appropriate.
   E.   Village Board Action: Recommendations of the planning commission shall
be submitted for final action to the village board. If the village board fails
to make a determination within forty five (45) days after receipt of the
planning commission's recommendations, such failure shall constitute an
approval of the planning commission's recommendations, unless such forty five
(45) days is extended with the consent of the applicant. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-
2005)
11-3A-12: SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS:
   A.   If, at any stage of the grading, the village zoning enforcement officer
determines by inspection that further work, even though under permit, is likely
to imperil any property, public way, watercourse or drainage structure, the
village zoning enforcement officer may require, as a condition to allowing the
work to continue, that such reasonable safety precautions be taken as he
considers advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-
12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   B.   Special precautions may include, but shall not be limited to,
specifying a flatter exposed slope, construction of additional drainage
facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, or cribbing, installation of plant
materials for erosion control, and reports from a registered professional
engineer, whose recommendations may be made requirements before further work.
   C.   When it appears that erosion or other storm damage may result because
the grading is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required to
install temporary planting to control erosion, install temporary structures or
take such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or
the public safety. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
   D.   On large operations or when unusual site conditions prevail, the
village zoning enforcement officer may specify the time of commencement of
grading and time of completion, or may require that the operation be conducted
in specific stages to ensure timely completion of protective measures or
devices. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
11-3A-13: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
No person, firm or corporation shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or
maintain any construction project, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or
in violation of any provisions of this article. In addition to any other
penalty authorized by this title, any person convicted of violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be required to restore the property to the
condition existing prior to commission of the violation, or to bear the expense
of such restoration. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Dedication Of Land For Public Use; Cash In Lieu
11-4-2: Floodplain Regulations
11-4-3: Resubdivision Of Land
11-4-4: Upgrading Existing Improvements
11-4-5: Nuisances Prohibited
11-4-1: DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC USE; CASH IN LIEU:
When an area of land for public use (in addition to streets, alleys,
pedestrianways, and utility easements) is recommended by the planning
commission and required by the village board to be located in whole or in part
in a subdivision, the subdivider shall designate on the preliminary plat and
final plat that such land is reserved for public use. At the option of the
village, a cash payment may be required in lieu of land for public use. (Ord.
2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-4-2: FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS:
Subdivision of, or development activities on, any land within the village, or
within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall be subject to the conditions
contained in title 10, chapter 12, "Development In Floodplain Areas", of this
code. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-4-3: RESUBDIVISION OF LAND:
In case of resubdivision of areas previously subdivided, where improvements are
already installed which meet the requirements of this title, no further
construction shall be required; provided, however, that where such
installations have become worn or broken, defective or do not meet current
village standards, the subdivider shall be required to repair and correct such
defects or deficiencies. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-4-4: UPGRADING EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS:
If property for which an application to subdivide has been presented abuts on
or contains an existing public street which has width of pavement less than
required by this title, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate additional
land sufficient to bring roadway widths up to the minimum standards of this
title, before the approval of the property for resubdivision. (Ord. 2005-39,
10-12-2005)
11-4-5: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
This title shall not be construed as authorizing any person to maintain a
private or public nuisance upon his/her property, and compliance with the
provisions of this title shall not be a defense in any action to abate such
nuisance. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
CHAPTER 5
PLATS AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11-5-1: Preliminary Plat
11-5-2: Final Plat
11-5-1: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Submittal: A proposed plat of subdivision shall be initially submitted
for preliminary approval by filing thirty (30) copies of the preliminary plat
with the village clerk.
   B.   Contents: Each preliminary plat shall contain the following:
      1.   Identification And Description:
         a.   Proposed name of subdivision (not duplicating name of any plat
heretofore recorded in LaSalle County).
         b.   Location by township, section, town, and range or other legal
description.
         c.   Names and addresses of all the owners and subdividers of the
tract, the name and signature of the owners' surveyor, and the name and
signature of the owners' engineer.
         d.   Graphic (engineering scale not smaller than 1 inch to 100 feet).
         e.   North point.
         f.   Date of preparation.
         g.   A signed statement by the land planner that the plat meets the
requirements of this title to the best of his/her knowledge, or a request for
variance to one or more requirements.
         h.   The zoning classification under the village or abutting municipal
zoning ordinances, and the zoning of all surrounding land indicating whether it
is in the village or other municipalities.
      2.   Existing Conditions: Each preliminary plat shall show and contain
the following:
         a.   Boundary line of proposed subdivision clearly indicated.
         b.   Total acreage therein.
         c.   Location, width and names of all existing or previously platted
streets or other public ways showing type of improvement, if any, railroad and
utility rights of way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings
and structures, easements, and section and corporation lines within the tract
and to a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the tract.
         d.   Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts,
septic systems (including filter fields) or other underground facilities within
the tract and to a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the tract; also
indicating such data as grades, invert elevations, and locations of catch
basins, manholes and hydrants.
         e.   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land,
within one hundred feet (100'), identifying by name and ownership.
         f.   Topographic data including contours at vertical intervals of not
more than two feet (2'); except, that contour lines shall be no more than one
foot (1') wherever the natural slope of the land is less than one-half percent
(0.5%). Also to be shown are watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, high water
elevation including source of information and other significant features.
         g.   Floodplain lines are to be delineated.
         h.   Farm drains, inlets and outfalls, if any.
         i.   Location of existing corporate boundary lines at or near the
proposed subdivision.
      3.   Subdivision Design Features: The application for preliminary
approval shall show or contain the following:
         a.   The location and width of proposed streets, alleys, and public
ways.
         b.   The proposed location of sewers and storm drains.
         c.   The proposed dedication of public grounds, if any.
         d.   The layout, numbers, and typical dimensions of lots to the
nearest foot, including building setback lines.
         e.   Proposed easements for public utilities.
         f.   A statement of the proposed method of sewage and waste disposal,
stormwater disposal, and water supply.
         g.   The proposed layout of water mains, valves, fire hydrants, and
other appurtenances.
         h.   Traffic and other impact studies, if required by the village.
         i.   Information on the gross area of each land use subarea, i.e.,
single-family, multi-family, commercial, etc.; for residential subareas, the
number of dwelling units and gross density contained therein based on the
ultimate development of the land. The subarea boundaries are to be clearly
delineated. Floor area ratio should be provided for all units over thirty feet
(30') in height.
      4.   Restrictive Covenants: Where applicable, an outline of the
restrictive covenants shall accompany the preliminary plat.
   C.   Fees:
      1.   At the time of filing the preliminary plat with the village clerk,
fees (which are in addition to any plat review fees) shall be paid to the
village clerk. Fees shall be as follows:
         a.   Five dollars ($5.00) per lot for a subdivision containing fifty
(50) lots or less with a minimum of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         b.   Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), plus three dollars ($3.00)
for each additional lot over fifty (50), in a subdivision containing more than
fifty (50) lots.
      2.   A plat review fee based on one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
rate per hour currently in effect for those village personnel participating in
the review process shall be paid to the village clerk before the final plat is
filed.
   D.   Distribution Of Preliminary Plat: The village clerk, with whom said
plat is filed, shall submit copies to each of the members of the planning
commission and one copy of the preliminary plat to each of the following:
      1.   The president and each trustee.
      2.   The village superintendent of public works. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-
2005)
      3.   The village zoning enforcement officer.
      4.   The village legal counsel. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013
Code)
      5.   The village engineer.
      6.   The superintendent of the appropriate grade school district.
      7.   The superintendent of the high school district.
      8.   The fire protection district.
      9.   The library district.
   E.   Notice Requirements: The village clerk shall publish notice, at the
cost of the developer, in a newspaper of general circulation in the village, of
the first meeting at which the planning commission will consider the said
preliminary plat. Said notice shall contain a description of the land proposed
to be subdivided and a general description of the proposed subdivision.
   F.   Approval Of Preliminary Plat: The planning commission may recommend,
and the village board may require, such changes or revisions as are deemed
necessary in the interests and needs of the community.
      1.   Qualifications:
         a.   No plan will be approved for a subdivision which is subject to
flooding or which contains inadequate drainage facilities. However, if the
subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the
village, make the area safe for occupancy and provide adequate drainage, the
preliminary plat of the subdivision may be approved. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
         b.   A proposed plat of subdivision or resubdivision shall not be
approved by the president and board of trustees unless it complies with the
provisions of this title and the official map.
      2.   Zoning Enforcement Officer Review And Recommendation: Upon receipt
of a preliminary plat, the zoning enforcement officer shall review the plat for
general compliance with the overall requirements of the village and shall
return a copy, together with a recommendation, to the planning commission and
the village board. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
      3.   Planning Commission Action:
         a.   The planning commission shall recommend the approval or
disapproval of the application for preliminary approval within ninety (90) days
from the date of the application for preliminary approval or the filing by the
applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is
later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent.
         b.   If such plat is recommended for disapproval, then, within said
ninety (90) days, the planning commission shall furnish to the applicant, in
writing, a statement setting forth the reason or reasons for such
recommendation.
      4.   President And Village Board Action:
         a.   If such plat is approved by the planning commission, the
president and village board shall accept or reject said plat within thirty (30)
days after its next regular meeting following approval by the planning
commission. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
         b.   If the proposed plat is approved, such approval shall be
indicated by the adoption of an ordinance by the president and board of
trustees. Any proposed preliminary plat that has been so approved shall have
attached to it, by the village clerk, a certified copy of such ordinance. (Ord.
2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   G.   Conditions Of Approval:
      1.   The approval of a preliminary plat by the planning commission and
village board is strictly tentative, involving merely the general acceptability
of the information submitted.
      2.   Preliminary approval shall be effective for a maximum period of
twelve (12) months, unless, upon application of the developer, the village
board grants an extension.
      3.   If the final plat has not been recorded within the twelve (12) month
(or extended) time limit, the preliminary plat must again be submitted for
preliminary approval.
      4.   Preliminary approval shall not qualify a preliminary plat for
recording.
      5.   Subsequent approval will be required of the detailed engineering
plans pertaining to water supply, storm drainage, sewerage and sewerage
disposal, street lighting, fire hydrants, street gradients, roadway widths, and
a lot grading plan prior to approval of the final plat by the village.
   H.   Copies Of Approved Plat: One print of the plat which has received
preliminary approval, signed by the president and the village clerk, shall be
retained by the village clerk, and two (2) copies returned to the subdivider,
who may then proceed with the preparation of plans and specifications for the
improvements required in this title, and preparation of the final plat. (Ord.
2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-5-2: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Application For Approval:
      1.   Application for final approval of the final plat shall be made to
the village board not later than one year after approval of the preliminary
plat has been granted, unless the time is extended by the village board.
      2.   The application for approval shall be accompanied by the original
tracing of the proposed final plat, suitable for recording, and thirty (30)
copies thereof. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
      3.   The final plat shall be prepared on permanent reproducible material,
such as mylar, suitable for recording with the county recorder of deeds, at a
scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), or larger if required by
the zoning enforcement officer. All final plats shall show the following: (Ord.
2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
         a.   Proposed name of subdivision and legal description of
subdivision.
         b.   An identification system for all lots and blocks.
         c.   Accurate angular and linear dimensions for all lines, angles, and
curvatures used to describe boundaries, streets, alleys, easements, areas to be
reserved for public use, and other important features; and lot lines to show
dimensions in feet and hundredths. All dimensions shown on curved lines shall
be arc distances.
         d.   True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines
or established survey monuments (not less than 2), which shall be accurately
described in the plat.
         e.   North point.
         f.   Township, county or section lines accurately tied to the lines of
the subdivision by distance and angles.
         g.   All horizontal dimensions, including radii, internal angles,
points of tangency and curvature, tangent bearings and lengths of all arcs.
         h.   Accurate location of all monuments, which shall meet the
requirements of Illinois Compiled Statutes.
         i.   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be
dedicated or reserved for public use, or for the exclusive use of the property
owners within the subdivision, with use purposes indicated thereon.
         j.   All easements required for the installation and maintenance of
utilities (electric, water, wastewater, gas, telephone, etc.), together with a
statement that dedicates the easements to the village and the public utilities.
         k.   All scenic or access easements, together with a statement that
dedicates the easements to the village.
         l.   (1) When a planned development or subdivision development (in
residential zoning districts R-2) proposes separate land division of duplex
type structures, such parcels shall be so indicated on the plat and shall
contain permanent covenants and deed restrictions as required by the developer
and approved by the village. Said adjoining owners, by agreement, shall address
as a minimum, but not be limited to, the following items:
               (A)    Common wall elements;
               (B)    Roof and appurtenances;
               (C)    Exterior elements and accessory structures;
               (D)    Alterations, additions, and landscaping;
               (E)    Insurance;
               (F)    Dispute resolution;
               (G)    An appropriate enforcement statement; and
               (H)    Nonconflict with existing village ordinances.
            (2)   These provisions shall not apply to the condominiumization of
any duplex structure that follows all of the procedures under the Illinois
condominium property act; provided, however, such declaration of condominium
shall address all of the above issues of common wall elements; roof and
appurtenances; exterior elements and accessory structures; alterations,
additions, and landscaping, insurance, dispute resolution; enforcement
remedies; and nonconflict with village ordinances.
         m.   Certification by a licensed surveyor, to the effect that the plat
represents a survey made by him/her and that monuments and markers shown
thereon exist as shown and that all dimensions are correct.
         n.   Notarized certification by owner, and by any mortgage holder of
record, requesting the adoption of the plat and the dedication of easements,
streets, and other public areas.
         o.   Forms for certification showing that all special assessments due
on the property to be subdivided have been paid in full.
         p.   Form for approval by the planning commission.
         q.   Form for approval by the village board.
         r.   Forms for approval by county authorities as required.
      4.   The following supporting documents and data shall be submitted with
said final plat:
         a.   Any special studies or additional items required by the planning
commission or the village.
         b.   All covenants such as homeowners' association covenants and
agreements which are to be applied to the property.
         c.   A description and justification for any variation from the
preliminary plat and a description of any external factors which have changed
since the preliminary plat was approved and which affect the final plat.
         d.   All documents required by sections
11-6C-1 and
11-6C-2 of this title.
   B.   Monuments:
      1.   Permanent monuments shall be placed at all corners of the
subdivision and as otherwise required in the state statutes.
      2.   Permanent monuments shall be three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter
iron pipe or three-fourths inch (3/4") steel plug set in six inch (6") diameter
concrete encasement which is augured into the ground at least three feet (3')
and with tops flush with the final grade.
      3.   All lot corners not marked by concrete monuments shall be marked by
galvanized or wrought iron pipe or iron or steel bars at least eighteen inches
(18") in length and not less than one- half inch (1/2") in diameter. The top of
the pipe or bar is to be set level with the established grade of the ground
after finish grading. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
   C.   Fees: At the time of filing the application for approval of the final
plat, the fees set out in subsections 11-3A-5A and B of this title shall be
paid to the village clerk for plan review which shall be based on the
percentages contained in said subsections of total construction cost (which
shall consist of, but not exclusively limited to, curb and gutters, sidewalks,
pavements, sanitary sewer system, storm sewer system, water distribution
system, stormwater detention facilities, parkway trees, landscaping,
streetlights, plus soil erosion control measures) as estimated by the design
engineer and approved by the village zoning enforcement officer. (Ord. 2005-39,
10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   D.   Approval By Parts: The applicant may elect to have final approval of a
geographic part or parts of the plat that received preliminary approval and may
delay application for approval of other parts until a later date or dates
beyond one year, with the approval of the village board, provided all
facilities required to serve the part or parts for which final approval is
sought have been provided. In such cases, only such part or parts of the plat
that have received final approval shall be recorded. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
   E.   Approval Of Final Plat:
      1.   Qualifications: A proposed plat of subdivision or resubdivision
shall not be approved by the president and board of trustees unless it complies
with the official map of the village and all other pertinent provisions of this
title. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
      2.   President And Village Board Action:
         a.   When a person submitting a plat of subdivision or resubdivision
for final approval has supplied all drawings, maps, and other documents
required by the village ordinances to be furnished in support thereof, and if
all such material meets all village requirements, the village board shall,
after review and approval by the planning commission, approve the proposed plat
within sixty (60) days from the date of filing the last required document or
other papers, or within sixty (60) days from the date of filing application for
final approval of the plat, whichever date is later. The applicant and the
village board may mutually agree to extend the sixty (60) day period. (Ord.
2005-39, 10-12-2005)
         b.   Such approval shall be indicated by the adoption of an ordinance
by the president and board of trustees. Any proposed final plat that has been
so approved shall have attached to it, by the village clerk, a certified copy
of such ordinance. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
         c.   If the proposed plat is disapproved, the village clerk will state
the reasons for the disapproval, specifying the aspects in which the proposed
plat fails to conform to village requirements or ordinances. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-
12-2005)
CHAPTER 6
DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS
ARTICLE A. DESIGN STANDARDS GENERALLY
SECTION:
11-6A-1: Streets
11-6A-2: Pedestrianways
11-6A-3: Easements
11-6A-4: Blocks
11-6A-5: Lots
11-6A-1: STREETS:
   A.   Intent: The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location
of all streets shall conform to the official map and to the provisions of this
title, and their relationship to existing and planned streets, to reasonable
circulation of traffic, to topographical conditions, to runoff of stormwater,
to public convenience and safety, and their appropriate relations to the
proposed uses of the area to be served shall be considered.
   B.   Design Criteria: The following general design criteria for streets
shall be followed:
      1.   Developments planned to be constructed adjacent to existing
developments must be designed to accept the alignment and corresponding widths
of existing pavements unless specifically excepted by the planning commission
or village board.
      2.   All right of way widths shall conform to the following minimum
dimensions:
Street Classification    Minimum Right Of Way (Feet)
Street Classification                    Minimum Right Of Way (Feet)
Arterial or primary                   80
Collector or secondary                80
Minor residential:
 Cul-de-sac                          60
 Dedicated (other than cul- de-sacs) 60
Minor industrial                      70
Major business                        80
Marginal access                       60
Frontage road (dedicated)             60
Half streets                          1/2 the total right of way of proposed
                                      street, if permitted by the village
 
(Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
      3.   If the tract of land proposed to be subdivided or any part thereof
lies adjacent to a highway over which the state department of transportation or
the county highway department has jurisdiction with respect to maintenance and
upkeep thereof and an entrance or entrances are desired from such highway to
lots, streets, roadway or alleys in the proposed subdivision, the subdivider
shall submit to the village zoning enforcement officer a written permit from
the said department granting permission to obtain and construct such an
entrance or entrances, including details thereof. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005;
amd. 2013 Code)
      4.   When a subdivision borders on and has lots fronting on a present or
proposed federal, state, county or limited access highway, necessary traffic
service to the lots of the subdivision property bordering such highways shall
be provided by a marginal access street.
      5.   When a street centerline within a single block deflects more than
ten degrees (10°), a curve is required. Minimum centerline radius shall be:
         a.   Arterial and collector streets: Three hundred feet (300').
         b.   Local streets and cul-de-sacs: One hundred fifty feet (150').
      6.   The maximum length of straight centerline or extension of a tangent
to a curve shall be one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') for
collector streets and six hundred sixty feet (660') for minor streets. This
shall not apply to straight streets on the boundary of a subdivision.
      7.   All centerline grades shall be at least 0.30 percent and not exceed
the following maximum grades:
         a.   Arterial and collector streets: Four percent (4%).
         b.   Local streets and cul-de-sacs: Six percent (6%).
      8.   Vertical curves shall be used whenever a change in centerline
gradient occurs.
      9.   Minor residential streets shall be so aligned that their use by
through traffic will be discouraged.
      10.   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty
five feet (125') shall be avoided.
      11.   It must be evidenced that all street intersections and confluences
encourage safe and efficient traffic flows.
      12.   Alleys are not permitted.
      13.   The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be five hundred feet
(500') measured along the centerline from the intersection at origin to end of
right of way, unless there are fewer than sixteen (16) lots abutting the cul-
de-sac. Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape with a
minimum right of way diameter of one hundred twenty feet (120').
      14.   Half street dedication or construction shall be prohibited, except
in the cases of completing an existing half street. Whenever an existing or
dedicated half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half
of the street shall be delineated within such tract. A half street, where
included, shall be graded in conformance to the grade of the adjacent half
street.
      15.   Reserved strips of land or other means of control designed to block
the extension of platted or existing streets or drains, or deny street access,
are prohibited.
      16.   No street names may be used which will duplicate or be confused
with names of existing streets in the Utica postal district.
         a.   Existing street names must be protected whenever possible.
         b.   Streets within a development shall not be named after the
developer or the name of the project unless said street is within said
development and cannot be extended into other developments.
         c.   All proposed street names require the approval of the village
board. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-6A-2: PEDESTRIANWAYS:
Pedestrianways shall be at least ten feet (10') wide. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-
2005)
11-6A-3: EASEMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities and street lighting and drainage or other public use,
where necessary, and shall be at least ten feet (10') wide.
      2.   The easements shall be so laid out so that there is a proper
continuity from lot to lot and block to block.
      3.   Provisions for extension of easements to adjacent areas shall be
made.
      4.   Approval of the utility easement layout for public utility companies
shall be required on the final plat. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
   B.   Utility, Sewer And Drainage Easements: Easements for utilities, sewer
and/or drainage shall be provided by clearly indicating on the face of the plat
the following language or as specified by the village zoning enforcement
officer: (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   Easement Provisions
Whenever the words "public utilities" or "public utility easement" shall appear
on a plat, they are defined as follows:
A permanent nonexclusive easement is hereby reserved for and granted to the
Village of North Utica, LaSalle County, Illinois, and to those public utility
companies operating under franchise from the Village of North Utica, and to
their successors and assigns, in, upon, across, over, under and through the
areas shown by dashed lines and labeled "Easements" on the attached Plat of
Subdivision for the purpose of installing, constructing, inspecting, operating,
replacing, renewing, altering, enlarging, removing, repairing, cleaning, and
maintaining electrical, gas, telephone, and other utility lines or
appurtenances, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, and any and all
manholes, hydrants, pipes, connections, catch basins, buffalo boxes, and,
without limitation, such other installations as may be required to furnish
public utility service to the attached area, and such appurtenances, and
additions thereto as said Village and Utilities may deem necessary, together
with the right of access across the lots and real estate included in the
attached documents for the necessary men and equipment to do any or all of the
above work. The right is also hereby granted to said Village and Utilities to
cut down, trim, or remove any trees, shrubs, or other plants that interfere
with the operation or access to any of said utilities, or, without limitation,
utility installations in, on, upon, or across, under, or through said
Easements. No permanent buildings or trees shall be placed on said Easements.
After receipt of permission from the Village Engineer, some may be used for
gardens, shrubs, landscaping, and other purposes that do not then or later
interfere with the aforesaid uses and rights. Where an easement is used for
storm or sanitary sewers, other utility installations shall be subject to the
prior approval of the said Village of North Utica.
   C.   Consent: Any person who submits the final plat to the village board for
final approval shall be deemed to have given consent to the terms of the
declaration of easements set forth in this section. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-6A-4: BLOCKS:
   A.   Length:
      1.   The maximum lengths of blocks shall be one thousand eight hundred
feet (1,800').
      2.   Blocks over nine hundred feet (900') long shall have pedestrianways
at their approximate centers.
      3.   The use of additional accessways to schools, parks, or other
destinations may be specified by the planning commission.
   B.   Shape: No specific rule concerning the shape of blocks is made, but
blocks must fit readily into the overall plan of the subdivision, and their
design must evidence consideration of lot planning, traffic flow, and public
open space areas, along with consideration for development of contiguous future
improvements. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-6A-5: LOTS:
   A.   Design Criteria:
      1.   Minimum lot dimensions in subdivisions designed for single- family
detached dwelling developments shall be as indicated in the zoning ordinance.
      2.   Acute angled lot corners shall be minimized. In general, lots should
be as nearly rectangular in shape as practicable with minimum rear lot widths
of thirty feet (30').
      3.   All lots, except those in planned developments, shall abut on a
publicly dedicated street.
      4.   Side lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to the street
line, or substantially so.
      5.   Double frontage lots are not permitted, except:
         a.   When lots back upon a major thoroughfare.
         b.   When topographic or other conditions render subdividing otherwise
unreasonable.
         c.   Any double frontage lots shall have an additional depth of at
least twenty feet (20') in order to allow space for a protective screen along
the lot line bordering the major thoroughfare.
      6.   Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream
shall have an additional depth or width, as required, to assure house sites of
at least seven thousand (7,000) square feet that are not subject to flooding.
      7.   No access strips will be required where deemed necessary by the
village engineer. "No access strip" means a strip of land along the rear lot
line of a double frontage lot and along a highway or thoroughfare where no
driveway will be permitted.
   B.   Lot Grading:
      1.   Grading of lots and roadways within the village shall be
accomplished in a manner to prevent ponding and shall not result in the
flooding of any primary structures. The only exceptions are for stormwater
detention/retention basins.
      2.   Except in special cases, grading of all grassed areas of lots shall
be kept within the range of one-half percent (0.5%) and five percent (5%).
      3.   Driveway grades on all lots, as measured from the top of curb to
finished garage floor, shall be kept within the range of one percent (1%) and
ten percent (10%).
      4.   Drainage easements will be provided along the rear and/or side lot
lines when surface waters from more than one lot are conveyed down a property
line.
      5.   When the slope between adjacent properties is three foot horizontal
to one foot vertical (3':1') or greater, retaining walls or other improvements
approved by the village zoning enforcement officer shall be required.
      6.   A minimum of four inches (4") of topsoil shall be provided on all
lots and parkways.
      7.   Parkways shall be sodded or seeded with class I seed at the rate and
method as indicated in section 642 of the standard specifications for road and
bridge construction of the Illinois department of transportation.
   C.   Addressing Of Lots, Buildings, Or Structures:
      1.   Numbering System: All lots, buildings, and structures in the village
shall be numbered by the village clerk.
      2.   Requirements:
         a.   It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant of every
residential dwelling in the village to have placed thereon numerals showing the
number of the dwelling.
         b.   These numerals shall be clearly visible from the street.
         c.   These numerals shall be placed at a location near the main
entrance of the principal dwelling and on the mailbox.
         d.   If a portion of the principal dwelling projects out toward the
street line a distance further than that of the main entrance, the numerals
shall be placed at a location on this projection which is clearly visible from
the street.
         e.   On corner lots, numerals shall be visible from the street on
which the main entrance is located.
      3.   Penalty: Any person, firm, or corporation failing to so number any
dwelling owned or occupied by him or it within ten (10) calendar days after
receiving notice to do so from the village shall be fined ten dollars ($10.00)
for each day on which the failure to number continues. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-
2005)
ARTICLE B. DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-6B-1: General Requirements
11-6B-2: Public Utilities
11-6B-3: Street Pavement Standards
11-6B-4: Sidewalks And Pedestrianways
11-6B-5: Trench Construction
11-6B-6: Right Of Way Improvements
11-6B-7: Water Distribution System
11-6B-8: Sanitary Sewer System
11-6B-9: Stormwater Drainage
11-6B-10: Street Lighting
11-6B-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Compliance With Provisions: The owner or subdivider shall install storm
and sanitary sewers, water supply system, street grading and pavement,
sidewalk, pedestrianways, landscaping, street trees, public utilities and
street lighting in accordance with this title. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
   B.   Soils Investigations And Physical Tests:
      1.   If the proposed subdivision contains questionable soil, and in the
opinion of the village zoning enforcement officer, soil borings or other soil
tests are necessary to determine the nature and extent of such questionable
material, the subdivider, builder, or land developer shall retain the services
of a competent testing laboratory to perform the needed investigations. Such
testing laboratory shall be subject to the approval of the village.
      2.   Copies of the completed reports compiled by the testing laboratory
shall be filed with the village zoning enforcement officer. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-
12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Supervision: The design engineer engaged by the subdivider, builder, or
land developer shall be represented by his agent at the site of construction as
needed to ensure that the construction of required land improvements complies
with the approved development plans and specifications. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-
2005)
   D.   Inspection:
      1.   All required improvements, public and private, shall be inspected by
the village zoning enforcement officer during the course of construction and at
completion for compliance with this title and the approved plans and
specifications.
      2.   Builders and developers are required to notify the village zoning
enforcement officer a minimum of forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning any
underground or surface improvements (sewer, water, paving, including parking
lots, etc.) to arrange for the appropriate inspections, as required in
subsection 11-6C-1C of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
11-6B-2: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
   A.   Location:
      1.   Telephone, Electric And Cable TV Lines:
         a.   All public utility lines for telephone, electric service, and
cable TV shall be placed in easements or along dedicated street rights of way
and entirely underground in residential subdivisions.
         b.   When telephone and electric service and cable TV lines are placed
underground entirely throughout a subdivided area, said conduits or cable shall
be placed within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not
conflict with other underground services.
         c.   All transformer boxes shall be located to not be unsightly or
hazardous to the public.
      2.   Gas Mains: All gas mains shall be placed within street rights of way
or within easements. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
   B.   Notice Of Intended Work: Underground work, either the installation of
or the repair of existing sewer and water systems, shall not commence until the
appropriate public utilities are staked and the village zoning enforcement
officer has been notified to arrange for inspection, as required in subsection
11-6C-1C of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Conveyance Of Improvements: Title to all public improvements required
in this title shall, at the time the same are accepted by the village board, be
conveyed and transferred to the village by sufficient documents of transfer.
(Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-6B-3: STREET PAVEMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   All street pavements within the village shall be constructed in
accordance with the following:
         a.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", state
of Illinois, department of transportation, current edition.
         b.   The current edition of the Illinois department of transportation
design manual.
      2.   Design requirements for the pavement shall be related to the
classification of the street based on the zoning classification of the area
adjacent to the subject street and/or the street classification as set forth on
the official map. The classifications shown in table 1 of this section for a
given street must be submitted to the village zoning enforcement officer for
his review prior to submittal of the preliminary plat to the planning
commission. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
      3.   At the request of the village zoning enforcement officer, a copy of
all design assumptions and computations on which the proposed design is based
shall be submitted.
      4.   The pavement design and right of way chart (table 1 of this section)
establishes minimum right of way widths and the minimum design standard for a
particular street classification. If, in the opinion of the village zoning
enforcement officer, traffic use or geometric considerations for a road or part
of a road warrants modified design, detail, a greater right of way width, a
wider pavement width, and/or a greater structural number than listed on the
chart, it shall be required. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   TABLE 1
   PAVEMENT DESIGN AND RIGHT OF WAY WIDTH CHART
Street Classification Minimum Right Of Way Width Minimum Width Face Of Curb To
                                                 Face Of Curb
Street Classification     Minimum Right Of Way Width Minimum Width Face Of Curb
                                                     To Face Of Curb
Arterial or primary       80 feet                    48 feet or two 24-feet
                                                     with median strip
  
Collector or secondary    80 feet                    38 feet
  
Minor residential:
 Cul-de-sac1             60 feet                    30 feet
  
 Circular end diameter   120 feet                   30 feet
  
 Dedicated (other than   60 feet                    30 feet
  cul-de-sac)
  
 Private (PUD)           ---                        30 feet
  
Minor industrial          80 feet                    38 feet
  
Minor business            80 feet                    38 feet
  
Marginal access           60 feet                    24 feet
  
Frontage road (dedicated) 60 feet                    24 feet
 
   Note:
      1.    The pavement diameter to face of curb of circular ended cul-de-sac
shall be a minimum of 100 feet.
      5.   Private streets in planned developments shall, at a minimum, meet
the minimum requirement for street width and design for minor residential
streets, shall have curb and gutter on both sides of the street, and shall have
a minimum centerline radius of curvature of one hundred fifty feet (150').
   B.   Pavement Design:
      1.   General Requirements:
         a.   All pavements shall be designed in accordance with the previously
referenced standards and manuals.
         b.   The design thickness shall be dependent on the soil support value
and the projected traffic factor; however, in no case shall the thickness of
pavements be less than the minimum specified in the Illinois department of
transportation design manual.
         c.   Actual or projected traffic counts, along with sufficient soil
boring data, will be required for the structural design.
      2.   Subgrade:
         a.   All subgrade material shall have a minimum Illinois bearing
ration (IBR) of three (3.0).
         b.   Subgrade material having an IBR less than three (3.0) shall be
removed and replaced with a suitable fill material, or the pavement must be
designed to compensate for soil conditions.
         c.   The soil support IBR values used by the designer shall represent
a minimum value for the soil to be used. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
         d.   The results of all IBR tests are to be submitted to the village
zoning enforcement officer. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
      3.   Flexible Pavements:
         a.   A minimum of three inches (3") of compacted asphalt (1 inch
surface, 2 inches binder) is required for all flexible pavements.
         b.   Pavements with a structural number of 4.00 to 4.99 will require
four inches (4") of compacted asphalt (11/2 inches surface, 21/2 inches
binder).
         c.   The final surface course is to be applied after all other public
improvements have been completed, and the bituminous binder course has proven
to be stable for a one year period. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
            (1)   Prior to lying of the surface course, any defects or damage
to the curb and gutter or pavement base must be corrected to the satisfaction
of the zoning enforcement officer. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
            (2)   The streets shall then be thoroughly cleaned, and a
bituminous tack coat shall be applied at a rate of 0.05 to 0.10 gallons per
square yard to assure uniform and complete adherence of the surface course.
         d.   To facilitate plowing of snow during the winter months, all
manholes, valve vaults, catch basins, inlets, etc., located within the pavement
area are to be ramped with compacted temporary asphalt patch material for the
period between the time the road is opened for general traffic and the time the
final surface course is applied. This ramp is to be maintained for the duration
of the above specified period.
      4.   Rigid Pavements: The design of all rigid pavements shall be based on
the structural design number for the type of street in question.
         a.   Portland cement concrete shall be proportioned according to the
applicable sections of the state specifications and shall be designed for a
minimum twenty eight (28) day compression strength of three thousand five
hundred (3,500) psi.
         b.   Air entrainment shall be four (4) through seven percent (7%) and
slump between two (2) and four inches (4").
         c.   Concrete pavement shall be constructed on a minimum six inch (6")
crushed aggregate subbase and having a gradation of CA-6.
      5.   Sight Distances: The design engineer shall show, at the points of
intersection of proposed roads, or of proposed roads, that the following
stopping sight distances are provided.
 
Legal Speed Limit Minimum Stopping Distance
25 to 30 mph      200 feet
31 to 40 mph      275 feet
41 to 50 mph      350 feet
51 to 55 mph      475 feet
 
      6.   Subgrade Preparation:
         a.   The subgrade of all roads shall be graded and rolled in
accordance with section 212 of the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", state of Illinois department of transportation.
            (1)   Particular attention is directed to the requirements for the
placement of soft and unstable material as contained in article 202.03 of said
specifications.
            (2)   Embankment shall be placed and compacted in accordance with
section 207 of said specifications.
         b.   Compaction tests (performed by the sand cone method AASHTO T-191
or with an approved nuclear density moisture meter), shall be taken in each
fill section, with the maximum distance between tests of three hundred feet
(300') for each lift. Density shall be ninety five percent (95%) of the maximum
density by a standard proctor test.
         c.   Proctor tests performed in accordance with AASHTO T-99 shall be
taken on each different type of borrow material. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
         d.   The proctor and density tests must be submitted for review and
approval by the zoning enforcement officer.
         e.   Upon approval of these tests, an inspection of the subgrade will
be made by the zoning enforcement officer. The subgrade must be approved prior
to placing any curb and gutter or base material. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005;
amd. 2013 Code)
      7.   Curb And Gutter: Illinois department of transportation type B-6.18
curb and gutter shall be provided on all streets. Any proposed substitutions
must meet the approval of the village.
      8.   Subsurface Pavement Drains:
         a.   Subsurface pavement drains may be required at any location where
water may collect in the structural elements of the pavement and other
engineering solutions may not adequately remove or prevent the entrance of
water. Subdrains may be required because of:
            (1)   A high water table;
            (2)   Active springs or seeps beneath the pavement; or
            (3)   Excessive amount of surface water entering or collecting in
the structural section.
         b.   The location of these areas requiring drains may be determined
prior to the preparation of the engineering plans. However, the final
determination shall be made during the construction phase.
         c.   Subdrains shall meet the following requirements:
            (1)   Shall have adequate capacity to quickly carry away any water
that enters the pavement structural section.
            (2)   Must maintain this capacity through the life of the pavement.
         d.   Collector pipes shall be a minimum of six inches (6") in diameter
and shall be of the following materials:
            (1)   Perforated concrete pipe conforming to ASTM C-444.
            (2)   Extra quality concrete drain tile conforming to ASTM C-412.
            (3)   Extra strength perforated clay pipe conforming to ASTM C-444.
            (4)   Heavy duty drain tile conforming to AASHTO M-179.
         e.   Subdrains are to discharge into the storm sewer system. (Ord.
2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-6B-4: SIDEWALKS AND PEDESTRIANWAYS:
   A.   Sidewalks Or Pedestrianways Required: Sidewalks or pedestrianways are
required in all subdivisions and are to be shown on all plats abutting
roadways, whether new or existing roadways. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
   B.   Soils Requirements: No sidewalk or pedestrianway within the village
shall be constructed on soil which is unstable or which, in the opinion of the
zoning enforcement officer, is unstable for sidewalk construction. Whenever
unstable ground is encountered, either before the preparation of detailed plans
or during the construction phase of the proposed improvements, said unstable
materials shall be removed in their entirety and shall be replaced with
satisfactory materials which shall be adequately compacted to the satisfaction
of the zoning enforcement officer. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Specifications: Sidewalks and pedestrianways shall be constructed of
portland cement concrete to a width of not less than five feet (5') and a
thickness of four inches (4"). Sidewalks shall be offset one foot (1') from the
abutting lot line and shall be constructed on both sides of the street.
Concrete shall have a minimum twenty eight (28) day compressive strength of
three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds, and shall contain not less than
three percent (3%) nor more than six percent (6%) entrained air. Slump shall
not be less than two inches (2") nor more than four inches (4"). (Ord. 2005-39,
10-12-2005)
11-6B-5: TRENCH CONSTRUCTION:
All trenches for storm or sanitary sewers or any buried utility shall be in
accordance with section 210 of the referenced "Standard Specifications For Road
And Bridge Construction". (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-6B-6: RIGHT OF WAY IMPROVEMENTS:
After all street and utility work has been completed, all public rights of way
not covered by pavement shall be covered with a minimum of four inches (4") of
topsoil and seeded or sodded to the satisfaction of the zoning enforcement
officer. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
11-6B-7: WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   No residential, commercial or industrial subdivision, or PUD, shall
be approved unless it is served by the village water supply system.
      2.   In the case of any structures, whether residential, commercial or
industrial, constructed prior to the effective date hereof and served by a
private well system, the following shall apply: (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
         a.   As soon as a village water main is contiguous to and available to
serve a structure or an area on a private well system, the owner must properly
abandon the private well system and connect to the village public water supply
system as required by section
8-2-2 of this code. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
         b.   All water supply systems which are installed in the public ways
or easements shall be deemed to be dedicated to the village upon acceptance of
the subdivision.
   B.   Water Mains: Water distribution mains shall be of adequate size and
shall serve the entire development.
      1.   Design Specifications: Water mains shall be designed according to
the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois"
or according to the "Recommended Standards For Water Works", adopted by the
Great Lakes Mississippi River board of state public health and environmental
managers. The more stringent requirements of either shall apply.
      2.   Installation:
         a.   Water mains shall, in general, be installed in the street right
of way, but in no case shall mains be installed within fifteen feet (15') of a
building.
         b.   All water mains shall be installed with a minimum depth of cover
of four and one-half feet (41/2'), measured from final grade to the top of the
pipe. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
         c.   Mains shall be extended to the property line of the development
along public rights of way and at any other location indicated by the zoning
enforcement officer. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
         d.   All excavation, backfilling, restoration of surfaces, and all
related work shall be completed in accordance with this title.
      3.   Size: The minimum size shall be six inches (6"), internal diameter,
in residential areas, and a minimum of eight inches (8"), internal diameter, in
all other areas. A larger diameter may be required by the village engineer.
      4.   Gridirons Or Looping Of Mains:
         a.   Each six inch (6") water main shall be looped (except cul-de-
sacs or stubbed streets, unless deemed necessary by the zoning enforcement
officer) so that runs between connections to six inch (6") or larger mains
shall not be greater than one thousand two hundred feet (1,200').
         b.   Each eight inch (8") water main shall be looped so that runs
between connections to mains eight inches (8") or larger shall not be greater
than one thousand four hundred feet (1,400') in a commercial area or one
thousand eight hundred feet (1,800') in residential areas.
         c.   Each ten inch (10") water main shall be looped so that runs
between connections to mains ten inches (10") or larger shall not be greater
than two thousand two hundred feet (2,200').
         d.   Each twelve inch (12") and larger water main shall be looped so
that runs between connections to mains twelve inches (12") or larger shall not
be greater than three thousand feet (3,000').
         e.   If the design engineer's report shows spacing greater than the
above for the required residual pressure, that spacing shall supersede the
above requirements.
      5.   Valves:
         a.   Valves shall be located on water mains in such a manner to
effectively isolate the sections from the system with minimum disruption.
         b.   Valves shall be installed so that not over nine hundred feet
(900') of main will be shut off at any given time.
         c.   If a tee is installed, two (2) valves shall be used.
         d.   The design engineer shall, by diagrams and/or written reports,
set forth his/her basis for location of water main valves.
         e.   No more than thirty (30) single-family dwelling units shall be
without water with the shutting off of any three (3) valve locations.
      6.   Valve Boxes:
         a.   Valve boxes shall be used on all main valves and auxiliary
valves.
         b.   Valve boxes shall have a base compatible with the size and type
of valve to be operated and shall extend to finished grade ground level.
         c.   Valve box covers shall be marked "WATER".
      7.   Thrust Blocks:
         a.   Thrust blocks are required at all valves, hydrants, tees and
bends.
         b.   Engineering drawings shall indicate the location of each concrete
thrust block to be installed. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
         c.   Where undisturbed earth is not available or not likely to be
available to back up pressure type concrete thrust blocks, the zoning
enforcement officer shall specify tie rods with or without anchor type concrete
thrust blocks.
      8.   Air Release Valves: Air release valves shall be placed on the water
main at high a point as deemed necessary by the village zoning enforcement
officer to serve as air vents preventing air locking of the water main. (Ord.
2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
   C.   Fire Hydrants:
      1.   General Standards: Fire hydrants shall match the hydrants generally
installed in the village water system and shall be furnished by a manufacturer
considered standard by the village.
      2.   Specifications:
         a.   Each hydrant shall be provided with a six inch (6") auxiliary
gate valve and a two foot (2') length of six inch (6") pipe between the hydrant
and valve.
         b.   Two (2) 3/4-inch threaded steel rods with hex nuts shall be
installed to tie the auxiliary gate valve to the water main and connecting tee.
         c.   Auxiliary valves shall be provided with valve boxes with covers
marked "WATER".
      3.   Location:
         a.   Fire hydrants shall be located at no more than five hundred foot
(500') intervals.
         b.   If the location or configuration of a commercial building
requires it, then private fire hydrants shall be installed.
         c.   Hydrants shall be located for easy access by the fire department.
   D.   Water Services:
      1.   The plans, except for residential developments with individual
services for each unit, shall show the calculated static water pressure at the
lowest and highest ground elevations on the site. Calculations shall be
presented showing that the proposed water services are of a large enough size
to supply an adequate flow of water at the outlet of the meter.
      2.   A separate water service shall be provided for each structure. The
village engineer shall determine if a structure requires more than one service.
   E.   Materials: Water system materials shall be as follows:
      1.   Water main shall be either AWWA C-900 PVC, having a minimum DR of 18
or thickness class 52, cement lined ductile iron pipe meeting the requirements
of ANSI A21.50 (AWWA C150). Both types of pipe shall have mechanical or rubber
ring push on joints.
      2.   Water main fitting shall be cement lined ductile iron with joints
similar to the pipe joints. Fittings shall be capable of withstanding the same
system pressures as the adjacent pipe.
      3.   Valves for the mains or for auxiliary fire hydrant valves shall be
mechanical joint or push on joint cast iron bodied, resilient seat gate valves,
Mueller, Clow or equal, with bronze mounted, double disc gate and with
nonrising stem and rubber O-ring packing. Each valve shall be furnished with a
cast iron road box with a cover marked "WATER".
      4.   Fire hydrants shall be Clow model F2500 or Mueller Centurion
hydrants with either mechanical joints or push on joints. All hydrants shall
have a ground level breakaway flange feature and safety stem coupling. Hydrants
shall have six inch (6") inlet connections, five and one-fourth inch (51/4")
compression type main valve openings, two and one-half inch (21/2") hose
connections, and one four and one-half inch (41/2") pump nozzle, all with
national standard threads.
      5.   Water service pipe shall be type K soft copper tubing, with a
minimum size of one inch (1") diameter.
      6.   Corporation cocks shall be Mueller Oriseal or equal, with a minimum
size of one inch (1").
      7.   Curb stops shall be Mueller Oriseal or equal, with a minimum size of
one inch (1"). Each stop shall be furnished with a cast iron Buffalo screw type
box with arch pattern base and cover marked "WATER". (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-6B-8: SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no residential, commercial or
industrial subdivision or development shall be approved unless it is served by
sanitary sewers connected to the village sewer system.
      2.   In the case of any structures, whether residential, commercial or
industrial, constructed prior to the effective date hereof, and served by a
septic system, the following shall apply:
         a.   As soon as a public sanitary sewer main is contiguous to and
available to service a structure or a septic system, said owner or owners must
properly abandon the septic system and connect to the village public sanitary
sewer system within one year.
         b.   All sanitary sewers which are installed in the public ways or in
easements shall be deemed to be dedicated to the village upon the acceptance of
the public improvements within the subdivision by the village.
   B.   Sewer Mains: Sewer mains shall be of adequate size and shall serve the
entire development.
      1.   Design Specifications:
         a.   Sewer mains shall be designed according to the latest edition of
the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois"
or according to the Illinois environmental protection agency's "Recommended
Standards For Sewage Works". The more stringent requirements of either shall
apply.
         b.   Before commencing the sewer layout, the developer shall confer
with the village to determine the required size and grades for any trunk sewers
traversing the subdivision.
         c.   All sanitary sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the
provisions of the latest edition of the "Standard Specifications For Water And
Sewer Main Construction In Illinois", as modified and/or more specifically
defined herein. In case of conflict, the provisions of the following paragraphs
shall apply.
      2.   Installation:
         a.   Sewer mains shall, in general, be installed in the street right
of way or in an easement adjacent thereto. In no case shall mains be installed
within ten feet (10') of a building. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
         b.   Sanitary sewers shall be extended to the edge of the development
along public rights of way and at other points indicated by the village zoning
enforcement officer. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
      3.   Size: The minimum size of mains shall be eight inches (8"), internal
diameter.
      4.   Sewer Services:
         a.   Sanitary sewer service laterals of a minimum of six inch (6")
internal diameter shall be provided for each lot, parcel, or tract prior to the
construction of street pavements. Services shall extend to the property line.
         b.   Service connection shall consist of a one-eighth (1/8) sewer pipe
bend set in the bell of the main wye or tee and the necessary lengths of the
pipe with the terminus plugged.
         c.   Service sewers shall have a minimum cover of thirty inches (30")
on private property and forty eight inches (48") in public rights of way.
         d.   A minimum velocity of two feet (2') per second shall be
maintained.
         e.   A separate sewer service shall be provided for each structure.
The village engineer shall determine if a structure requires more than one
service.
      5.   Sewer Alignment: Alignment shall be straight between manholes and
follow the layout of the streets.
      6.   Manholes:
         a.   Location: Manholes shall be installed not more than four hundred
feet (400') apart for sewers less than eighteen inches (18") in diameter, or
less and five hundred feet (500') for sewers eighteen inches (18") or more.
         b.   Diameter: Manhole diameter shall be four feet (4'0") for a sewer
diameter of twenty one inches (21") and smaller, and five feet (5'0") for a
sewer diameter of twenty four inches (24") and larger.
         c.   Inspection Manholes:
            (1)   An inspection manhole having a minimum diameter of forty
eight inches (48") is required for all commercial and industrial buildings.
            (2)   The manhole shall be constructed on the building service
sewer before it connects to the sewer main and, preferably, shall not be closer
than five feet (5') from the building.
            (3)   There shall be no flow into the inspection manhole except the
flow from the building for which the inspection manhole is intended.
      7.   Lift Stations:
         a.   If a lift station is part of the engineering design, it shall be
shown in the plan elevation, and the specifications for such lift station shall
be submitted with engineering plans.
         b.   Lift stations shall be of the wet well type with submersible
pumps and shall conform in all respects to the standards established by the
state environmental protection agency and the village.
         c.   A trailer mounted, engine driven sewage pump of adequate capacity
shall be given to the village for use during power outages.
         d.   An alarm shall be installed to the village master panel in the
event of failure at the lift station.
         e.   Lift stations and force mains are not desirable nor recommended
and shall be used only after all other means of providing service have been
determined to be impossible.
   C.   Allowable Materials: Allowable materials shall be as follows:
      1.   Sewer pipe and fittings shall be either extra strength vitrified
clay pipe (ASTM spec. C700) with flexible compression joints (ASTM C-425) or
semirigid composite pipe (truss pipe) (ASTM spec. D-2680) with solvent weld or
gasket joints, or PVC sewer pipe, DR-35, meeting the requirements of ASTM spec.
D3034 and ASTM spec. F-679. Joints shall be flexible elastomeric seals per ASTM
spec. D3212.
      2.   Manholes shall be precast concrete and in accordance with the
appropriate provisions of section 32 of the referenced "Standards
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". Frames and
closed lids in roadways shall be Illinois department of transportation
designation "Type 1 Frame And Closed Lid". (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-6B-9: STORMWATER DRAINAGE:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   An adequate system of stormwater drainage shall be constructed and
installed consisting of pipes, tiles, manholes, inlets, and other necessary
facilities that will adequately drain the development and protect roadway
pavements and will prevent the accumulation of stormwater at any place under
normal conditions.
      2.   Any existing drain tiles encountered during construction must be
left undisturbed or shall be attached to the proposed storm drainage system at
locations indicated by the village zoning enforcement officer.
      3.   Drain tile located under roadways shall be replaced with concrete
tile.
   B.   Design: The following shall govern the design of any improvement with
respect to the drainage and detention of stormwater runoff:
      1.   Layout: The subdivision shall be designed in such a manner as to
preserve and utilize natural streams, channels, and detention basins.
      2.   Stormwater Release Rate: The allowable release rate of stormwater
for a 100-year storm from developments shall not exceed historic/predevelopment
discharge rates for a 10-year storm or the capacity of the receiving stream or
drainage system, whichever is less.
      3.   Stormwater Storage: Excess runoff from a 100-year/24-hour storm with
an SCS type II distribution shall be stored on site within appropriately
designed detention facilities such that the allowable release rate is not
exceeded and there is no ponding in streets or on buildable lot areas, except
parking lots.
      4.   Bypass Flow: Drainage systems shall have adequate capacity to pass
through the development the runoff from all upstream areas for a 10-year storm.
      5.   Backyard Swales: Backyard swales are permitted in residential areas
subject to the following regulations:
         a.   Maximum and minimum slopes and general design criteria of the
federal housing administration's "Minimum Property Requirements" shall be
acceptable except as herein modified.
         b.   No continuous swale shall have a length exceeding three hundred
feet (300') before discharging into a storm sewer system.
         c.   Minimum grade of the flowline shall be 0.5 percent.
      6.   Storm Sewer Outfalls: Storm sewer outfalls shall be so designed such
that when the receiving stream or drainage system is at full capacity, the
storm sewer will continue to discharge at its design flow rate.
      7.   Crown Of Street Pavements: The crown of street pavements hereafter
built adjoining or near streams, floodwater runoff channels, or basins shall be
not lower than the established high water elevation, plus two feet (2') in the
case of major streets, and plus one foot (1') in the case of other streets.
      8.   Waterway Openings Of Bridges And Culverts: Waterway openings of
bridges and culverts hereafter built over streams of floodwater runoff channels
shall be designed with a waterway opening large enough to handle the flow from
a 100-year frequency storm. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
   C.   Drainage Plan: A comprehensive drainage plan must be submitted to the
village zoning enforcement officer which incorporates the aforementioned rules
and shall be accompanied by maps or other descriptive material showing the
following: (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
      1.   The extent and area of each watershed tributary to the drainage
channels in the subdivision.
      2.   The street storm sewers and other storm drains to be built, the
basis of their design, the outfall and outlet locations and elevations, the
receiving stream or channel and its high water elevation, and the functioning
of the drains during high water elevations.
      3.   Existing streams and floodwater runoff channels to be maintained and
new channels to be constructed, their location, cross sections, and profiles.
      4.   Existing culverts and bridges, drainage areas, elevation and
adequacy of waterway openings, new culverts and bridges to be built, their
materials, elevations, waterway openings, and basis of design.
      5.   Existing detention ponds and basins to be maintained, enlarged, or
otherwise altered and new ponds or basins to be built with dams and their
design.
   D.   Detention Ponds:
      1.   Detention Ponds Containing Permanent Water:
         a.   Detention reservoirs containing permanent lakes must have a water
area of at least one-half (1/2) acre and a minimum depth of ten feet (10') over
at least twenty five percent (25%) of the total area. The remaining lake area
must have an average depth of at least three feet (3') and should have no
extensive shallow areas.
         b.   In excavated lakes, the underwater side slopes in the lakes must
be stable. In the case of valley storage, natural slopes may be considered to
be stable.
         c.   (1) A safety ledge four (4) to six feet (6') in width is required
and must be installed in all lakes approximately thirty six inches (36") below
the permanent water level.
            (2)   In addition, a ledge twelve (12) to eighteen inches (18")
above the permanent water line must be provided.
            (3)   The slope between the two (2) ledges must be stable and of a
material which will prevent erosion due to wave action such as stone or riprap.
         d.   The reservoir must be designed to provide for the easy removal of
sediment which will accumulate in the lake during periods of reservoir
operations.
         e.   Dikes shall be a minimum of four feet (4') wide with three to one
(3:1) side slopes or flatter. The top of the dike must be a minimum of one foot
(1') above the peak stage for a 100-year storm. An emergency spillway shall be
provided for storm runoff volume in excess of a 100-year/24-hour storm.
      2.   Dry Detention Ponds: The dry detention ponds must be designed to
serve multipurposed functions. Recreational facilities, aesthetic qualities,
etc., as well as floodwater storage must be considered in planning the
reservoir.
      3.   Other Detention Storage:
         a.   Underground Storage: All or a portion of the detention storage
may be provided in underground or surface detention facilities to include
basins, tanks, swales or oversize storm sewers.
         b.   Parking Lot Storage:
            (1)   Paved parking lots may be designed to provide temporary
detention storage of stormwater on all or a portion of their surfaces.
            (2)   Outlets shall be designed so as to slowly empty the stored
waters, and depths of storage must be limited to a maximum of nine inches (9").
            (3)   Inlets shall be located in driving aisles whenever possible.
      4.   Safety Features:
         a.   Design of detention storage facilities shall incorporate safety
features, particularly at outlets, on steep slopes, and at any attractive
nuisances, to include, as necessary, fencing, handrails, lighting, steps,
grills, signs, and other protective or warning devices to restrict access
during critical periods and to afford some measure of safety to both authorized
and unauthorized persons.
         b.   Safety screens must be provided for any pipe or opening to
prevent children or large animals from crawling into the structures. A maximum
opening of six inches (6") is required. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
         c.   Danger signs must be mounted at appropriate locations to warn of
deep water, possible flood conditions during storm periods, and other dangers
that exist. Fencing may be required if deemed necessary by the village zoning
enforcement officer. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
         d.   All slopes and the bottom of dry detention ponds are to be
sodded. All other areas are to be seeded.
      5.   Responsibility For Maintenance:
         a.   The responsibility for maintenance during construction and
thereafter shall be that of the developer/owner, unless the village approves
the creation of a homeowners' or similar type of association or expressly
assumes the responsibility. The maintenance of detention ponds shall be set
forth in the subdivision covenants and approved by the village.
         b.   Maintenance shall consist of, but shall not be limited to, the
cleanup of accumulated debris, flotsam, or other materials and also the control
of the growth of obnoxious weeds or the creation of conditions which support
the growth of mosquitoes or other insects.
         c.   Maintenance shall also consist of proper repairs to such items as
inlet structures, outlet structures, side slopes, or other elements of the
facility.
   E.   Stormwater Storage Basins:
      1.   The village shall maintain a complete listing of all storage basins
for the storage and detention of stormwater in the village, whether required
under this title or otherwise, and may require each basin to be inspected
periodically.
      2.   Such inspection shall be performed at the owner's expense within
ninety (90) days and shall be performed by an engineer registered in the state
of Illinois. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
      3.   A report shall be submitted to the village zoning enforcement
officer, including supporting calculations, stipulating the existing capacity
of the storage basins.
      4.   The village zoning enforcement officer may serve notice upon the
record owner thereof to restore, repair, or properly maintain any such basin
which does not retain its original storage capacity. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005;
amd. 2013 Code)
      5.   In the event such notice has not been complied with on or before
ninety (90) days after service thereof (unless such time period shall be
extended by the president and village board), the village may perform such
restoration, repair, or maintenance work as may be necessary to return such
stormwater storage basin to its original storage capacity; and the cost thereof
shall be a lien in favor of the village upon the lots, tracts, or parcels
benefited by the stormwater storage basin; and the village may file with the
county recorder of deeds a notice of lien, citing this subsection E5,
describing the necessary work performed and the reasonable cost thereof to the
village. The lien may be foreclosed pursuant to Illinois Compiled Statutes. The
owner of the stormwater storage basin may also be fined as set forth in this
title.
      6.   These regulations shall apply to all stormwater storage basins
existing on the effective date hereof, as well as all future stormwater storage
basins.
   F.   Storm Sewers: Storm sewers shall be constructed throughout the entire
subdivision to carry off water from all inlets and catch basins and shall be
connected to an adequate outfall.
      1.   Design:
         a.   The storm sewer system shall be separate and independent of the
sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
         b.   All storm sewers shall be designed by the rational method on the
basis of a minimum 10-year storm frequency and shall be sized to adequately
carry all tributary areas. Copies of the design computations, together with a
drawing defining each drainage area, shall be submitted to the village zoning
enforcement officer. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
      2.   Velocity: Minimum velocity shall be three feet (3') per second, and
maximum velocity shall be ten feet (10') per second for all storm sewer
installation. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
      3.   Spacing For Surface Collectors: Maximum spacing for surface
collectors shall be four hundred feet (400') or as directed by the village
zoning enforcement officer. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
      4.   Inlets: Inlets shall be provided at all low areas and shall be
provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any intersection
of streets.
      5.   Allowable Materials For Storm Sewers:
         a.   Pipe materials shall be concrete pipe or reinforced concrete
pipe.
         b.   Other materials for storm sewer construction may be used in
special cases only upon approval by the village zoning enforcement officer.
      6.   Minimum Size: The minimum size for all storm sewers shall be twelve
inches (12").
   G.   Storm Sewer Structures:
      1.   Manholes:
         a.   Location:
            (1)   Manholes are utilized to provide access to continuous
underground storm sewers for the purpose of inspection and cleanout and to
permit a change in direction, grade and size of sewer. Typical locations where
manholes should be specified are:
               (A)    Where two (2) or more storm sewers converge.
               (B)    At intermediate points along tangent sections.
               (C)    Where pipe size changes.
               (D)    Where an abrupt change in alignment occurs.
               (E)    Where an abrupt change of the grade occurs.
            (2)   Manholes should not be located in traffic lanes; however,
when it is impossible to avoid locating manholes in a traffic lane, care should
be taken to ensure it is not in the normal vehicle path.
         b.   Spacing: The spacing of manholes should be in accordance with the
following:
 
Sizes Of Pipe (Inches) Maximum Distance (Feet)
12 to 24               400
27 to 54               600
60 and up              1,000
 
         c.   Type: A manhole, type A (highway standard 1527), with appropriate
frame and lid, should be provided for the following sewer sizes when the depth
exceeds four feet (4'):
            (1)   When the sewer pipe diameter is eighteen inches (18") or
less, a four foot (4') diameter manhole should be provided.
            (2)   When the sewer pipe diameter is twenty one inches (21") to
forty two inches (42"), inclusive, a five foot (5') diameter manhole should be
provided.
            (3)   When the sewer pipe diameter is forty eight inches (48") or
larger, a six foot (6') diameter manhole (standard 2395) or a reinforced
concrete pipe tee (standard 2263) or a special design manhole should be
provided.
         d.   Hydraulic Losses: The following criteria should be used to
estimate hydraulic losses in storm sewer manholes:
            (1)   Allow a drop of 0.1 foot in a through manhole where there is
no change in the diameter of the sewer pipe.
            (2)   Allow a drop of 0.2 foot in the presence of one lateral or
bend.
            (3)   Allow a drop of 0.3 foot when two (2) laterals are present.
            (4)   In a through manhole where there is a change in the diameter
of the sewer pipe, no loss should be allowed if 0.8 foot depth in each sewer
pipe is attained by lowering the larger pipe.
         e.   Pipe Connections: The pipe tee and wye connections are permitted
for connecting lateral lines from pavement inlets to main storm sewer lines,
provided the following conditions are met:
            (1)   Manholes are provided at the required intervals.
            (2)   The minimum lateral size is twelve inches (12") or larger.
            (3)   Precast connections are required unless designer verifies
that the structural and hydraulic integrity of the mainline sewer is not
affected by field connection.
         f.   Junction Chambers: The junction of small sewers is made in
manholes. On occasion, junction chambers of special design are required to join
two (2) or more converging large size storm sewers. In design, a smooth
transition is essential to prevent turbulence in flow which would cause eddies
and deposition of solids. Normally, junction chambers should not be utilized
when the trunk sewer is less than forty two inches (42") in diameter.
      2.   Inlets:
         a.   Inlets are drainage structures utilized to collect surface water
through grate or curb openings and convey the water to storm sewers or direct
outlet to culverts and ditches. Grate inlets should be provided with
appropriate frames and grates as provided in section B of the highway
standards.
         b.   An inlet type A (standard 1683) should be utilized when the sewer
pipe diameter is fifteen inches (15") or less and the depth of pipe is not more
than four feet (4'). For larger diameter pipes or where there is both an
incoming and outgoing pipe in the inlet, a larger diameter inlet structure,
such as inlet type B (standard 2349) or a three foot (3'), four foot (4') and
five foot (5') diameter catch basin or manhole should be specified. When such a
structure is used in a shallow pipe situation, a precast reinforced concrete
flat slab top, shown on standard 2354, should be used in lieu of the standard
conically tapered top.
         c.   Inlets used for the drainage of roadway surfaces shall be
combination inlets. These inlets consist of both a curb opening and a grate
inlet acting as a unit.
   H.   Groundwater Management:
      1.   Footing Drain Tile: All structures utilizing footing drain tile to
keep basements dry shall route the drain tile to sump pumps or daylight which
discharge only to the surface of the surrounding land, or to a separate storm
sewer.
      2.   Service Lines: All new subdivisions shall install a service line
from the subdivision's storm sewer system to individual lots for the purpose of
accepting the groundwater discharge from the sump pumps, only. The service
lines shall either be concrete or reinforced concrete pipe, having a diameter
of at least six inches (6") or scheduled 40 PVC. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
      3.   Surface Discharge: For properties not served by storm sewer system,
the discharge from any groundwater pump (other than a replacement pump)
installed after October 12, 2005, shall be to the surrounding land surface with
the point of discharge being no nearer than five feet (5') from the property
line. In no case shall the discharge from a groundwater pumping system cause
damage to a neighboring property. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
      4.   Gutter Downspouts: In no case shall gutter downspouts be connected
to any public sewer system, but instead shall drain to the surface of the land.
In no case shall gutter downspouts cause roof water to damage a neighbor's
property. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-6B-10: STREET LIGHTING:
The developer shall provide street lighting at such locations as designated by
the village engineer. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
ARTICLE C. IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11-6C-1: Design Approval Procedure
11-6C-2: Subdivision Improvement Security
11-6C-3: Acceptance And Approval Of Improvements
11-6C-1: DESIGN APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Required Documents And Information: Before submitting the final plat
for approval and before commencing work on the construction and installation of
any improvements required by this title, the developer or owner shall submit
the following necessary documentation for the construction and installation of
the required improvements to the village zoning enforcement officer and village
clerk for review and approval:
      1.   The following documents are required at the time engineering plans
are submitted to the village zoning enforcement officer for review and
approval:
         a.   Three (3) sets of engineering drawings.
         b.   Three (3) sets of specifications.
         c.   Three (3) copies of the plat of survey or subdivision plat.
         d.   EPA sewer construction permit.
         e.   EPA water construction permit.
         f.   Three (3) copies of the storm sewer calculations.
         g.   Three (3) copies of the storm drainage plan.
         h.   Three (3) copies of the retention facility calculations.
         i.   Three (3) copies of the hydraulic gradient profiles of the storm
sewer design, if the design is based on the hydraulic gradient.
         j.   Three (3) copies of the engineer's estimate of cost.
         k.   Three (3) copies of the water main calculations for consumption
and fire flow demand when the design is less than the minimum design required
by this title.
         l.   Three (3) copies of the pavement thickness design calculations.
      2.   The engineering drawings, which are submitted, must include the
following information:
         a.   A title sheet showing the name of the project, section, township
and range, an index of sheets, a tabulation of symbols, location of bench
marks, and a graphic location with respect to nearest traveled streets and
roads.
         b.   General plan layout of the project indicating all requirements.
         c.   (1) A detailed grading plan indicating the elevations of all
building foundations, lot corners, and points of change in gradient.
            (2)   Direction of flow of surface waters will be delineated with
arrows and the gradient of the land indicated above the arrows.
            (3)   Curb elevation will be indicated opposite each lot corner and
all changes in gradient.
         d.   A detailed plan of street improvements showing horizontal and
vertical locations of all street and sidewalk improvements and including
horizontal and vertical locations of all points of tangency, points of vertical
curvature, points of vertical intersection, and points of vertical tangency.
Radii of intersection of streets will be shown on this plan.
         e.   A detailed plan of storm sewer improvements showing horizontal
and vertical locations of all manholes, catch basins, inlets, headwalls, and
the like and indicating lengths, types and grades, and gradients of all storm
sewers and swales.
         f.   A detailed plan of sanitary sewer improvements showing horizontal
and vertical locations of all manholes and indicating lengths, type and grade,
and gradients of sanitary sewers.
         g.   A detailed plan of water system improvements indicating
horizontal and vertical location of all fire hydrants and valves and showing
lengths, sizes, and locations of all water mains.
         h.   Plans and profiles drawn at a scale not to exceed one inch equals
forty feet (1" = 40') horizontally and one inch to ten feet (1" = 10')
vertically indicating additional horizontal and vertical locations of streets,
sewers, appurtenances, and the existing grade.
         i.   Such additional details as are necessary to clarify the extent or
manner of construction.
         j.   Summary of all quantities.
         k.   An erosion and sedimentation control plan.
         l.   General detail sheets showing:
            (1)   Pavements cross section.
            (2)   Curb, gutter, and sidewalk details.
            (3)   Cross section of detention facilities including sedimentation
basins.
            (4)   Manholes, vaults, inlets and castings.
            (5)   Hydrants.
            (6)   Typical trench cross sections for sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, and water mains.
   B.   Fees And Securities:
      1.   Prior to the approval of the final plat of the proposed subdivision
or planned development by the village board and prior to the recording of the
plat, appropriate bonds, escrow monies, recapture fees, irrevocable letters of
credit for public improvements, and any other related fees must be deposited
with the village clerk.
      2.   When the appropriate subdivision improvement security is posted and
all permit fees paid to the village, the installation of the required
improvements may begin. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
   C.   Inspections:
      1.   All improvements constructed under the terms of this title shall be
subject to periodic inspections by the zoning enforcement officer. (Ord. 2005-
39, 10-12-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
      2.   Fees for these inspections shall be at the rate of one-half of one
percent (0.5%) of the cost of construction of said improvements, paid by the
owner or developer.
      3.   The minimum fee for any inspection shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
(Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-6C-2: SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT SECURITY:
   A.   Agreements and guarantees which are required prior to approval of the
final plat are as follows:
      1.   Agreement: The subdivider, builder, or developer shall provide a
signed statement setting forth an agreement wherein he/she or they agree to
construct and install the improvements required in this title, in accordance
with the plans and specifications approved by the village.
      2.   Construction Contract: A copy of a signed construction contract with
a reliable contractor for the required improvements.
      3.   Security For Improvements:
         a.   The subdivider or developer shall submit to the village clerk a
good and sufficient security for the completion of all the improvements
required under this title, together with the cost of reasonable inspection
fees, in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of such
improvements and fees.
         b.   Said security shall provide that monies in such estimated amounts
are on deposit with a bank or other financial institution and restricted for
the purpose of the installation and satisfactory completion of said
improvements.
         c.   The acceptable form of security is an irrevocable letter of
credit in said amount issued by any reputable financial institution. The letter
of credit shall be in substantially the following form:
   (Letterhead of Bank)
   (Date)
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We hereby establish our irrevocable credit in favor of           
[Developer]          , or the municipality of                      in the
amount of                 ($          ). We understand that this irrevocable
credit is to be used to construct the following improvements in the residential
development known as                     to be constructed within the Village
of North Utica, Illinois;
   [DESCRIBE IMPROVEMENTS]
The development is legally described as follows: [legal description]. We shall
make payouts from this irrevocable commitment as follows:
If we have not been notified by the municipality of a default by the owner and/
or developer, we shall disburse the funds for labor and materials furnished by
contractors in accordance with the sworn statement on order of the owners, the
submission of proper lien waivers from the contractors engaged in such work,
and the certificate by the municipal engineer,                , that such work
has been properly completed; provided, however, that we shall withhold from
each payment made under such sworn statement(s) or order(s) an amount equal to
ten percent (10%) thereof until all improvements have been completed except
final surfacing of the streets and sidewalks at which time the 10% sum withheld
shall be disbursed less a sum equal to one hundred and twenty five percent
(125%) of the cost of the final surfacing of the street, which sum shall be
finally disbursed when that work has been completed and the requirements of
certification and lien waivers as has been hereinabove set out.
The required improvements shall be completed in accordance with the following
schedule: [insert schedule]
If we receive a resolution of the corporate authorities of the municipality
indicating that the owner and/or developer has failed to satisfactorily
complete or carry on the work of the installation and construction of the
required improvements, and such resolution indicates that the owner and/or
developer has been notified that the municipality finds that a breach of the
owner's and/or developer's obligations has occurred and has not been cured
within a period of thirty (30) days, in such case we shall make payments for
materials and labor to such contractor(s) or subcontractor(s) retained by the
municipality who have completed the improvements in substantial accordance with
the plans and specifications of the owner and/or developer; such payments shall
be made upon the certification of the municipal engineer that the work has been
completed and the submission of proper waiver of liens from the contractor(s)
or subcontractor(s). The amount of the payouts shall be in accordance with the
retention provisions as previously set out.
The irrevocable credit established by us shall be in force for a period of
                (     ) years, and shall remain in effect without regard to any
default in payments of sums owed us by the owner and/or developer and without
regard to other claims that we may have against the owner and/or developer.
Sixty (60) days before the expiration of this irrevocable credit we shall
notify the corporate authorities of the municipality, by registered letter
return receipt requested, of the impending expiration date. This commitment
shall not terminate without such notice. If the work covered by this commitment
has not been completed within the time set forth in this agreement, the
municipality may at its option continue drawing funds, as otherwise provided,
for an additional period of one year. It is recognized that the municipality is
according the owner and/or developer the permission to proceed with the
development project expressly upon the guarantee of the irrevocable nature of
this commitment. It is further acknowledged that the consideration of this
irrevocable commitment is provided by agreements between this financial
institution and the developer. The sum of this credit shall, however, be
reduced in the amount of disbursements made from time to time in accordance
with the terms under which this credit is extended as set out above.
                                       
            Signature
The Village Board may enter into such supporting agreements by and among the
Village and the lending institution, as the Village Board shall deem necessary
or desirable to further secure the proper and satisfactory completion of said
improvements.
      4.   Maintenance Guarantee: In addition to the security requirement
described herein, the subdivider, builder, or developer shall deposit cash in
the amount of ten percent (10%) of the amount required for construction, or the
village board may accept a certificate of deposit or other United States
government security in lieu of cash, which is to be retained by the village for
a period of one year following the final acceptance of the project to ensure
and protect against defects discovered during such one year period.
   B.   Reduction Of Improvement Security:
      1.   A letter of credit may be reduced from time to time (maximum of once
per month) upon resolution of the village board approving such reductions and
concurrently granting their preliminary approval to corresponding portions of
the improvements.
      2.   There shall be withheld and reserved from each reduction an amount
equal to ten percent (10%) of the original estimate of the work completed for
which preliminary approval has been granted.
      3.   Upon completion of all public improvements and private improvements,
where applicable, and when satisfactorily meeting the requirements of this
title, the village board, upon resolution, may release the improvement security
and initiate the one year maintenance period.
      4.   If all improvements are acceptable after the one year maintenance
period, the maintenance guarantee shall be refunded to the developer along with
any accrued interest.
      5.   The village may use all or any portion of the maintenance guarantee
to cure or correct any damage, defects, or faults discovered during the one
year period should the developer not promptly or properly correct said damage,
defects, or faults.
   C.   Application To Jurisdictional Area: Subdividers, builders, or land
developers of land outside village limits, but within the one and one-half (11/
2) mile zoning area, shall be subject to these requirements.
   D.   Subdivisions In Units Or Sections:
      1.   If the subdivider, builder, or developer elects to develop the
subdivision in units or sections, building permits (where issuance of same is
within the jurisdiction of the village) will be issued for lots contained in
each section or unit upon approval by the village of the plan delineating such
sectional development.
      2.   Public improvements, as set forth in this title, for each section or
unit shall adequately serve each and every lot within the unit so designated
and shall conform to the public improvement plans for the entire subdivision
under consideration.
      3.   The sectional installation of public improvements and cash deposit
with the village shall be done in accordance with the requirements set forth
herein. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-6C-3: ACCEPTANCE AND APPROVAL OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Acceptance: Each development is required by this title to contain the
necessary improvements as outlined in this title. However, the acceptance of
the required improvements is limited to the following types of developments:
      1.   All improvements in a planned development as authorized by the
village.
      2.   The underground and surface improvements within the rights of way of
public streets, easements, or outlots in a residential subdivision.
      3.   All improvements within office, research, or industrial parks.
      4.   Within other types of developments so authorized by the village
board.
   B.   Approval:
      1.   When all required improvements, public and private, are completed in
their entirety, the developer or owner must formally request the village, by
letter, to accept or approve (for private improvements) said improvements, and
the developer or owner must, in such letter, guarantee them for a period of one
year from the date of acceptance or approval (for private improvements).
      2.   Prior to request for approval, the zoning enforcement officer must
be in receipt of:
         a.   Test results.
         b.   As built engineering plans showing:
            (1)   Actual location and size of storm sewers, sanitary sewers and
water mains showing all locations of all inlets, manholes, valve vaults,
hydrants, and other appurtenances. Actual invert and rim elevations are to be
given for all inlets and manholes.
            (2)   Locations and dimensions of roadways, sidewalks, and
easements.
            (3)   Locations and sizes of all water and sewer services.
            (4)   Contour lines of any detention facilities along with
calculations indicating actual storage capacity.
            (5)   Elevations of the tops of all foundations and the corner of
all lots.
            (6)   An Illinois environmental protection agency operating permit
for all water main construction.
      3.   a. Upon receipt of the letter of request, the zoning enforcement
officer will authorize and schedule a final inspection to take place as soon as
reasonably possible after receipt of the letter.
         b.   Final inspections shall not be scheduled between November 15 and
April 1 unless, in the opinion of the zoning enforcement officer, weather
conditions permit.
         c.   All deficient improvements which do not totally conform to this
title (either incomplete, damaged, or poor workmanship) will be inventoried.
         d.   The inventory of deficiencies will be forwarded to the developer
or owner for processing.
         e.   When the deficiencies are corrected, the developer or owner shall
request a second inspection. Scheduling of the second inspection shall be the
same as for the first inspection.
         f.   If the length of time between the first and second inspection is
greater than four (4) months or if the noted deficiencies are not correct at
the time the second inspection is made, the request for acceptance will be
canceled.
         g.   If canceled, a second request for acceptance is subject to the
following conditions:
            (1)   The developer or owner shall pay costs incurred by the person
conducting the inspection.
            (2)   The punch list of deficiencies recorded during the previous
inspections will be voided, and a complete reinspection is required.
   C.   Surface Maintenance:
      1.   During the period between the installation of the final surface
course on the roadways and the termination of the one year maintenance period
or the final acceptance of the public improvements, the zoning enforcement
officer may request the developer to seal all cracks that appear in the
pavement section with an approved hot poured rubber asphalt sealing compound.
      2.   This crack sealing is limited to those cracks that normally occur
due to volume and thermal shrinkage.
      3.   All other types of pavement distress will have to be properly
repaired to the satisfaction of the zoning enforcement officer.
      4.   All cracks shall be properly routed and air blown clean in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and to the satisfaction of
the zoning enforcement officer.
   D.   Final Acceptance And Approval: No improvements, public or private,
shall be accepted or approved (for private improvements) by the village
president and village board prior to receipt of the zoning enforcement
officer's report specifying whether or not the improvements comply with this
title and the approved plans and specifications.
   E.   Bill Of Sale: The developer or owner shall present the village with a
"Bill Of Sale" in substantially the following form:
   BILL OF SALE
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that (name of developer), (Developer), in
consideration of One Dollar and other valuable consideration, does hereby
grant, sell, transfer, and deliver unto the Village of North Utica, a Municipal
Corporation in LaSalle County, Illinois (hereinafter "VILLAGE") the following
goods, chattels, and other items of personal property, namely:
ONE: Each and every part and item of a system of storm sewers, lined culverts,
and paved drainage ways, and other items of personalty for the retention or
detention of storm and surface waters installed at the direction of the VILLAGE
by the Developer for the purpose of the collection, transport, and flow of
surface and storm waters anywhere within the VILLAGE.
TWO: Each and every part and item of a system for the collection,
transportation, and treatment of sewage installed at the direction of the
VILLAGE by the developer anywhere in the VILLAGE with the exception of those
pipes that transports the sewage of a single building into a common sewer
commonly known as a house service.
THREE: Each and every part and item of a system for the distribution of water
installed at the direction of the VILLAGE by the developer anywhere in the
VILLAGE except the pipe that transports water from the buffalo box to a single
building commonly known as a house service.
FOUR: Each and every part of the street and roadway system installed at the
direction of the VILLAGE by the Developer anywhere in the VILLAGE.
The object of this Bill of Sale is to grant, sell, transfer, and deliver to the
VILLAGE, with the exceptions noted, the ownership in all items of personalty
that comprise the storm sewer, storm and surface water retention and detention,
sanitary sewer, water distribution system, and roadway system installed by the
Developer to Date within the VILLAGE.
The Developer does hereby covenant it is the lawful owner of the goods,
chattels, and personalty described above; that such items are free from all
encumbrances; that the Developer has the right to sell the same as aforesaid;
and that the Developer warrants and will defend the same against the lawful
claims and demands of all persons; and that the execution of this Bill of Sale
is an authorized act of said corporation, individual, or partnership. Dated at
               , Illinois, this       day of                , 20   .
                                       
ATTEST:
                              
(Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
CHAPTER 7
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
SECTION:
11-7-1: Findings And Purpose
11-7-2: General Principles
11-7-3: Erosion And Sedimentation Control Plan
11-7-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
   A.   The village board finds as follows:
      1.   That excessive quantities of soil erodes from areas that are
undergoing development for certain nonagricultural uses, including, but not
limited to, the construction of dwelling units, commercial buildings and
industrial plants, the building of roads and highways, and the creation of
recreational facilities.
      2.   That the washing, blowing, and falling of eroded soil across and
upon roadways endangers the health and safety of users thereof by decreasing
vision and reducing traction of road vehicles.
      3.   That said soil erosion necessitates the costly repair of gullies,
washed out fills, and embankments.
      4.   That the sediment from said soil erosion tends to clog sewers and
ditches and to pollute and silt rivers, streams, lakes, and reservoirs.
      5.   That said sediment limits the use of water and waterways for most
beneficial purposes, destroying fish and other aquatic life, and that said
sediment is costly and difficult to remove.
      6.   That said sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways
resulting in greatly increased chances of flooding.
   B.   The village board, therefore, declares that the purpose of this chapter
is to provide minimum standards to safeguard persons, to protect property and
prevent the despoliation of the environment, and to promote the public welfare
by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials
and maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks
the topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth on land situated in
the village. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
11-7-2: GENERAL PRINCIPLES:
The following general principles shall apply to any movement of earth, site
development, and execution of an erosion and soil sedimentation control plan:
   A.   The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any given time
during development.
   B.   Such minimum area exposure shall be kept to as short a duration of time
as is practical.
   C.   Temporary vegetation or, where applicable, mulching or other cover
shall be used to protect areas exposed during development.
   D.   Sediment basins, debris basins, desalting basins, or silt traps shall
be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land
undergoing development.
   E.   Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development. Drainageways shall be designed so that their final gradients and
the resultant velocities of discharge will not create additional erosion in
accordance with the following requirements:
      1.   Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed as
soon as possible.
      2.   The plan of development shall relate to the topography and soils of
the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created.
      3.   The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events
likely to contribute to erosion, and on the evaluation of the risks, costs, and
benefits involved. In the design of erosion control facilities and practices,
provisions shall be made for aesthetics, and the requirements of continuing
maintenance shall be minimized.
      4.   Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected to the
maximum extent possible, consistent with proper land planning and design and
development of the site.
      5.   Velocity retarding devices (temporary or permanent) shall be
installed to reduce the scouring of drainage ditches. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-
2005)
11-7-3: EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN:
   A.   Plan Required: An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be
required for any of the following:
      1.   Any grading, stripping, excavating, or filling of land with any
further development of that land coming at a later date.
      2.   All planned developments, residential subdivisions or multi- family,
commercial or industrial developments which are in excess of one acre.
      3.   All building sites, of any sizes, whether they be residential,
commercial or other.
   B.   Contents Of Plan: Each erosion and sedimentation control plan, which
may be included in the site development plans, shall contain the following:
      1.   The existing topography of the site and adjacent areas within one
hundred feet (100').
      2.   A complete physical survey of the site, including such land features
as rivers, swamps, type and location of plant life, tree groups, wells and any
existing structures.
      3.   A soil survey analysis.
      4.   A proposed grading plan including elevations of buildings and
structures, manhole covers, street profiles, sidewalks, ditches, driveways,
stormwater and sediment basins and berms.
      5.   Required initial clearing and stockpiling operations.
      6.   Sequence of all operations during construction.
      7.   All erosion and sedimentation control measures necessary to meet the
objectives of this section throughout all phases of construction and
permanently after completion of development of the site, including location,
type and configuration of such controls detailed on construction drawings and
in specifications.
      8.   Areas to be seeded and/or sodded, seeding mixtures and rates, types
of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of
lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both
temporary and permanent vegetative control measures.
      9.   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including
easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance.
      10.   Identification of the person(s) or entity which will have legal
responsibility for maintenance of erosion and sedimentation control structures
and measures after development is complete. (Ord. 2005-39, 10-12-2005)
