CITY CODE
of
NORTHLAKE, ILLINOIS
1992
Code current through:
Ord. O-18-2025, passed 8-4-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Northlake, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance O-18-2025, passed August 4, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
ORDINANCE NUMBER  O-20-2025
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING BICYCLES, ELECTRIC BICYCLES, LOW-
SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLES,
E-SCOOTERS AND LOW-SPEED E-SCOOTERS
 
JEFFREY T. SHERWIN, Mayor NANCY PAULETTO, Clerk
 
 
JAIMES. CONTRERAS PENNY FELDMANN RICHARD GROCHOWSKI NORMAN JOHNSON FRANCINE
PATTI
ALEX SOSA PAUL T. STRAUBE, SR.
JUAN URBINA
Aldermen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published in pamphlet fonn by authority of the Mayor and City Council of the
City of Northlake 10/20/2025 Ancel Glink, 4544 West 103rd Street, Unit 2NE, Oak
Lawn, Illinois 60453
 
ORDINANCE NO. O-20-2025
 
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING BICYCLES, ELECTRIC BICYCLES, LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC
BICYCLES,
E-SCOOTERS AND LOW-SPEED E-SCOOTERS
 
 
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Northlake, Cook County,
Illinois, in the exercise of Northlake's home rule powers as follows:
SECTION 1: Title 6, Chapter 5 of the Northlake City Code is amended by deleting
the existing text and substituting the following in lieu thereof:
6-5-1   Definitions.
 
Bicycle:
 Any device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two 
(2) tandem wheels except scooters and similar devices.
 
Electric Bicycle: Any electric powered device built on a bicycle- style frame
equipped with one or more
operating modes and a throttle, having an electric motor with a power output
exceeding 750 watts, and is capable of exceeding 20 mph using only the
throttle. Including, but not limited to, electric dirt bikes and electric mini
bikes.
 
Low-Speed Electric Bicycle: A bicycle equipped with fully operable pedals and
an electric motor of less than 750 watts, and that meets the requirements of
one of the three (3) classifications set forth in Section 1-140.10 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-140.10).
 
E-Scooter: Any device weighing less than 100 pounds, with 2 or 3 wheels,
handlebars, and a floorboard that can be stood upon while riding, that is
solely powered by an electric motor and human power, and whose maximum speed,
with or without human propulsion, is more than 10 mph, but not greater than 20
mph.
 
Low-Speed E-Scooter: Any device weighing less than 100 pounds, with 2 or 3
wheels, handlebars, and a floorboard that can be stood upon while riding, that
is solely powered by an electric motor and human power, and
whose maximum speed, with or without human propulsion, is no more than 10 mph
as defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-140.11. Low Speed E-Scooter does not include a moped
or motor- driven cycle.
Roadway: That portion of a highway
improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
 
Reckless Operation: The operation of an Electric Bicycle, Low-
Speed Electric Bicycle, Low-Speed E­ Scooter or E-Scooter with a conscious
disregard for the safety of the operator and/or others, which poses a risk to
the safety of the operator and/or others.
 
Sidewalk: The portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines
of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians
 
Electric Bicycle and Low-Speed Electric Bicycle:
 
1.   No person shall operate an Electric Bicycle or Low-Speed Electric Bicycle
in such a manner that constitutes Reckless Operation.
 
2.   It shall be unlawful to operate an Electric Bicycle or Low-Speed Electric
Bicycle while carrying a package, bundle, or article in a manner that prevents
the operator from keeping both hands on the handlebars.
 
3.   It shall be unlawful to operate an Electric Bicycle or Low-Speed Electric
Bicycle while under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs.
 
4.   No Electric Bicycle or Low-Speed Electric Bicycle shall be used to
carry more than one (1) person unless the Electric Bicycle or Low-Speed
Electric Bicycle is specifically designed for more than one (1) person.
 
5.   Electric Bicycles and Low-Speed Electric Bicycles are required to have a
label, from the manufacturer, permanently affixed to the Electric Bicycle or
Low-Speed Electric Bicycle in a prominent location. The label shall contain the
bike's classification, its top assisted speed, and its motor wattage.
 
LOW SPEED E-SCOOTERS:
 
1.   No person shall operate a Low-Speed E-
Scooter in such a manner that constitutes Reckless Operation.
 
2.   It shall be unlawful to operate a Low-Speed E-Scooter
while carrying any package, bundle, or article that prevents the operator from
keeping both hands on the handlebars.
3.   The use of a cell phone, or similar device, while operating a Low-
 Speed E-Scooter is prohibited
4.   It shall be unlawful to operate a Low-Speed E-Scooter
while under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs.
 
5.   No passengers shall be allowed on a Low-Speed E-Scooter.
 
E-SCOOTERS:
1.   No person shall operate an E-Scooter in such a manner that constitutes
Reckless Operation.
2.   It shall be unlawful to operate an E-Scooter while carrying any package,
bundle,
or article that prevents the operator from keeping both hands upon the
handlebars.
3.   The use of a cell phone, or similar device, while operating an E-Scooter
is
prohibited.
4.   It shall be unlawful to operate an E-Scooter while under the influence
of alcohol and/or drugs.
5.   No passengers shall be allowed on an E-Scooter.
 
ELECTRIC BICYCLES:
1.   In order to operate an Electric Bicycle on a Roadway, the following
is required:
a.   Valid registration issued by the State.
b.   Valid liability insurance.
c.   The operator must possess a valid driver's license, with the required
classification, based on the type of vehicle being operated.
d.   The operator and every passenger shall be protected by glasses, goggles,
or a transparent shield.
e.   The vehicle shall have all equipment required by Illinois law, as
specified in the Illinois Vehicle Code, including but not limited to: brakes, a
headlight, taillight, turn signals, a horn a speedometer, at least one
(1) rearview mirror, and brake lights.
 
AGE RESTRICTIONS:
1.   No person may operate an Electric Bicycle or Low-Speed Electric Bicycle
unless they are sixteen (16) years of age or older (unless accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian).
2.   No person may operate a Low-Speed E-Scooter or E-Scooter unless they are
sixteen (16) years of age or older (unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian).
 
 
LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
1.   Bicycles may be operated on any Roadway, bike lane or sidewalk within the
City.
2.   Except as prohibited by the Illinois Vehicle Code, Electric Bicycles and
Low­ Speed Electric Bicycles shall be permitted on Roadways and designated bike
lanes.
3.   E-Scooters and Low Speed E-
Scooters are only permitted on Roadways and bike lanes.
4.   No person may operate a Low-Speed Electric Scooter or Electric Scooter on
a Roadway with a posted speed limit in excess of 30 mph.
 
Parking:
 
1.   Electric Bicycles or Low-Speed Electric Bicycles, Low-Speed E-Scooters,
and E­ Scooters that are parked on a public right of way shall be parked in an
upright position and in a manner that does not obstruct the passage of
pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
2.   It shall be unlawful to park an Electric Bicycle or Low-Speed
Electric Bicycle, Low­ Speed E-Scooter or E-Scooter in such a way that it
blocks an entrance to a building, a fire hydrant, or a crosswalk.
 
SAFETY & EQUIPMENT:
 
1.   Lamps and Reflectors
a.   Every Bicycle, Electric Bicycle or Low-Speed Electric Bicycle, E-Scooter,
and Low-Speed E- Scooter, when in use after dark, shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front that emits a white light visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear which must be
visible from all distances of at least 500 feet to the rear. A lamp emitting a
steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of 500 feet may be used in
addition to or instead of the red reflector.
2.   Speedometer:
a.   Each Electric Bicycle shall be equipped with a speedometer that displays
the speed the bicycle is traveling in miles per hour.
3.   Brakes
a.   Every Bicycle, Electric Bicycle, Low-Speed Electric Bicycle, Low-Speed E-
Scooter, and E-Scooter shall be equipped with working brakes.
4.   Alterations to Electric Bicycle, Low-Speed Electric Bicycle, E-Scooters,
or Low­
Speed E-Scooters
a.   No person shall knowingly modify an Electric Bicycle, Low-Speed Electric
Bicycle, Low-Speed E-Scooter, or E-Scooter to change the manufacturer's speed
capability.
b.   No person shall operate an altered Electric Bicycle, Low-Speed Electric
Bicycle, Low-Speed E-Scooter or E-Scooter that allows the device to travel
faster than the manufacturer's speed capability
5.   All operators and passengers of an Electric Bicycle, Low-Speed Electric
Bicycle, Low­ Speed E-Scooter or E-Scooter shall wear a helmet.
 
6-5-2   Obedience to Traffic-Control Devices. Any person operating a Bicycle,
Electric Bicycles, Low-Speed Electric Bicycles, Low-Speed E-Scooter or E-
Scooter shall obey the instructions of traffic signals, signs and other traffic
control devices applicable to vehicles unless otherwise directed by a police
officer.
6-5-3   Operation of Bicycles, Low-Speed Electric Bicycles and Electric
Bicycles.
A.   Riding on Bicycles, Electric Bicycles or Low-Speed Electric Bicycles:
A person operating a Bicycle, Electric Bicycle or Low-Speed Electric Bicycle
shall not ride other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat
attached thereto, nor carry any other person or persons upon such Bicycles,
Electric Bicycles or Low-Speed Electric Bicycles other than upon a firmly
attached and regular seat designed and intended for such purpose.
 
B.   Riding on Right:
 Every person operating a Bicycle, Electric Bicycle or Low-Speed Electric
Bicycle upon a public roadway shall ride as near to the right side thereof as
practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one
proceeding in the same direction.
 
C.   Emerging From Alley or Driveway: The operator of a Bicycle, Electric
Bicycle or Low­ Speed Electric Bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or
building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across
any alleyway, yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching
on said sidewalk area and upon entering the public roadway shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
D.   Clinging to Vehicles: No person riding upon any Bicycle, Electric Bicycle
or Low-Speed Electric Bicycle shall attach said Bicycle, Low-Speed Electric
Bicycle by clinging to any other vehicle.
 
E.   Riding in a Group: Persons operating Bicycles, Electric Bicycles or Low-
Speed Electric Bicycles shall ride in single file.
 
6-5-4   : Duty of Parent or Guardian: It shall be unlawful for any parent
or guardian to permit any minor child of which they are a parent or guardian to
violate any provisions of this chapter.
 
6-5-5   : Penalty: Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of
this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars 
($25.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
SECTION 2: If any section, paragraph, clause
or provision of this ordinance shall be held
invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not
affect any of the other provisions of this ordinance.
 
SECTION 3:   
All ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict.
SECTION 4:  
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
 
approval and publication as provided by law.
 
ADOPTED  this 20 th day of October 2025 pursuant to a roll call vote as
follows:
 
                YES NO ABSENT PRESENT
Contreras
Feldmann
Grochowski
Johnson
Patti
Sosa
Straube
Urbina
(Mayor Sherwin)
TOTAL
APPROVED  by the Mayor on October 20, 2025.
 
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1d1300d496ebe964abc7de90476368240ad48dd1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3297_4346x20.jpg]
 
 
 
ATTEST:
 
 
Nancy Pauletta
CITY CLERK
Jeffrey T. Sherwin MAYOR
 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
) ss
COUNTY OF COOK   )
 
 
CERTIFICATION
 
I, NANCY PAULETTO, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that I am the duly qualified and elected
Clerk of the City of Northlake, Cook County, Illinois, and that as such Clerk I
do have charge of and custody of the books and records of the City of
Northlake, Cook County, Illinois.
 
I DO HEREBY FURTHER CERTIFY that the foregoing is a full, true and correct copy
of Ordinance No. R-20-2025, "AN ORDINANCE REGULATING BICYCLES, ELECTRIC
BICYCLES, E­ SCOOTERS, LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS,"
adopted and approved by the Mayor and City
Council of the City of Northlake, Illinois on October 20, 2025.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto affixed my hand and the Corporate
Seal of the City of Northlake, Cook County, Illinois this 20 th day of October
2025.
 
 
 
 
NANCY PAULETTO
City Clerk
City of Northlake Cook County, Illinois
SEAL
 
 
ORDINANCE NUMBER O-22- 2025                 
 
                                                                                                                                                        
 
   AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A VARIANCE    
FOR THE PROPERTY COMMONLY KNOWN AS
   38 WEST FRANKLIN DRIVE, NORTHLAKE, ILLINOIS
 
                                       
                                                                                                                 
 
   JEFFREY T. SHERWIN, Mayor
NANCY PAULETTO, Clerk
 
 
JAIME S. CONTRERAS
   PENNY FELDMANN
   RICHARD GROCHOWSKI
   NORMAN JOHNSON
FRANCINE PATTI
ALEX SOSA
   PAUL STRAUBE
JUAN URBINA
Aldermen
 
 
 
 
                                       
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the Mayor and City Council of the
City of Northlake on 10/20/2025
Ancel Glink - City Attorneys – 4454 West 103rd Street – Oak Lawn, Illinois
60453
   ORDINANCE NO. O-22-2025      
 
   AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A VARIANCE
   FOR THE PROPERTY COMMONLY KNOWN AS
   38 WEST FRANKLIN DRIVE, NORTHLAKE, ILLINOIS
 
                                       
 
   WHEREAS, an application has been filed by Ricardo Cordova (“Petitioner”)
requesting a variance from the required side set back to allow for the
construction of a attached garage at the property commonly known as 38 West
Franklin Drive which is legally described on Exhibit A (Subject Property); and
   WHEREAS, on October 7, 2025 the Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning and
Economic Development Commission ("Commission") conducted a public hearing on
the requested variance;
   WHEREAS, after public testimony and due deliberation, the Commission voted
to recommend to the City Council the approval of the requested variance for the
Subject Property;
   NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of
Northlake, Cook County, Illinois in the exercise of Northlake's home rule
powers, as follows:
   SECTION 1:   The foregoing preambles are restated and incorporated herein by
reference though fully set forth herein.
   SECTION 2: A variance is hereby granted to reduce the side yard set back
requirement for the Subject Property of six (6) feet to four (4) feet to allow
for the construction of an attached garage.
   SECTION 3: If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance
shall be held invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other
provisions of this ordinance.
   SECTION 4:   All ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the
extent of such conflict.
   SECTION 5:   This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
 
 
 
 
ADOPTED this 20th day of October 2025 pursuant to a roll call vote as follows:
 
 
                YES NO ABSENT PRESENT
Contreras
Feldmann
Grochowski
Johnson
Patti
Sosa
Straube
Urbina
(Mayor Sherwin)
TOTAL
 
   APPROVED by the Mayor on October 20, 2025.
 
 
 
 
                     ___________________________
                     Jeffrey T. Sherwin
                     MAYOR
ATTEST:
 
 
 
            
Nancy Pauletto
CITY CLERK
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT A
 
Legal Description
 
LOT 20 IN BLOCK 2 IN MIDLAND DEVELOPMENT COMPANY’S NORTHLAKE VILLAGE UNIT NO.
6, A RESUBDIVISION IN SOUTHEAST ¼ OF SECTION 31, TOWNSHIP 40 NORTH, RANGE 12
EAST OF THE THIRD PRINCIPAL MERIDIAN, IN COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS.
 
PIN:   12-31-404-023-0000
 
 
Commonly Known As: 38 West Franklin Drive, Northlake, Illinois 60164
 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
         ) SS
COUNTY OF COOK   )
 
 
   CERTIFICATION
 
   I, Nancy Pauletto, do hereby certify that I am the duly qualified and
elected Clerk of the City of Northlake, Cook County, Illinois, and that as such
Clerk I do have charge of and custody of the books and records of the city of
Northlake, Cook County, Illinois.
 
   I do hereby further certify that the foregoing is a full, true and correct
copy of Resolution No. O-22-2025, “AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A VARIANCE FOR THE
PROPERTY COMMONLY KNOWN AS 38 WEST FRANKLIN DRIVE, NORTHLAKE, ILLINOIS,”
adopted and approved by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Northlake,
Illinois on October 20, 2025.
 
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto affixed my hand and the Corporate Seal
of the City of Northlake, Cook County, Illinois this 20th day of October 2025.
 
 
 
                                                                                                       
                        Nancy Pauletto
                        City Clerk
                         City of Northlake
                        Cook County, Illinois
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NUMBER O-23-2025
 
AN ORDINANCE PROPOSING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL SERVICE AREA NO. 7 BY THE
CITY OF NORTHLAKE FOR THE CONDOMINIUM BUILDING LOCATED AT 38 KING ARTHUR COURT,
AND PROVIDING FOR A PUBLIC HEARING AND OTHER PROCEDURES IN CONNECTION THEREWITH
 
 
 
JEFFREY T. SHERWIN, Mayor NANCY PAULETTO, Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
JAIME S. CONTRERAS PENNY FELDMANN ALEX SOSA
RICHARD GROCHOWSKI NORMAN JOHNSON FRANCINE PATTI
PAUL STRAUBE JUAN URBINA
Aldermen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: Louis F. Cainkar, Ltd., 6215 W. 79th Street, Suite 2A, Burbank, IL
60469
 
ORDINANCE NO. O-23-2025
 
AN ORDINANCE PROPOSING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL SERVICE AREA NO. 7 BY THE
CITY OF NORTHLAKE FOR THE CONDOMINIUM BUILDING LOCATED AT 38 KING ARTHUR COURT,
AND PROVIDING FOR A PUBLIC HEARING AND OTHER PROCEDURES IN CONNECTION THEREWITH
 
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Northlake, Cook County,
Illinois, as follows:
Section 1: Authority to Establish Special Service Areas.  That the City of
Northlake ("Northlake") has authority pursuant to Article VII, Section 7 of the
Illinois Constitution of 1970 to provide special services to contiguous areas
within its corporate limits and within the corporate limits of other consenting
municipalities; and to provide the manner of levying and imposing additional
taxes to pay the cost of such special service in accordance with the provisions
of the Special Service Area Tax Law, 36 ILCS 200/27-6, et seq.
 
Section 2:    Findings.  This City Council finds as follows:
 
(a)   that it is in the public interest that the creation of a special service
area (the "SSA") for the purposes set forth herein be considered;
(b)   that the SSA is compact and contiguous and is located within Northlake;
 
(c)   that the SSA will specially benefit from structural repairs to the
building improvements,
including repair and replacement of roof, which construction is in addition to municipal services generally
provided by Northlake as a whole and it is; therefore, in the best interest of
the SSA that the levy of special taxes and the issuance of bonds in the SSA be
considered.
Section 3:  Public Hearing - Tax Rates - Bonds.  That a public hearing shall
be held at
6:45 p.m. on Monday, December 1, 2025, in the Council Chambers of City Hall, 55
E. North Avenue, Northlake, Illinois, to consider the creation of Special
Service Area No. 7, in the following described territory:
 
Unit Number 1 Through 14 Inclusive In 38 King Arthur Court Condominiums as
Delineated
and Defined in the Declaration Recorded as Document No. 0020920705, in the West ½ of the
Southeast ¼ of Section 30, Township 40 North, Range 12, East of Third Principal
Meridian, in Cook County, Illinois.
 
PINs:
 
 
12-30-402-060-1001 12-30-402-060-1007 12-30-402-060-1013
12-30-402-060-1002 12-30-402-060-1008 12-30-402-060-1014
12-30-402-060-1003 12-30-402-060-1009
12-30-402-060-1004 12-30-402-060-1010
12-30-402-060-1005 12-30-402-060-1011
12-30-402-060-1006 12-30-402-060-1012
 
At the hearing, there will be considered the levy of an annual tax of unlimited
rate on the property in the SSA, said tax to be levied for a maximum of eleven
(11) years which tax shall be in addition to all other taxes provided by law.
 
At the hearing, there will be considered the issuance of bonds in an amount not to
exceed
$115,000 to be paid over not more than eleven (11) years and bearing interest
at a rate not to exceed 9.0% per annum.
Section 4:  Notice of Hearing.  Notice of hearing, in substantially the form
attached hereto, shall be published at least once not less than fifteen (15)
days prior to the public hearing in one or more
newspapers in general circulation in Northlake. In addition, notice by mailing shall be given by depositing
said notice in the U. S. mails addressed to the person or persons in whose name
the general taxes for the last preceding year were paid on each lot, block,
tract or parcel of land lying within the proposed SSA. Said Notice shall be
mailed not less than ten (10) days prior to the time set for the public
hearing. In the event taxes for the last preceding year were not paid, the
Notice shall be sent to the person last listed on the tax rolls prior to that
year as the owner of the property.
 
Section 6:  Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect
from and after its passage and approval as provided by law.
 
PASSED  this 3 rd day of November, 2025 pursuant to a roll call vote as
follows:
 
                YES NO ABSENT PRESENT
Contreras
Feldmann
Sosa
Grochowski
Johnson
Patti
Straube
Urbina
(Mayor Sherwin)
TOTAL
APPROVED by the Mayor on November 3, 2025.
 
 
 
ATTEST:   Jeffrey T. Sherwin
MAYOR
 
 
 
Nancy Pauletto CITY CLERK
 
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING CITY OF NORTHLAKE SPECIAL SERVICE AREA NO. 7
 
Notice is hereby given that on Monday, December 3, 2025 at 6:45 p.m. in the
Council Chambers of the City Hall, 55 E. North Avenue, Northlake, Illinois, a
hearing will be held by the City Council to consider forming a special service
area consisting of the following described territory:
 
Unit Number 1 Through 14 Inclusive In 38 King Arthur Court Condominiums as
Delineated
and Defined in the Declaration Recorded as Document No. 0020920705, in the West ½ of the
Southeast ¼ of Section 30, Township 40 North, Range 12, East of Third Principal
Meridian, in Cook County, Illinois.
 
PINs:
 
 
12-30-402-060-1001 12-30-402-060-1007 12-30-402-060-1013
12-30-402-060-1002 12-30-402-060-1008 12-30-402-060-1014
12-30-402-060-1003 12-30-402-060-1009
12-30-402-060-1004 12-30-402-060-1010
12-30-402-060-1005 12-30-402-060-1011
12-30-402-060-1006 12-30-402-060-1012
commonly described by street location as 38 King Arthur Court, Northlake,
Illinois. The purpose of the formation of Northlake Special Service Area Number
No. 7 in general is to pay for the structural repairs to building improvements,
including repair and replacement of roof.
 
All interested persons affected will be given an opportunity to be heard and
object to the formation of the special service area, the levy of taxes
affecting said area, and the issuance of bonds.
A special tax will be considered at the public hearing to be levied for a
period not to exceed 11 years at an unlimited rate, to be levied against the
property included in the special service area. The issuance of bonds in
an amount not to exceed $115,000 payable over not more than 11 years at an
interest rate not to exceed 9.0% will also be considered at the public hearing.
After the life of the bonds, the maintenance of the special services shall be
the responsibility of the owners of the properties within the special service
area.
At the hearing, all persons affected will be given an opportunity to be heard.
The hearing may be adjourned by the City Council without further notice to
another date without further notice other than a motion to be entered upon the
minutes of its meeting fixing the time and place of its adjournment.
If a petition signed by at least 51% of the electors residing within the
special service area and by at least 51% of the owners of record of the land
included within the boundaries of the special service area is filed with the
City Clerk within 60 days following the final adjournment of the public hearing
objecting to the creation of the special service district, the enlargement
thereof, the levy or imposition of a tax or the issuance of bonds for the
provision of special services to the area, no such district may be created or
enlarged, or tax may be levied or imposed, or no such bonds may be issued.
 
 
                                                     ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 0-29-92
THE NORTHLAKE CODE FOR 1992
SPONSORED BY: ALDERMEN DOYLE, PAUL, MCADOW, PADILLA, LACOGNATA
WHEREAS, The City Council of the City of Northlake, last adopted a City Code in
1979; and
WHEREAS, this Code has been amended, from time to time, by the enactment of
various and sundry ordinances; and
WHEREAS, the Northlake Code of 1979 contains numerous and various sections
which are either moot, conflicting, outdated or otherwise inconsequential; and
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Northlake has undertaken to review,
re-edit and otherwise update the City Code of 1979;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF NORTHLAKE,
COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
      1.   That the Northlake Code of 1992, attached hereto and made a part
hereof, is adopted as the Municipal Code of the City of Northlake.
      2.   That all Ordinances or parts of Ordinances, or portions of any
previous Municipal Code of the City of Northlake, in conflict with the terms of
the Northlake Code of 1992, are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
      3.   That three copies of the Northlake Code of 1992 shall be placed on
file with the City Clerk of the City of Northlake.
      4.   That this Ordinance shall take effect after its passage, approval
and publication according to the law.
ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL THIS 7TH DAY OF DECEMBER, 1992.
AYES: ALDERMEN PADILLA, LACOGNATA, OBRZUT, PAUL, DOYLE, MCADOW
NAYS: ALDERMEN KERIVAN, CZERWINSKI
ABSENT: NONE
   /s/
   REID M. PAXSON, MAYOR
ATTEST:
/s/
EVELYN C. STURM, CITY CLERK
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Official Copy of Code
1-1-5: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official Code of the City. This City Code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the NORTHLAKE CITY CODE and it is hereby
published by authority of the Council and shall be kept up to date as provided
in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this City Code by title in any legal documents. (1992 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code. (1992 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute sufficient
compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or
revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such amendments or
revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the
said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in
each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly
identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the City Code.
(1992 Code)
1-1-4: OFFICIAL COPY OF CODE:
   A.   A copy of the City Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City
Clerk, preserved in looseleaf form. It shall be the express duty of the City
Clerk or someone authorized by the Clerk to insert in their designated places
all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the Mayor and City
Council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or
reprinted in page form and to extract from the Code all provisions which may
from time to time be repealed by the Mayor and City Council. This copy of such
Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same and shall
be considered the Official Code of Ordinances of the City. (Ord. 0-08-77, 4-26-
77)
   B.   The City Clerk shall also keep a separate book containing every
amendment or addition to this Code, with a reference on each copy of such
amendment or addition as to the place in the record of ordinances where the
original ordinance may be found.
   C.   The above-described records shall be kept in addition to the record of
ordinances which the Clerk is required to keep by statute. 1  (Ord. 0-23-79,
11-20-79)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. ch. 24, ¶3-10-7.
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. Any person having in his custody an official copy of the City
Code shall make every effort to maintain said Code in an up-to-date and
efficient manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement
pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through the
office of the City Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of
officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the
City and shall be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed to do so by
order of the City Council. (1992 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City
Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
City; and all special ordinances. (1992 Code)
Whenever an ordinance, by its nature, either authorizes or enables the Council
or a certain Municipal officer or employee to make additional ordinances or
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of such ordinance, all
ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving such purpose effected
prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect
and are saved. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the
preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1992 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable, if
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to
any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein repealed
and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be
deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this City Code. (1992 Code)
Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of
this City shall in any manner be construed as a waiver of any license at the
effective date due and unpaid under such ordinance nor be construed as
affecting any of the provisions of such ordinance relating to the collection of
any such license or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof
nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required
to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and
obligations thereof appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord.
0-23-79, 11-20-79)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1992 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Interpretation
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
In the construction of the provisions of this Code and all ordinances, the
following rules of construction shall be observed unless inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the Council or the context clearly requires otherwise:
   A.   Definitions given within a title, chapter or article apply only to
words or phrases used in such title, chapter or article unless otherwise
provided.
   B.   A general term following specific enumeration of terms shall not be
limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
   C.   Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and
approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and others that
have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed
and understood according to such meaning.
   D.   Words used in the past tense shall include the future, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
   E.   Whenever any word in any section of this Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this Code by words importing the singular number only,
or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as
well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included.
   F.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been
changed in the content of this Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1992 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with either actual or apparent
authority to bind another by his acts.
AND, OR: "And" may be read "or" and "or" may be read "and" if the sense
requires it.
BOND: An obligation, in writing, binding the signatory to pay a sum certain
upon the happening or failure of an event.
BUILDING: Any structure intended to have walls and a roof.
CITY LIMITS OR CORPORATE LIMITS: Within the City and includes not only the
corporate limits of the City but also any property which the City owns or which
is under its jurisdiction.
CITY, TOWN, VILLAGE, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OR MUNICIPALITY: Denotes the City of
Northlake, irrespective of its population or legal classification.
CLERK: The City Clerk.
CODE: The Municipal Code of the City of Northlake.
COUNCIL: The City Council, Aldermen and Mayor.
COUNTY: Cook County, Illinois.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Northlake".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the City shall commence on January 1 of each
year and end on December 31 of the same year 1 .
JOINT AUTHORITY: That authority given to several persons or officers. Such
authority vests in a majority of such persons or officers.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MAY: The word may is permissive and discretionary.
MAYOR: The Mayor of the City.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the City; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
OATH: Any form of attestation by which a person signifies that he is bound in
conscience to perform an act or to speak faithfully and truthfully, and shall
include an affirmation or declaration in cases where by law an affirmation may
be substituted for an oath.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code, State law or Federal
law or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Northlake".
OFFICES: Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to
any office, officer or employee of the City exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
OFFICIAL TIME: The official time within the City for the transaction of all
City business shall be as follows:
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to
five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
Saturday, nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) noon.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: A person who has complete dominion over a particular property and who is
the one in whom legal or equitable title rests; when applied to a building or
land, owner shall mean any part owner, joint owner, owner of a community or
partnership interest, life tenant, tenant in common or joint tenant of the
whole or part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any individual, natural person, joint stock company, partnership,
voluntary association, society, club, firm, company, corporation, business
trust, organization or any other group acting as a unit, or the manager,
lessee, agent, servant, partner, member, director, officer or employee of any
of them, including an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other
representative appointed according to law. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term person or whoever, as applied to
any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof and as
applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Any money, goods, movable chattels, things in action,
evidence of debt, all objects and rights which are capable of ownership and
every other species of property except real property.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC PLACE: Means and includes any public street, road or highway, alley,
lane, sidewalk, crosswalk or other public way or any public resort, place of
amusement, stadium, athletic field, park, playground, public building or
grounds appurtenant thereto, school building or school grounds, public parking
lot or any vacant lot, the elevator, lobby, halls, corridors and areas open to
the public of any store, office or apartment building or any other place
commonly open to the public.
REAL PROPERTY: Land, together with all things attached to the land so as to
become a part thereof.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
SHALL: The word shall is mandatory.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property along the margin of a street or other highway designed, constructed
and intended for the use of pedestrians to the exclusion of vehicles.
SIGNATURE AND SUBSCRIPTION: The name of a person or the mark or symbol appended
by him to a writing with intent to authenticate the instrument as one made or
put into effect by him.
STATE: The State of Illinois.
STREET: All streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, parkways, roads, lanes,
viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto, docks built on the public street,
alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, recreation and park lands
used for vehicular traffic or other public ways or thoroughfares in this City
over which it has jurisdiction which have been or may hereafter be dedicated
and open to public use, or such other public property so designated by any law
of this State.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the
ground or is attached to something having location on the ground including a
fence or freestanding wall. A sign, billboard or other advertising medium,
detached or projecting, shall be construed to be a structure.
TENANT, OCCUPANT: The words "tenant" and "occupant", applied to a building or
land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building
or land, whether alone or with others.
TIME: An hour of the day according to the official time of the City.
WEEK: Seven (7) days; however, publication in a newspaper or other required
paper of any notice or other matter indicated to be for a stated number of
weeks shall be construed to mean one insertion in each week, unless
specifically stated to be for each day of the week or for more than one day in
each week.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark.
YEAR: A calendar year. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. 1992 Code; Ord. O-44-98,
9-21-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. Effective January 1, 1999.
1-3-3: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   References:
      1.   Any references in this Code to an ordinance or provision of this
Code shall mean such ordinance or provision as may now exist or as hereafter
amended.
      2.   Any references in this Code to titles, chapters, articles or
sections shall be to the titles, chapters, articles and sections of this Code
unless otherwise specified.
   B.   Conflicting Provisions:
      1.   If the provisions of different titles, chapters, articles or
sections of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of
each title, chapter, article or section shall prevail as to all matters and
questions growing out of the subject matter of that title, chapter, article or
section.
      2.   If clearly conflicting provisions are found in different sections of
the same chapter, the provisions of the section last enacted shall prevail
unless the construction is inconsistent with the meaning of that chapter.
      3.   Where any conflict exists between a section of this Code and any
section of the State statutes, the latter shall prevail.
   C.   Time Computation:
      1.   The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in any
section, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first and
including the last day. If the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day
shall not be counted in the computation.
      2.   When the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal
holiday, from midnight to midnight, is excluded.
   D.   Errors And Omissions: If a manifest error is discovered consisting of
the misspelling of any word or words, the omission of any word or words
necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected, the use of a
word or words to which no meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or
words when another word or words was clearly intended to express such intent,
such spelling shall be corrected and such word or words supplied, omitted or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provision
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published. No such alteration shall be made or permitted if
any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error. (Ord. O-23-
79, 11-20-1979)
   E.   Catchlines: The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are
intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall
not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern,
limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the
provisions of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided,
shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines,
are amended or reenacted. (1992 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Penalty Provisions
1-4-2: Payment Of Fines; Delinquencies
1-4-3: Application Of Provisions
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
1-4-5: City Jail
1-4-1: PENALTY PROVISIONS:
   A.   General Penalty: Whenever, in this code or in any other ordinance of
the city, or rule, regulation or order promulgated by any law officer or agency
of the city under authority duly vested in him/her, or it, any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of
any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such
provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of the city of any rule,
regulation or order as aforesaid shall be punished by a fine of not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. O-64-95, 12-4-1995)
   B.   Supervision: The court and any administrative body or council committee
as provided in this code may make an order of supervision as an alternative
order of disposition for violations of this code, with or without monetary
fine, for a period not to exceed two (2) years in length. The period of
supervision and other conditions thereof will be imposed by the court as it
deems fit and proper. (Ord. O-13-81, 7-14-1981; amd. 1992 Code)
   C.   Public Service Work: Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-
1 and 5/1-2-1.1, a penalty imposed for violation of an ordinance may include or
consist of a requirement that the defendant perform some reasonable public
service work such as, but not limited to, the picking up of litter in public
parks or along public highways or the maintenance of public facilities. (Ord.
O-20-90, 4-16-1990)
1-4-2: PAYMENT OF FINES; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Prompt Payment Of Fines: Members of the police department and other
city employees shall refrain from starting prosecutions in court against
violators who pay the sums indicated in settlement of the claim for a penalty
for the offense alleged. All money received from such settlement shall be paid
into the general corporate fund. (1976 Code § 19-1-16; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-
3-2014)
   B.   Delinquent Payments; Administrative Charges: Any person cited for a
city ordinance violation who has neither resolved same through the court
process or through direct payment within the time provided by the court or as
set forth on the citation shall be deemed to be delinquent in payment of the
city ordinance violation citation. Persons delinquent in payment of city
ordinance violation citations shall have imposed upon them, per citation, an
administrative charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00). The violation citations
shall not be considered satisfied and paid unless payment of the fifteen dollar
($15.00) administration charge is paid at the time of satisfaction of the
violation citation fine. (Ord. O-01-88, 2-9-1988)
   C.   Collection Of Fines, Penalties And Fees: The city prosecutor or any
duly appointed special counsel is hereby empowered to file a civil action to
recover any penalty or fine for the violation of any municipal ordinance or any
other fee due and unpaid the city. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
1-2-9.1, in all actions for violation of this code wherein the fine for said
violation would not be in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and no jail
term could be imposed, service of summons may be by certified mail, return
receipt requested, whether service is to be within or without the state. Any
violations of this code wherein the fine for said violation would be in excess
of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is excluded.
In the event that a penalty, fine or fee is not paid within sixty (60) days
from the date of issuance, the penalty, fine or fee for said violation of said
ordinance shall be increased to two hundred dollars ($200.00) and no jail term
shall be imposed for same. After sixty (60) days, the city prosecutor or any
duly appointed special counsel is authorized to settle said matters in
accordance with the following schedule:
 
Prior to suit                $100.00
Suit filed                   125.00
Judgment obtained            150.00
Within 30 days post judgment 175.00
 
(Ord. O-15A-90, 3-19-1990)
1-4-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where any duty
is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a
continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply. (1992 Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1992
Code)
1-4-5: CITY JAIL:
   A.   Jail Established: The place in the city as may be established and used
as the jail or any other place which may be hereafter established by the city
council for that purpose is hereby declared to be the city jail. (1976 Code §
2-15-1)
   B.   Keeper Of Jail: The chief of police shall be the keeper of the jail and
shall have custody over all persons confined therein and of all property
pertaining thereto. (1976 Code § 2-15-2; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
   C.   Prisoners:
      1.   Incarceration: The city jail shall be used for incarceration of all
persons arrested for violating any laws of the United States, the state or for
violating any city ordinances until such person shall be lawfully brought
before a proper judge for a hearing or until such person shall be lawfully
transferred to some other place of incarceration or otherwise lawfully
released. (1976 Code § 2-15-3)
      2.   Escape From Jail: No person shall escape, attempt to escape or
assist any prisoner to escape or attempt to escape from the city jail. (1976
Code § 2-15-4)
      3.   Communications With Prisoners: No person shall communicate with any
prisoner held in the city jail without the permission of the chief of police.
(1976 Code § 2-15-5; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
   D.   Administrative Processing Fee:
      1.   Effective May 1, 1997, any person arrested and held in custody
overnight at the city jail shall be charged an administrative processing fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00) per night of incarceration plus the cost of each meal
consumed while in the police department's custody. Said fee shall be rendered
at the time of posting bail. (Ord. O-38-96, 10-21-1996; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-
3-2014)
      2.   In the event that the arrestee cannot afford to pay the
administrative processing fee and/or meal charge and is found guilty, by the
judicial system, in a court of law, the city shall request that the court of
jurisdiction include in said arrestee's sentence eight (8) hours of community
service, to be served in the city, for each night of incarceration spent at the
city jail.
      3.   In the event that the arrestee is found not guilty, the city shall
reimburse said arrestee the administrative processing fee and the cost of meals
incurred during such period of incarceration. (Ord. O-38-96, 10-21-1996)
CHAPTER 5
APPLICATION OF TITLE
SECTION:
1-5-1: Application Of Provisions
1-5-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this Title shall apply to all officers and employees of the
City, regardless of the time of creating the office or of the time of the
appointment of the officer. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-1979)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Elected Officials; Terms Of Office
1-6-2: Mayor
1-6-2-1: Election; Term Of Office
1-6-2-2: Powers And Duties
1-6-2-3: Bond And Salary
1-6-3: City Council Rules Of Order And Procedure
1-6-1: ELECTED OFFICIALS; TERMS OF OFFICE:
The city council shall consist of eight (8) members. Such members shall be
elected and serve for four (4) year staggered terms as is provided by statute.
The powers of the city council shall be legislative except as may be otherwise
provided by statute and ordinance. Members of city council shall receive an
annual salary of twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00). (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-
1979; amd. 1992 Code)
1-6-2: MAYOR:
1-6-2-1: ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE:
The mayor shall be elected for a four (4) year term and shall serve until his
successor is elected and qualified as is provided by statute. (Ord. O-23-79,
11-20-1979)
1-6-2-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city
and shall perform such duties as may be required of him by statute or by
ordinance, which ordinance shall not be inconsistent with Illinois statutes.
(1976 Code §
2-3-2; amd. Ord. O-07-89, 4-11-1989)
   B.   Annual Report: (Rep. by Ord. O-15-97, 5-19-1997)
   C.   Inspect Books And Records: The mayor shall have the power and authority
to inspect all books and records pertaining to city affairs and kept by any
officer or employee of the city at any reasonable time. (1976 Code §
2-3-2)
   D.   Serve As Liquor Commissioner: The mayor shall be the liquor
commissioner of the city. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
   E.   Formal Occasions: The mayor shall act for and on behalf of the city on
formal occasions and receptions, but in his absence or inability to attend any
such function, the mayor's designee shall so act. (1976 Code § 2-3-4; amd. 1992
Code)
1-6-2-3: BOND AND SALARY:
   A.   Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the mayor shall
execute a surety company bond 1  in the amount of three thousand dollars
($3,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his
office. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. 1992 Code)
   B.   Salary: The mayor shall devote as much time as necessary to perform the
functions of his office and shall receive an annual salary of sixty thousand
dollars ($60,000.00). (Ord. O-17-2004, 9-20-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-10-2 of this title.
1-6-3: CITY COUNCIL RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE:
The following rules of order and procedure shall govern the deliberations and
meetings of the council and the committees thereof: (Ord. O-65-95, 12-4-1995)
   A.   Meetings:
      1.   Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the city council shall be
held on the second Monday of January, February, June, July, August and
September and on the first and third Mondays of March, April, May, October,
November and December at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. in the city hall, unless
another site shall be specified. Any regular meeting falling upon a legal
holiday may be canceled or rescheduled by the mayor or by a majority of the
city council. (Ord. O-20-2014, 9-15-2014)
      2.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the mayor or by
any three (3) aldermen by written request or notice being filed with the clerk
for such meeting. At least forty eight (48) hours' written notice of such
special meeting shall be given by the clerk, which notice shall specify the
time and purpose of such meeting and shall be delivered to each member of the
council, personally, if he can be found, and if he cannot be found, a copy of
such notice shall be left at the home of such council member in the presence of
an adult member of the council member's family or in the absence of such person
shall be left at the residence. The clerk shall cause an affidavit showing
service of such notice as herein provided to be filed in his office at the time
fixed for such special meeting, together with a statement of compliance with
the notices to members of the media as provided in the open meetings act 1 .
(Ord. O-12-95, 5-1-1995)
      3.   Emergency Meetings: In the case of an emergency, a meeting may be
called upon such notice as is practicable. The meeting may be called by the
mayor or by any three (3) aldermen. The convening authority shall notify all
other members of the council, the clerk, and any other person or entity
entitled to such notice.
      4.   Open To The Public: All meetings of the council, including special
and adjourned meetings, except closed or executive sessions thereof, shall be
open to the public, as is required by statute 2 .
   B.   Presiding Officer:
      1.   The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council, but he shall
have a vote only where the state statutes or the municipal ordinances require
more than a majority vote of the corporate authorities or in the event of a tie
or where one- half (1/2) of the Aldermen elected have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution or motion, even though there is not a tie vote.
      2.   During the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Council shall
elect one of its number President Pro Tem of the Council, and he shall act as
presiding officer of the Council. Where the absence or disability of the Mayor
is to be of very short duration and no individual is required to be granted the
powers of the Mayor, the Council shall elect one of its members temporary
Chairman. The Mayor Pro Tem or the temporary Chairman, when acting as presiding
officer, shall vote on all questions on which the vote is taken by "yeas" and
"nays", his name being called last. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have all of the
powers and duties of the Mayor; the temporary Chairman shall only have such
powers and duties as accrue to a presiding officer.
      3.   Each meeting of the Council shall convene at the time appointed for
such meeting, as provided by ordinance. The Clerk or, in his absence, a member
of the Council or the Deputy Clerk shall thereupon immediately call the roll of
members. If no quorum is present, the Council shall not thereby stand
adjourned, but the members present shall be competent, by majority vote, to
adjourn or recess the Council to another time or date prior to the next
regularly scheduled meeting.
      4.   If no quorum is present and the members present desire to compel the
attendance of absent members, they themselves, or by their agents, shall
attempt to communicate the call to the session personally to the absentees. Any
absent member who refuses to attend the meeting (or a new meeting to which the
members present have adjourned), after personal notice to attend, may be fined
by the members present a sum not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
each occurrence.
   C.   Quorum; Order Of Business: A quorum for the transaction of business
shall consist of a majority of all the Council entitled by law to be elected.
The order of business shall be as follows:
      1.   Call to order of regular meeting by presiding officer;
      2.   Pledge of Allegiance to flag;
      3.   Roll call;
      4.   Establishment of quorum;
      5.   The reading and approval (with corrections and additions, if any) of
the journal of the proceedings of the previous meeting or meetings;
      6.   Approval of warrants and vouchers; (Ord. O-09-91, 4-15-1991)
      7.   Reports of the standing committees:
Committee On Finances/Rules
Committee On Public Works
Committee On Public Safety
Committee On Licensing and Inspectional Services; (Ord. O-14-93, 5-17-1993)
      8.   Reports of special committees; (Ord. O-09-91, 4-15-1991)
      9.   Reports and communications from Mayor and other officials:
Mayor
Finance Director
Clerk
Aldermen
Attorney
Commissions
Department heads; (Ord. O-09-91, 4-15-1991; amd. Ord. O-37-91, 12-2-1991; Ord.
O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
      10.   Petitions, communications and orders;
      11.   Appointments;
      12.   Old business;
      13.   New business;
      14.   Resolutions;
      15.   Ordinances;
      16.   Public participation;
      17.   Adjournment of regular meeting. (Ord. O-09-91, 4-15-1991; amd. Ord.
O-26-96, 4-1-1996; Ord. O-15-97, 5-19-1997)
   D.   Duties:
      1.   Presiding Officer:
         a.   The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum and may
speak to points of order in preference to other members and shall decide all
questions of order subject to appeal. The presiding officer may speak to
matters being considered by the Council without relinquishing his chair. If he
refuses to allow the Aldermen to exercise their right to appeal a decision of
the Chair, the Aldermen may consider and pass upon the appeal in spite of the
Chair's failure to grant them an appeal.
         b.   In case of any disturbances or disorderly conduct, the presiding
officer shall have the power to require the chamber to be cleared.
      2.   Members:
         a.   Aldermen shall be seated in the Council Chambers numerically by
ward. While the presiding officer is putting the question, no member shall walk
across or out of the Council Chamber.
         b.   Every member, previous to his speaking, making a motion or
seconding the same, shall address himself to the presiding officer and say "Mr.
Mayor" and shall not proceed with his remarks until recognized and named by the
Chair. He shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding
personalities and refraining from impugning the motives of any other member's
argument or vote.
         c.   When two (2) or more members address the Chair at the same time,
the presiding officer shall name the member who is first to speak. (Ord. O-09-
91, 4-15-1991; amd. Ord. O-26-96, 4-1-1996)
   E.   Rules Regarding Public Participation At Meetings: (Rep. by Ord. O-15-
97, 5-19-1997)
   F.   Presentation Of New Business, Ordinances Or Resolutions And Deferment:
Every item of new business, ordinances or resolutions shall be reduced to
writing and presented to the city council. No item of new business, ordinance
or resolution shall be considered unless the item of new business, ordinance or
resolution has been placed upon the agenda for the meeting of the city council
except upon the passage of a motion to suspend the rules by two-thirds (2/3) of
the corporate authorities. The presiding officer shall assign new business,
ordinances and resolutions when presented to a committee of the city council
for recommendation or direct the city clerk to place the item on the agenda for
the next meeting of the city council.
   G.   Debate:
      1.   No member shall speak more than once on the same question, except by
unanimous consent, and then not until every other member desiring to speak
shall have had an opportunity to do so; provided, however, that the proponent
of the matter under consideration or the chairman of the committee whose report
is under consideration, as the case may be, shall have the right to open and
close debate.
      2.   No member shall speak longer than ten (10) minutes at any one time,
except by consent of the Council, and in closing debate on any question, as
above provided, the speaker shall be limited to five (5) minutes, except by
special consent of the Council.
      3.   While a member is speaking, no member shall hold any private
discussion or pass between the speaker and the chair.
   H.   Call of Member to Order: A member, when called to order by the chair,
shall thereupon discontinue speaking and take his seat, and the order of ruling
the chair shall be binding and conclusive, subject only to the right of appeal.
   I.   Appeals from Decisions of the Chair: Any member may appeal to the
Council from a ruling of the chair and, if the appeal is seconded, the member
making the appeal may briefly state his reason for the same, and the chair may
briefly explain his ruling, but there shall be no debate on the appeal, and no
other member shall participate in the discussion. The chair shall then put the
question "Shall the decision of the chair be sustained?" If a majority of the
members present vote "No", the decision of the chair shall be overruled;
otherwise, it shall be sustained.
   J.   Question of Personal Privilege: The right of a member to address the
Council on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which
his integrity, character or motives are assailed, questioned or impugned.
   K.   Voting: Every member who shall be present when a question is stated
from the chair shall vote thereon or abstain at the time that his name is first
called. A failure to vote shall be counted as an abstention and will count in
the manner established by law. Any member required to abstain on a matter due
to conflict of interest shall so declare.
   L.   Special Order of Business: Any matter before the Council may be set
down as a special order of business at a time certain if two-thirds (2/3) of
corporate authorities present vote in the affirmative, but not otherwise.
   M.   Seconding of Motions Required; Written Motions, Reading of Motions,
Resolutions, Ordinances, Minutes and Correspondence:
      1.   No motion shall be put or debated in the Council unless it be
seconded; provided, however, that neither the maker nor seconder of a motion
shall be required to vote in favor of that motion. When a motion is seconded,
it shall be stated by the presiding officer before debate, and every motion in
the Council, except motions of procedure, shall be reduced to writing, if
required by a member, and the member who proposed the motion shall be entitled
to the floor.
      2.   No resolution, ordinance or minutes need be read prior to
consideration, but such items may be read in response to a motion passed
seeking such reading.
      3.   Copies of correspondence received by the Clerk or Mayor shall be
distributed before the meeting to all members of the corporate authorities.
Correspondence received by Municipal officials need not be read in full at
Council meetings unless pertinent to a matter before discussion. Correspondence
received may be summarized at Council meetings.
   N.   Withdrawal of Motions: If the maker of the motion desires to withdraw
the motion, he may do so. The seconder of the motion may renew the motion as
its maker and seek a new seconder. If the seconder of a motion wishes to
withdraw his second, he may do so. The maker of the motion may seek an
additional seconder before the motion is ruled out of order for lack of a
second. Neither the maker nor seconder of a motion may withdraw the motion,
except with the consent of a majority of the Council, once discussion on the
motion has ceased.
   O.   Division of Questions: If any questions under consideration contain
several distinct propositions, the Council, by a majority vote of the members
present, may divide such question.
   P.   Record of Motions: In all cases where a resolution of motion is entered
in the journal, the name of the member moving and seconding the same shall be
entered.
   Q.   Votes:
      1.   Taking and Entering the Votes; Explanation of the Votes: The "yeas"
and "nays" upon any question shall be taken and entered in the journal. When
the Clerk has commenced to call the roll of the Council for the taking of a
vote by "yeas" and "nays", all debate on the question before the Council shall
be deemed concluded, and during the taking of the vote, a member shall be
permitted briefly to explain his vote and shall respond to the calling of his
name by the Clerk by answering "yea" or "nay" or "abstain", as the case may be.
      2.   Announcement and Changes of Votes: The result of all votes by "yeas"
and "nays" shall not be announced by the Clerk but shall be handed by him to
the Mayor for announcement, and no vote shall be changed after the tally list
has passed from the hands of the Clerk.
   R.   Precedence of Motions: The following chart sets out commonly used
motions in the order of their precedence as determined by "Robert's Rules of
Order Revised". The main or principal motion is at the bottom in rank. The
other motions may be made while the main motion is pending and must be dealt
with before the main motion. They are arranged according to rank, the highest
at the top of the list. Incidental motions, however, have no rank among
themselves, yet take precedence over subsidiary motions. When any one motion is
immediately pending, the motions above it on the list are in order and those
below are out of order.
      1.   Privileged Motions:
      Undebatable:
      Fix Time to Adjourn
      Adjourn
      Take Recess
      Question of Privilege
      2.   Incidental Motions:
      Undebatable:
      Division of Assembly
      Division of a Question
      Filling Blanks
      Objection
      Parliamentary Inquiry
      Point of Information
      Point of Order
      Suspend the Rules (requires a
        2/3 vote)
      Withdraw a Motion
      Debatable:
      Appeal
      3.   Subsidiary Motions:
      Undebatable:
      Lay on the Table
      The Previous Question (Close
      Debate - requires a 2/3 vote)
      Limit or Extend Debate
      Debatable:
      Postpone to a Definite Time
      Refer to a Committee
      Amend the Amendment
      Amendment
      Postpone Indefinitely
      Main or Principal Motion
      4.   Miscellaneous Motions:
      Take from Table (undebatable)
      Rescind (debatable; requires 2/3
       vote without notice, requires
       majority vote with notice)
      Reconsider (debatable)
      Ratify (debatable)
      5.   Motion to Refer: A motion to refer to a standing committee shall
take a precedence over a similar motion to refer to a special committee.
      6.   Motion to Amend:
         a.   A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to
amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained.
         b.   An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in
order, but an amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in order.
         c.   On an amendment to "strike out and insert" the paragraph to be
amended shall first be read as it stands, then the word proposed to be stricken
out, then those to be inserted and finally, the paragraph as it will stand if
so amended shall be read.
         d.   An amendment to the main question or other pending question may
be referred to a committee, and neither the main question nor such other
pending question shall be affected thereby.
      7.   Filling of Blanks: When a blank is to be filled and different sums
or times proposed, the question shall be taken first on the least sum or the
longest time.
      8.   Motion to Substitute: A substitute for any original proposition
under debate or for any pending amendment to such proposition may be
entertained and, if accepted by the Council by vote, shall entirely supersede
such original proposition or amendment, as the case may be.
   S.   Reconsideration:
      1.   A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time during the same
meeting or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A motion for
reconsideration, once having been made and decided in the negative, shall not
be renewed, nor shall a motion to reconsider be reconsidered. No motion to
reconsider the approval or denial of the recommendation of an advisory body
required to hold public hearings shall be entertained except at the same
meeting at which the original action was taken or after the matter has been
referred to the advisory body for a further hearing and recommendation. Where a
motion to reconsider such a motion is made at the same meeting as the passage
of the original motion, it may be tabled to a later date certain.
      2.   A motion to reconsider must be made by a member who voted on the
prevailing side of the question to be reconsidered, unless otherwise provided
by law; provided, however, that where a motion has received a majority vote in
the affirmative but is declared lost solely on the ground that a greater number
of affirmative votes are required by statute for the passage or adoption of
such motion, then, in such case, a motion to reconsider may be made only by
those who voted in the affirmative on such question. A motion to reconsider
need not be seconded. (Ord. O-09-91, 4-15-91)
   T.   Standing Committees:
      1.   Committees Established: The following shall be the standing
committees of the Council:
   Committee on Finances/Rules
   Committee on Public Works
   Committee on Public Safety
   Committee on Licensing and
    Inspectional Services
   (Ord. O-14-93, 5-17-93)
      2.   Membership: All standing committees shall consist of five (5)
members, to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. (Ord. O-27-95, 6-5-95)
      3.   Reports: Any report of a committee shall be deferred for final
action thereon to the next regular meeting of the City Council after the report
is made, except upon the request of any two (2) members of the Council. (Ord.
O-23-91, 8-5-91)
   U.   Rules of Committees:
      1.   Officers: The chairman of each committee shall be named by the
Mayor. A vice chairman and secretary of each committee shall be selected by the
committee.
      2.   Duties Of Vice Chairman: The duties of the vice chairman shall be to
preside over committee meetings and present committee reports in the absence of
the chairman.
      3.   Duties Of Secretary: The duties of the secretary shall be to keep a
record of meetings, prepare minutes of each meeting and deliver the same to the
City Clerk within five (5) working days after a meeting is adjourned. (Ord. O-
09-91, 4-15-1991)
      4.   Minutes: Within two (2) working days after receipt of the minutes,
the City Clerk shall deliver a copy thereof to the Mayor and each member of the
City Council. (Ord. O-09-91, 4-15-1991; 1992 Code)
      5.   Call And Notice Of Meetings:
         a.   Each committee may establish a regular meeting schedule which
shall be posted on the bulletin board in the lobby of City Hall.
         b.   For each committee which does not establish a regular meeting
schedule and for all special meetings, the following shall govern:
            (1)   A meeting may be called by the chairman or any two (2)
members of a standing committee by notifying the City Clerk no later than
seventy two (72) hours prior thereto; (Ord. O-68-95, 12-18-1995)
            (2)   No later than forty eight (48) hours prior to a meeting, the
City Clerk shall post a notice of the same on the bulletin board in the lobby
of the City Hall and cause written notice to be served upon the Mayor and all
members of the City Council and to any other person or entity entitled to such
notice. (Ord. O-04-95, 2-6-1995)
         c.   All committee meetings shall be held at times which are
reasonably convenient for both the public and members of the Council.
         d.   All notices of committee meetings shall specify the date, time,
place and agenda.
      6.   Committees With No Regular Meetings: When the Mayor or the City
Council refers a matter or matters to a committee which has not established a
regular meeting schedule, said committee shall meet as soon as practical to
consider the matter or matters referred.
      7.   Reports: A committee shall make its report to the City Council at
the next meeting following the meeting of the City Council at which said report
is approved by the committee. Any report of a committee shall be deferred for
final action thereon to the next regular meeting of the City Council after the
report is made, upon the request of any two (2) members of the Council.
      8.   Committee Action: Committee action shall consist of:
         a.   Recommend to the City Council for approval or denial of a
proposal;
         b.   Report and recommend to the Mayor and/or City Council of action
or nonaction;
         c.   Recommend to Mayor and/or City Council further study; or
         d.   Recommend to Mayor referral to another committee. (Ord. O-09-91,
4-15-1991)
      9.   Establishment Of Rules: Each committee may adopt rules and/or
regulations which shall apply only to its committee and the operation thereof.
The chairman of each committee shall be responsible for the enforcement of said
rules and/or regulations. (Ord. O-09-95, 5-1-1995)
      10.   Attendance:
         a.   Notification Of Absence: Any member of the City Council appointed
to a standing committee shall notify the chairman of said committee of his or
her expected absence. In case of the chairman's expected absence, the chairman
shall notify the vice-chairman of such standing committee.
         b.   Reasons For Absence: The absent committee member shall provide a
legitimate reason for his or her absence in order to be granted an excused
absence. A legitimate reason for an excused absence shall be defined as:
            (1)   Illness of the committee member or of his/her family;
            (2)   Death in the committee member's family; or
            (3)   Vacation.
All absences, excused or otherwise, shall be made part of the standing
committee report.
         c.   Penalty:
            (1)   Failure to make proper notification of an expected absence or
failure to provide a legitimate reason for an excused absence at any required
committee meeting shall result in such member being fined in an amount of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) at the next regular business meeting following the
unexcused absence, upon a majority vote of the corporate authorities of the
City.
            (2)   Effective May 1, 1997, failure to make proper notification of
an expected absence or failure to provide a legitimate reason for an excused
absence at any required committee meeting shall result in such member
forfeiting one-twenty- sixth (1/26) of his or her annual appropriated
compensation, at the next regular business meeting following the unexcused
absence, upon a majority vote of the corporate authorities of the City. (Ord.
O-46-96, 11-18-1996)
   V.   The Journal: The Clerk shall keep the journal of the proceedings of the
Council after each meeting of the Council. The Clerk shall supply to each
member a typewritten copy of the proceedings (minutes) within four (4) business
days after each meeting of the Council. The journal shall be approved
periodically. The Clerk's draft of the journal of proceedings may be amended to
reflect correctly the view of the legislative body as to the events which
occurred.
   W.   Ordinances:
      1.   Style Of Ordinances: The style of all ordinances shall be "BE IT
ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF NORTHLAKE" as is provided by
statute.
      2.   "Yea" And "Nay" Vote: The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the
passage of all ordinances and on all propositions to create any liability
against the city or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money and in
all other cases at the request of any member of the council; such vote shall be
entered on the journal of the proceedings, as is provided by statute.
      3.   Approval Or Veto: All ordinances of whatever kind and any resolution
or motion creating any liability against a municipality or providing for the
expenditure or appropriation of its money shall be deposited with the city
clerk, and if the mayor approves thereof, he shall sign the same, and such as
he shall not approve, he shall return to the council with his objections
thereto in writing at the next regular meeting occurring not less than five (5)
days after the passage thereof. Such veto may extend to any one or more items
or appropriations contained in any ordinance making an appropriation or to the
entire ordinance, and in case the veto only extends to a part of such
ordinance, the residue thereof shall take effect and be in force. But in case
the mayor shall fail to return any ordinance with his objections thereto by the
time aforesaid, he shall be deemed to have approved such ordinances, and the
same shall take effect accordingly.
Upon the return of any ordinance by the mayor, the vote by which the same was
passed may be reconsidered by the council at its next regular meeting after the
return of the veto, and if, after such reconsideration, two-thirds (2/3) of all
the members elected to the council shall agree by yeas and nays to pass the
same, it shall go into effect, notwithstanding that the mayor may refuse to
approve thereof.
      4.   Record Of Ordinances: The clerk shall keep a record of all
ordinances passed in an ordinance book for such purpose.
      5.   Publication: All ordinances imposing any penalty for a violation
thereof or making any appropriation shall be published as required by statutes
so provided by the state.
      6.   Time Of Taking Effect: No ordinance which must be published to
comply with the foregoing subsection shall go into effect until ten (10) days
after it is so published or such other time as the statutes of the state so
provide, unless a statement of urgency of the ordinance is contained in it, and
it achieves passage by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of the corporate
authorities then holding office. In all other cases, the ordinances shall go
into effect upon the passage thereof, as provided by statute, even though the
operation of the ordinance may not take effect until a later date.
   X.   Adoption Of "Robert's Rules Of Order Revised": The rules of
parliamentary practice contained in the latest published edition of "Robert's
Rules Of Order Revised" shall govern the council in all cases to which they are
applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the special rules of
this council or the statutes or laws of the state of Illinois.
   Y.   Temporary Suspension Of Rules; Amendment Of Rules: These rules may be
temporarily suspended, repealed, altered or amended by a two-thirds (2/3) vote
of the corporate authorities then holding office. (Ord. O-09-91, 4-15-1991)
   Z.   Censure And Expulsion Of Members:
      1.   Censure Of Members; Expulsion Of Members: Any member acting or
appearing in a lewd or disgraceful manner or who uses opprobrious, obscene or
insulting language to or about any member of the council or who does not obey
the order of the chair shall be, on motion, censured by a majority vote of the
corporate authorities and, in addition, may be fined not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each occurrence. With the concurrence of the majority of
the corporate authorities, the council may expel an alderman but not a second
time for the same offense. (Ord. O-26-96, 4-1-1996)
      2.   Sergeant At Arms: The chief of police shall act as sergeant at arms
at all city council meetings; shall have thorough knowledge of the city council
rules of order and procedure; and be charged with the duty of controlling order
during such meetings in accordance with this section. (Ord. O-26-96, 4-1-1996;
amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
 
Notes
1 2. 5 ILCS 120/1 - 120/6.
2 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 7
CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-7-1: Election; Term Of Office
1-7-2: Bond And Salary
1-7-3: Duties
1-7-4: Deputy Clerk
1-7-1: ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE:
The City Clerk shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term and until
his successor is appointed and qualified as provided by statute 1 . (Ord. O-23-
79, 11-20-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-95.
1-7-2: BOND AND SALARY:
   A.   Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the City Clerk
shall execute a surety company bond 1  in the amount of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties.
   B.   Salary: The City Clerk shall devote as much time as necessary to
perform the functions of his and/or her office and shall receive an annual
salary of sixteen thousand five hundred dollars ($16,500.00). (Ord. O-23-79,
11-20-1979; amd. 1992 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. See section
  1-10-2 of this title.
1-7-3: DUTIES:
The City Clerk shall:
   A.   Signature Required: Seal and attest all contracts of the City and all
licenses, permits and other such documents as shall require this formality.
   B.   Accounts Kept; Monies Deposited:
      1.   Keep accounts showing all money received by him or her on behalf of
the City and the source and disposition thereof and such other accounts as may
be required by statute or ordinance. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
      2.   Turn over all money received by him or her on behalf of the City to
the Finance Director promptly on receipt of the same, and with such money, give
a statement as to the source thereof. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-
24-2018, 11-19-2018)
   C.   Records, Documents And Bonds Kept; Index:
      1.   In addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the
Clerk is required by statute to keep, keep a register of all licenses and
permits issued and the payments thereon, a register showing all of the officers
and regular employees of the City and such other records as may be required by
the City Council.
      2.   Be the custodian of all documents belonging to the City which are
not specifically assigned to the custody of some other officer of the City by
the Mayor or Council and be the custodian of all bonds required to be filed
with the City.
      3.   Keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records kept
by him so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had.
   D.   Custodian Of City Seal: Be the custodian of the City Seal 1  and affix
its impression on documents whenever this is required. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-
1979)
   E.   Additional Duties: In addition to the duties herein provided, perform
such duties and functions as may be required by statute or ordinance. (1976
Code § 2-4-9)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-13-5 of this title.
1-7-4: DEPUTY CLERK:
When authorized by the Corporate Authorities, the City Clerk shall have the
power to appoint one Deputy Clerk with powers and duties established as
provided by statute. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. 1992 Code)
CHAPTER 8
CITY TREASURER
(Rep. by Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
CHAPTER 9
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-9-1: Terms Of Office
1-9-2: Oath And Bond
1-9-3: Vacancies; Failure To Attend Meetings
1-9-4: Powers And Duties
1-9-5: Acts By Deputy Or Designee
1-9-6: Fingerprinting
1-9-7: Inspection Of Records
1-9-8: Official Misconduct
1-9-9: Impersonating Or Interfering With City Officers
1-9-10: Reimbursement Of Expenses
1-9-1: TERMS OF OFFICE:
   A.   Elected Officials; Commencement Of Terms: The terms of all elected
Municipal officers shall commence May 1 following the election at which such
officers were elected. (Ord. O-14-97, 5-19-1997)
   B.   Appointive Officers:
      1.   All officers of the City appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council, shall hold their offices for the terms as provided
by ordinances creating the positions or until their successors are appointed
and qualified. (1976 Code §
2-1-3; amd. 1992 Code)
      2.   Every officer of the City appointed by the Mayor, with the consent
of the City Council, to a position for which no term of office is prescribed by
this Code shall hold office during the term of the Mayor or until his successor
is appointed and qualified. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
1-9-2: OATH AND BOND:
   A.   Oath Of Office: Every officer of the City shall, before entering upon
the duties of his office, take the oath prescribed by statute. (1976 Code §
2-1-4)
   B.   Bond: Every officer shall give, before entering upon the duties of his
office, a surety company bond 1  as may be provided for by statute or
determined by the City Council by ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of his office or position. (1976 Code §
2-1-5)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-10-2 of this title.
1-9-3: VACANCIES; FAILURE TO ATTEND MEETINGS:
In all offices to which appointments are made by the Mayor, a vacancy shall
exist when the appointee fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular
scheduled meetings of the office, commission or other organization to which
such office is an integral part thereof, without good cause. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-
20-1979)
1-9-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Monies Received: Every officer of the City shall, at least once each
day, turn over all monies received by him in his official capacity to the Clerk
with a statement showing the source from which the same was received. (1976
Code § 2-1-10)
   B.   Books And Records To Successor: Every officer of the City, upon the
termination of his office for any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to his
successor all books and records which may be the property of the City. If no
successor has been appointed within one week after the termination of office,
such property shall be delivered to the Clerk or to the Finance Director. (1976
Code § 2-1-9; amd. Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
   C.   Conservators Of The Peace: The Mayor and all police officers of the
City are conservators of the peace with such powers and authority as may be
provided by statute. No other elected official, appointed official or employee
of the City shall be a conservator of the peace as defined by statute. (Ord. O-
26-2003, 11-17-2003)
1-9-5: ACTS BY DEPUTY OR DESIGNEE:
Whenever a power is granted to or a duty is imposed upon a public officer or
employee, the power may be performed by any authorized deputy or designee or by
any person authorized pursuant to law or ordinances, unless this Code expressly
provides otherwise. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
1-9-6: FINGERPRINTING:
Each employee of the City shall, as soon as practicable after or before his
employment, appear at the Police Department for fingerprinting. The Chief of
Police shall fully process such fingerprints and shall fully report all
findings therefrom to the City Council. (1976 Code § 2-1-7; amd. 1992 Code;
Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
1-9-7: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
All records kept by any officers of the City shall be open to inspection by the
Mayor or any member of the City Council at reasonable times, whether or not
such records are required to be kept by statute or ordinance. (1976 Code § 2-1-
11; amd. 1992 Code)
1-9-8: OFFICIAL MISCONDUCT 1 :
A public officer or employee commits misconduct when, in his official capacity,
he commits any of the following acts:
   A.   Intentionally or recklessly fails to perform any mandatory duty as
required by law;
   B.   Knowingly performs an act which he knows is forbidden by law to
perform;
   C.   With intent to obtain a personal advantage for himself or another, he
performs an act in excess of his lawful authority; or
   D.   Solicits or knowingly accepts for the performance of any act a fee or
reward which he knows is not authorized by law.
A public officer or employee convicted of violating any provision of this
section forfeits his office of employment. In addition, he shall be fined in an
amount not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned in a penal
institution other than the penitentiary for a term not to exceed six (6) months
or both. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  5-6-1-10A of this Code.
1-9-9: IMPERSONATING OR INTERFERING WITH CITY OFFICERS 1 :
No person shall falsely represent himself to be an officer of the City or
shall, without being duly authorized, exercise or attempt to exercise any of
the duties, functions or powers of a City officer or shall hinder, obstruct,
resist or otherwise interfere with any City officer in the discharge of his
official duties.
Persons convicted of impersonating or interfering with City officers shall be
fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment
in a penal institution other than the penitentiary for a term not to exceed six
(6) months. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
 
Notes
1 2. See also subsection 5-1-9B of this Code.
1-9-10: REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES:
   A.   Officials and employees of the City shall be reimbursed for reasonable
room, food, transportation and registration expenses while in actual attendance
at conventions, seminars and conferences and similar functions attended by them
in connection with Municipal business or for work-related travel assignments
that have been approved by the Mayor or attended outside of the normal work
schedule. Any official or employee receiving reimbursement for expenses shall
submit dated receipts as evidence of expenses incurred prior to reimbursement.
All conventions, seminars and conferences or work-related travel in excess of
two hundred fifty (250) miles shall require prior approval of the Finance and
Rules Committee. Emergency approval of work related travel may be made by the
Mayor with notice to the Finance and Rules Committee as soon as practicable.
Should airfare be required, the least expensive available coach class fare
shall apply. Should a nonrefundable fare be canceled without legitimate reason
as determined by the Finance and Rules Committee, the City official or employee
shall be required to reimburse the City for such expenses.
Whenever possible, a City car from the City vehicle pool shall be made
available to the City official or employee requesting such in connection with
City business. When using a City vehicle, receipted gasoline expenses shall be
reimbursed.
When a City official or employee uses a private vehicle for City-related
travel, transportation reimbursement shall be at the current applicable mileage
reimbursement rate approved by the IRS, based on odometer readings for the
beginning and ending of the travel.
All work-related travel plans, registrations, etc., shall be conducted by the
Director of Finance or his designee. The Director of Finance or his designee
shall seek governmental rates when making travel arrangements. In the event
that no governmental rates can be obtained, then the most reasonable rate
available shall be reimbursable. Should a City official or employee desire an
upgrade, they shall be responsible for the difference in cost. Where there is a
difference in the single and double room rates, any officer or employee
desiring a double room to accommodate a spouse or companion shall be
responsible for the difference in the rate.
Acceptable expenses shall include: food, transportation between conference,
seminar, and convention sites or different sites required for City business,
tips and parking expenses.
The foregoing expenses shall be submitted to the Finance and Rules Committee
for approval. Upon receipt of reimbursement vouchers, the Finance and Rules
Committee may approve said reimbursements and authorize the Budget Director to
issue payment of incurred expenses. The issuance of drafts for an amount of
anticipated expenses prior to such officers and employees actual attendance of
such conventions, seminar, conferences or travel for work-related business is
prohibited unless the Finance and Rules Committee authorizes such payment.
However, if the issued draft received exceeds the actual expenses incurred,
such officers and employees shall reimburse the City for any monies received
but not used for proper expenses, as evidenced by dated receipts for expenses
incurred.
   B.   No reimbursements shall be allowed for the following expenses:
      1.   Alcoholic beverages.
      2.   Golf outings and other social events.
      3.   Postage and printing of newsletters.
      4.   Mileage incurred within the City.
      5.   Telephone expenses.
      6.   Any expense incurred by the spouse or other family member of any
City official or employee.
      7.   Any expense incurred in connection with an improvement to private
property. (Ord. O-41-98, 9-21-1998)
ARTICLE A. CITY COLLECTOR
SECTION:
1-9A-1: Office Created; Appointment
1-9A-2: Duties
1-9A-3: Salary
1-9A-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby established in the City the office of the City Collector, who
shall be appointed pursuant to Illinois Revised Statutes, chapter 24, paragraph
3-7-1, 3-7-2. 1  (1992 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  1-10-1B2a(7) for Budget Officer acting as City Collector.
1-9A-2: DUTIES:
Duties: The City Collector shall perform those duties enumerated in Illinois
Revised Statutes, chapter 24, paragraphs 3-11-25, 3-11-26 and 3-11-27 and such
other duties and functions as may be required by statute or ordinance or, from
time to time, directed by the City Council. (1992 Code)
1-9A-3: SALARY:
The City Collector shall receive such annual salary as may be fixed in the City
budget by the City Council, payable bi-weekly. (1992 Code)
ARTICLE B. LEGAL ADVISORS
SECTION:
1-9B-1: City Attorney
1-9B-2: City Prosecutor
1-9B-1: CITY ATTORNEY:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of City
Attorney, an executive office of the City. The City Attorney shall be appointed
by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council. (1976 Code §
2-7-1; 1992 Code)
   B.   Duties: The City Attorney shall:
      1.   Legal Advisor of City: Be the legal advisor of the City and shall
tender advice on all legal questions affecting the City whenever requested to
do so by any City official. Upon request by the Mayor or by the City Council,
he shall reduce any such opinion to writing. (1976 Code §2-7-5)
      2.   Judgments: See to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees
rendered or entered in favor of the City and of all similar interlocutory
orders. (1976 Code §
2-7-4)
      3.   Draft Documents: Except as may be otherwise directed by the City
Council, draft or supervise the drafting of any contract, lease or other
document or instrument to which the City may be a party. Upon request by the
City Council, he shall draft ordinances covering any subject within the power
of the City. (1976 Code §2-7-6)
      4.   Suits and Actions: Prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions
at law or equity to which the City may be a party or in which it may be
interested or which may be brought against or by any officer of the City on
behalf of the City or in the capacity of such persons as an officer of the
City. He shall be paid on an hourly fee basis in addition to his annual salary
or as provided by contract for services performed in prosecuting or defending
any suits or actions at law or in equity. Appointment of a City Attorney shall
not prevent the City from engaging the services of additional counsel. (1976
Code §
2-7-3; 1992 Code)
1-9B-2:CITY PROSECUTOR:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of City
Prosecutor, an executive office of the City. The City Prosecutor shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with advice and consent of the City Council. (1976 Code
§
2-7-2; 1992 Code)
   B.   Duties: The City Prosecutor shall prosecute all ordinance violations
and such traffic violations as may be delegated to him.
   C.   Salary: The City Prosecutor shall be paid a monthly fee as set by
ordinance from time to time. (1976 Code §
2-7-3; 1992 Code)
ARTICLE C. DEPARTMENTS OF PUBLIC WORKS AND BUILDING AND INSPECTIONAL SERVICES
SECTION:
1-9C-1: Creation Of Departments
1-9C-2: Offices Established; Appointment
1-9C-3: Superintendent Of Public Works
1-9C-4: Chief Building Official
1-9C-1: CREATION OF DEPARTMENTS:
The Department of Public Works and the Department of Building and Inspectional
Services are hereby established. (Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
1-9C-2: OFFICES ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT:
The exempt offices of Chief Building Official, Superintendent of Public Works,
and Deputy Superintendent of Public Works and Director of Operations are hereby
established. These officers shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council. The salaries of these positions shall be
established by the budget or other ordinance. The Superintendent of Public
Works shall be responsible for the general management and administration of the
Department of Public Works. The Deputy Superintendent of Public Works shall be
subordinance to the Superintendent of Public Works and shall have such
responsibilities as are assigned by the Superintendent of Public Works. The
Director of Operations shall be responsible for supervising the daily
operations of the Department of Public Works and shall perform such other
duties as are assigned by the Superintendent of Public Works. The Chief
Building Official shall be responsible for the general management of the
Department of Building and inspectional Services. (Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997,
eff. 12-1-1997; amd. Ord. O-01-2024, 3-4-2024)
1-9C-3: SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
   A.   Duties: The duties of the Superintendent of Public Works shall include,
but shall not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Director Of Water Works System: The Superintendent of Public Works
shall be Director of the Water Works System and shall have charge of the
operation thereof.
      2.   Sewers And Drains: All sewers and drains in any public street or
other place belonging to the City shall be under the care of the Superintendent
of Public Works, who shall be charged with the repair and operation of the
same.
      3.   Maintenance And Repair Of Public Ways And Property: The
Superintendent of Public Works shall have charge of the repair, care and
maintenance of all public streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks and other public
places in the City.
      4.   Custodian Of Public Property: All public property not assigned by
ordinance to some other officer shall be in the custody of the Superintendent
of Public Works, and he/she shall have charge of the care, maintenance and
repair of such property and buildings. (Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-
1997)
1-9C-4: CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL:
   A.   Duties: The duties of the Chief Building Official shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
      1.   The Chief Building Official shall act as conservator of the peace
with police powers for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this Code
relating to the licensing and regulation of businesses and occupations and
health, sanitation and safety.
      2.   The Chief Building Official shall be the enforcing officer of the
following Titles of this Code:
Title 3, Business and License Regulations
Title 4, Public Health and Safety
Title 7, Public Ways and Property
Title 8, Building Regulations
Title 11, Land Subdivisions
Title 12, Flood Control
The Chief Building Official shall take all necessary and appropriate action to
compel compliance with all such ordinances and regulations. (Ord. O-36-97, 8-
18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
ARTICLE D. EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT TO THE MAYOR
SECTION:
1-9D-1: Office Established; Appointment
1-9D-2: Duties
1-9D-1: OFFICE ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT:
The position of Executive Assistant to the Mayor is hereby established, which
shall be an exempt position due to its confidential nature. The Executive
Assistant to the Mayor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council. The salary of the Executive Assistant to the Mayor
shall be established by the budget or other ordinance. (Ord. O-26-97, 7-7-1997)
1-9D-2: DUTIES:
The Executive Assistant to the Mayor shall perform such duties as assigned from
time to time by the Mayor. (Ord. O-26-97, 7-7-1997)
ARTICLE E. PERSONNEL POLICY
(Rep. by Ord. O-26-2000, 8-21-2000)
ARTICLE F. ETHICS ACT
SECTION:
1-9F-1: Definitions
1-9F-2: Prohibited Political Activities
1-9F-3: Gift Ban
1-9F-4: Penalties
1-9F-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR EFFECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state or local public office in a political organization, or
the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice presidential
electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the support or
opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, b) relating
to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the
person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy
in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a
regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 1 .
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
3 of the Illinois public labor relations act 2 .
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited
to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as
a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this article, does
not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time,
compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence.
With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated
time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is
executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work
time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of
the election code 3 .
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the city of Northlake, whether on a full time or
part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the
direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how
the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The city of Northlake.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or
other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a)
compensation for employment, b) service credit towards pension benefits, and c)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by
statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code 4 , but only with regard to those activities
that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
   A.   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting,
political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
   B.   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting or other political event.
   C.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   D.   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   E.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   F.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   G.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   H.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   I.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   J.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
   K.   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   L.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   M.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against
any referendum question.
   N.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   O.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   A.   Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer or 2) by an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   B.   Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer or 2) with
an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   C.   Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee,
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
   D.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. O-08-
2004, 4-5-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
2 2. 5 ILCS 315/3.
3 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
4 2. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
1-9F-2: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the city of
Northlake in connection with any prohibited political activity.
   B.   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as
part of that officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment,
or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal
time off).
   C.   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   D.   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this article.
   E.   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or 2) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. O-08-2004, 4-5-
2004)
1-9F-3: GIFT BAN:
   A.   Except as permitted by this section, no officer or employee, and no
spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee
(collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit
or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is
otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall
intentionally offer to make a gift that violates this section.
   B.   This section is not applicable to the following:
      1.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public.
      2.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
      3.   Any: a) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code
or b) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
      4.   Educational materials and missions.
      5.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
      6.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
      7.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: a) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; b)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and c) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees or their spouses or immediate
family members.
      8.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: a) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or b) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food
or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
      9.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
      10.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of
this act, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental" means any
gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
      11.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
      12.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other.
   C.   An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member
living with the officer or employee, does not violate this article if the
recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited
source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an
appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3)
of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered,
or succeeded. (Ord. O-08-2004, 4-5-2004)
1-9F-4: PENALTIES:
   A.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-9F-2 of this article may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three
hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   B.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-9F-3 of this article is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one
thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).
   C.   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation
of any provision of this article to the local enforcement authorities, the
state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a
term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a
period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined
in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   D.   A violation of section
1-9F-2 of this article shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney
for the city of Northlake by filing in the circuit court an information, or
sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and
conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the
establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
   E.   A violation of section
1-9F-3 of this article may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an
attorney for the city of Northlake.
   F.   In additional to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of section
1-9F-2 or
1-9F-3 of this article is subject to discipline or discharge. (Ord. O-08-2004,
4-5-2004)
ARTICLE G. HARASSMENT IN THE WORKPLACE POLICY
SECTION:
1-9G-1: Purpose
1-9G-2: Policy
1-9G-3: Prohibited Activity
1-9G-4: Employee's Responsibilities
1-9G-5: Complaint Procedures
1-9G-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this policy is to maintain a healthy work environment and to
provide procedures for reporting, investigation and resolution of complaints of
harassment, sexual or otherwise. (Ord. 0-42-93, 12-6-93)
1-9G-2: POLICY:
It is the policy of the City that all employees have the right to work in an
environment free of all forms of harassment. The City does not condone, and
will not tolerate, any harassment of any kind. Therefore, the City shall take
direct and immediate action to prevent such behavior, and to remedy all
reported or unreported instances of harassment, which comes to the attention of
the City, be they sexual or otherwise. (Ord. 0-42-93, 12-6-93)
1-9G-3: PROHIBITED ACTIVITY:
   A.   No employee shall either explicitly or implicitly ridicule, mock,
deride or belittle any person.
   B.   Employees shall not make offensive or derogatory comments based on
race, color, sex, religion or national origin either directly or indirectly to
another person. Such harassment is a prohibited form of discrimination under
State and Federal employment law and is also considered misconduct subject to
disciplinary action by the City.
   C.   Sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests for
sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when:
      1.   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of employment; or
      2.   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an employee is used as
the basis for employment decisions affecting the employee; or
      3.   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with an employee's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment. (Ord. 0-42-93, 12-6-93)
1-9G-4: EMPLOYEE'S RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   The director of each department shall be responsible for preventing
acts of harassment. This responsibility includes:
      1.   Observing the unit work environment on a daily basis for signs that
harassment may be occurring;
      2.   Counseling all employees on the types of behavior prohibited, and
the City procedures for reporting and resolving complaints of harassment;
      3.   Stopping any observed acts that may be considered harassment, and
taking appropriate steps to intervene, whether or not the involved employees
are within his/her line of supervision; and
      4.   Taking immediate action to limit the work contact between two
employees where there has been a complaint of harassment, pending
investigation.
   B.   The director of each department has the responsibility to assist any
employee of the City, who comes to that director with a complaint of
harassment, in documenting and filing a complaint with the Internal
Investigation Board.
      1.   The Internal Investigation Board shall hereinafter be referred to as
the IIB 1 .
   C.   Each employee of the City is responsible for assisting in the
prevention of harassment through the following acts:
      1.   Refraining from participation in, or encouragement of actions that
could be perceived as harassment;
      2.   Reporting acts of harassment to a department head; and
      3.   Encouraging any employee, who confides that he/she is being
harassed, to report these acts to a department head.
   D.   Failure to take action to stop known harassment shall be grounds for
discipline. (Ord. 0-42-93, 12-6-93)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 2, Chapter 9 of this Code.
1-9G-5: COMPLAINT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Employees encountering harassment shall tell the person that their
actions are unwelcome and offensive. The employee shall document all incidents
of harassment in order to provide the fullest basis for investigation.
   B.   Any employee who believes that he/she is being harassed shall report
the incident(s) to his/her department head as soon as possible so that steps
may be taken to protect the employee from further harassment, and appropriate
investigative and disciplinary measures may be initiated. Where this is not
practical, the employee may instead file a complaint with the IIB.
      1.   The department head or other person to whom a complaint is reported
shall meet with the employee and document the incidents complained of, the
person(s) performing or participating in the harassment, and the dates on which
it occurred. (See attachment A, Complaint Form, on file in the office of the
City Clerk.)
      2.   The department head receiving the complaint shall expeditiously
deliver the complaint to the IIB.
   C.   The IIB shall be responsible for the investigation of any complaint
alleging harassment. (Ord. O-42-93, 12-6-1993)
      1.   The IIB shall immediately notify the chief of police if the
complaint contains evidence of criminal activity, such as battery, rape or
attempted rape. (Ord. O-42-93, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
      2.   The IIB shall include a determination whether other employees are
being harassed by the person, and whether other city employees participated in,
or encouraged the harassment.
      3.   The IIB shall inform the parties involved of the outcome of the
investigation.
      4.   A file of harassment complaints shall be maintained in a secure
location. The mayor and city council shall be provided with an annual summary
of these complaints.
   D.   There shall be no retaliation against any employee for filing a
harassment complaint, or assisting, testifying or participating in the
investigation of such a complaint.
   E.   Complainants or employees who disagree with the findings of the IIB may
file an appeal within five (5) days to the chairman of the finance/rules
committee. The chairman, after meeting and concurrence with the committee,
shall render a decision to the appeal within ten (10) days.
   F.   This policy does not preclude any employee from filing a complaint or
grievance with an appropriate outside agency. (Ord. O-42-93, 12-6-1993)
ARTICLE H. CITY EMPLOYEE DRUG TESTING POLICY
SECTION:
1-9H-1: Purpose
1-9H-2: Policy
1-9H-3: Definitions
1-9H-4: Drugs to be Tested for
1-9H-5: Procedures/Rules
1-9H-6: Applicant Testing General Standards
1-9H-7: Employee Drug Testing
1-9H-8: Supervisor/Department Director Training
1-9H-9: Laboratory Testing
1-9H-10: Consent
1-9H-11: Refusal to Consent
1-9H-12: Employee Assistance Program (EAP) Referral
1-9H-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this policy is as follows:
   A.   To provide all employees with notice of the provisions of the City of
Northlake Drug Testing Program.
   B.   To provide and maintain a safe, healthy working environment for all
City employees.
   C.   To safeguard the reputation of the City and its employees as good,
responsible citizens worthy of the trust of the people, businesses and agencies
for whom they provide services.
   D.   To reduce the incidence of accidental injury to person or property.
   E.   To reduce absenteeism, tardiness and poor job performance. (Ord. 0-17-
94, 6-6-94)
1-9H-2: POLICY:
   A.   It is the policy of the City that our mission of service to the
citizens of the City justifies maintenance of a drug-free work environment
through the use of a reasonable employee drug testing program. The public has a
right to expect that those who are employed to serve them are at all times both
physically and mentally prepared to assume these duties. There is sufficient
evidence to conclude that the use of controlled substances, and other forms of
drug abuse will seriously impair an employee's physical and mental health, and
thus, their job performance.
   B.   Where City employees participate in illegal drug use and drug activity,
the integrity of the City and public confidence in them are destroyed. This
confidence is further eroded by the potential for corruption created by drug
use.
   C.   Therefore, in order to ensure the integrity of the City and to preserve
public trust and confidence in a fit and drug-free work environment, the City
shall implement a drug testing program to detect prohibited drug use by City
employees. (Ord. 0-17-94, 6-6-94)
1-9H-3: DEFINITIONS:
ALCOHOL or ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage that may be legally sold and
consumed and that has an alcohol content in excess of one percent (1%) by
volume.
DRUG: Any substance (other than alcohol) capable of altering the mood,
perception, pain level or judgment of the individual consuming it.
ILLEGAL DRUG: Any drug or controlled substance, the sale or consumption of
which is illegal.
PRESCRIBED DRUG: Any substance prescribed for the individual consuming it by a
licensed medical practitioner.
REASONABLE SUSPICION: An articulable belief based on specific objective facts
and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts.
UNDER THE INFLUENCE: Having the presence of an illegal drug or alcohol at or
above the level of a positive test result, or having the presence of a
prescribed or over-the-counter drug in an amount contrary to the instructions
or prescription. (Ord. 0-17-94, 6-6-94)
1-9H-4: DRUGS TO BE TESTED FOR:
When drug and alcohol screening is required under the provisions of this
policy, a urinalysis test will be given to detect the presence of the following
drugs:
   A.   Alcohol (ethyl)
   B.   Amphetamines (e.g., speed)
   C.   Barbiturates (e.g., Amobarbital, Butabarbital, Phenobarbital,
Secobarbital)
   D.   Cocaine
   E.   Methaqualone (e.g., Quaalude)
   F.   Opiates (e.g., Codeine, Heroin, Morphine, Hydromorphone, Hydrocodone)
   G.   Phencyclidine (PCP)
   H.   THC (Marijuana)
   I.   Drugs specified on the State of Illinois Schedule of Controlled
Dangerous Substances. (Ord. 0-17-94, 6-6-94)
1-9H-5: PROCEDURES/RULES:
   A.   Prohibited Activity (Violations, Alcoholic Beverages): Violation of the
following rules will result in disciplinary action which may include
termination of employment and shall apply to all applicants, probationary,
part-time and full-time employees.
      1.   No alcoholic beverages will be brought on or consumed upon City
premises, in City vehicles, or employee's personal vehicle while engaged in
City business.
      2.   No alcoholic beverage will be consumed by City employees directly
before work or during periods within the work shift including lunch.
      3.   Drinking or being under the influence of an alcoholic beverage while
on duty is forbidden.
      4.   Any employee whose off-duty abuse of alcohol results in excessive
absenteeism or tardiness or is the cause of an accident or poor work
performance, shall satisfactorily participate in an alcohol abuse assistance or
rehabilitation program where appropriate. If the employee refuses or fails
rehabilitation the employee shall be subject to disciplinary action, including
termination of employment.
   B.   Prohibited Activity (Violations, Drug Abuse): The following rules shall
apply to all applicants, probationary, part-time and full-time employees, while
on- and off-duty:
      1.   No employee shall illegally possess any controlled substance. The
use of an illegal drug or controlled substance or the possession of same on- or
off-duty shall be subject to disciplinary action, including termination of
employment or where appropriate shall participate in a drug abuse assistance or
rehabilitation program. If the employee refuses or fails rehabilitation the
employee shall be subject to disciplinary action, including termination of
employment.
      2.   The sale, trade or delivery of illegal drugs or controlled
substances by a City employee to another person shall be subject to
disciplinary action, including termination of employment and shall be reported
to law enforcement authorities.
      3.   The occasional, "recreational", or "off-duty" use of illegal drugs
will not be excused by the City.
      4.   Failure of an employee to notify the City of any criminal drug
statute arrest for a violation occurring on or off the work place no later than
two (2) days after such arrest shall be grounds for termination of employment.
      5.   No employee shall ingest any controlled or other dangerous
substance, unless as prescribed by a licensed medical practitioner.
      6.   No employee shall ingest any prescribed or over-the-counter
medication in amounts beyond the recommended dosage.
      7.   Any employee who unintentionally ingests, or is made to ingest a
controlled substance shall immediately report the incident to their department
head so that appropriate medical steps may be taken to ensure the employee's
health and safety.
      8.   Any employee having a reasonable basis to believe that another
employee is illegally using, or is in possession of any controlled substance
shall immediately report the facts and circumstances to their department head.
(Ord. 0-17-94, 6-6-94)
1-9H-6: APPLICANT TESTING GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Applicants for a position with the City shall be required to take a
drug and alcohol test as a condition of employment during a pre-employment
medical examination.
   B.   Applicants shall be disqualified from further consideration for
employment under the following circumstances:
      1.   Refusal to submit to a required drug test; or
      2.   A confirmed positive drug test indicating drug use prohibited by
this policy. (Ord. 0-17-94, 6-6-94)
1-9H-7: EMPLOYEE DRUG TESTING:
City employees will be required to take drug tests as a condition of continued
employment in order to ascertain prohibited drug use, as provided below:
   A.   A department head may order an employee to take a drug test upon
documented reasonable suspicion that the employee is or has been using drugs. A
summary of the facts supporting the order shall be made available to the
employee prior to the actual test.
   B.   Reasonable suspicion shall be based on observable employee behavior
including without limitation:
      1.   The employee is directly observed using or in possession of drugs or
alcohol while on duty;
      2.   The employee displays a pattern of abnormal or erratic behavior; the
presence of the physical symptoms of drug or alcohol use (i.e., glassy or
bloodshot eyes, alcohol odor on breath, slurred speech, poor coordination and/
or reflexes);
      3.   The receipt of information provided by reliable and credible sources
and independently corroborated, that an employee is under the influence of
alcohol or drugs;
      4.   Following a serious or potentially serious accident or incident in
which safety precautions were violated or equipment or property was damaged
(including, without limitation, automobiles, trucks and other equipment) or
injury was sustained.
   C.   The department director shall document in detail the specific facts,
symptoms, or observations which formed the basis for their determination that
reasonable suspicion exists to warrant the testing of an employee. The facts
underlying the determination of reasonable suspicion shall be disclosed to the
employee at the time the demand for a test is made.
   D.   All noncontractual City employees shall be subject to mandatory random
drug and alcohol tests as outlined in Section
1-9H-9 of this Article.
Employees shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including
termination under the following circumstances:
   A.   Refusal to submit to drug testing whether a mandatory random drug test
or a drug test based on reasonable suspicion; or
   B.   A confirmed positive drug test indicating drug use prohibited by this
policy. (Ord. 0-17-94, 6-6-94)
1-9H-8: SUPERVISOR/DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR TRAINING:
The City shall develop a program of training to assist supervisory personnel in
identifying drug and alcohol use among employees. Such training will be
directed toward helping supervisors to recognize the conduct and behavior
giving rise to a reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol use, to identify
employees who need drug counseling and employee assistance programs, and to be
aware of those employees who pose an immediate safety threat. (Ord. 0-17-94, 6-
6-94)
1-9H-9: LABORATORY TESTING:
   A.   All drug testing of employees and applicants shall be conducted at
medical facilities or laboratories selected by the City. The testing facility
shall:
      1.   Give testing notice to each employee once a year on a random basis.
      2.   Ensure privacy to employees and applicants consistent with the
prevention of tampering.
      3.   Ensure reliable test results, including the use of gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry to confirm positive test results.
      4.   Ensure proper identification, labeling and handling of test samples.
      5.   Ensure reliable results on confirmatory tests of original samples.
   B.   All information from an employee's drug test is confidential and only
those with a need to know are to be informed of test results. Disclosure of
test results to any other person, agency or organization is prohibited unless
written authorization is obtained from the employee or applicant. The results
of a positive drug test shall not be released until the results are confirmed.
   C.   Urine samples shall be provided in a private restroom stall or similar
enclosure so that employees and applicants may not be viewed while providing
the sample. Bags, briefcases, purses and other containers may not be carried
into the test area. The water in the commode shall be colored with blue dye to
protect against dilution of test samples. (Ord. 0-17-94, 6-6-94)
1-9H-10: CONSENT:
   A.   Before a drug and alcohol test is administered, employees and job
applicants will be asked to sign a consent form authorizing the test and
permitting release of test results to those Municipal officials with a need to
know. The consent form shall provide space for employees and applicants to
acknowledge that they have been notified of the City's drug testing policy.
   B.   An employee who refuses to consent to a drug test is subject to
disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment.
   C.   The City shall take no adverse employment action against an employee
who voluntarily seeks treatment, counseling or other support for an alcohol or
drug related problem, other than the City may require reassignment of the
employee with pay if he/she is then unfit for duty in his/her current
assignment. The City shall make available a means by which the employee may
obtain referrals and treatment. All such requests shall be confidential and any
information received by the employer, through whatever means, shall not be used
in any manner adverse to the employee's interests, except reassignment as
described above. (Ord. 0-17-94, 6-6-94)
1-9H-11: REFUSAL TO CONSENT:
   A.   Applicants: A job applicant who refuses to consent to a drug and
alcohol test will be denied employment with the City.
   B.   Employees: An employee who refuses to consent to a drug and alcohol
test whether a mandatory and/or random test when reasonable suspicion of drug
or alcohol use has been identified is subject to disciplinary action up to and
including termination. (Ord. 0-17-94, 6-6-94)
1-9H-12: EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (EAP) REFERRAL:
   A.   Upon the first confirmed determination that an employee has been under
the influence of drugs or alcohol, the City shall refer the employee to an
Employee Assistance Program for assessment, counseling and rehabilitation
unless the employee's drug or alcohol use has resulted in an accident serious
enough to warrant dismissal. Participation in an EAP is voluntary and no
disciplinary action may be taken against an employee for failure to begin or
complete an EAP program. Disciplinary action based on a violation of the City's
drug and alcohol policy is not automatically suspended by an employee's
participation in an EAP and may be imposed when warranted.
   B.   Voluntary participation in an EAP prior to a confirmed positive test
result is encouraged. No disciplinary action will be brought as a result of
volunteering to participate in such a program. Employees who, prior to a
positive test result, voluntarily identify themselves as drug or alcohol users
and obtain counseling and rehabilitation through the City's EAP shall not be
disciplined for their drug and/or alcohol use if they thereafter refrain from
violating the City's policy on drug and alcohol abuse. All employees, however,
can be disciplined for any incidents resulting from their violation of the
City's policy on drug and alcohol abuse. (Ord. 0-17-94, 6-6-94)
ARTICLE I. PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE HEALTH INSURANCE
BENEFITS POLICY
SECTION:
1-9I-1: Purpose
1-9I-2: Administrative Process
1-9I-3: Health Insurance Benefits
1-9I-1: PURPOSE:
The general purpose of this policy is to establish the process for application
for health insurance benefits pursuant to the public safety employee benefits
act 1  ("PSEBA"). This policy is established in recognition of the city of
Northlake's ("city") obligations under state law to provide health insurance
benefits to its public safety employees who qualify for, and are determined to
be eligible to receive, certain health insurance benefits from the city.
Any full time police officer who after November 14, 1997, suffers a
catastrophic injury or the eligible family members of a police officer who is
killed in the line of duty may apply for health insurance benefits under PSEBA
by sending a letter of request for benefits to the city as provided in
subsection 1-9I-2B of this article. (Ord. O-19-2012, 7-9-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.
1-9I-2: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS:
The following procedure is established to determine eligibility for PSEBA
benefits:
   A.   Application Form: The applicant shall submit an application on a form
provided by the city.
   B.   Time Period For Submission Of Application: The application for PSEBA
benefits must be submitted by personal delivery or certified mail to the city,
within one year after the date on which the police officer allegedly suffered a
catastrophic injury or was killed in the line of duty. The city finance
director will review the application when all of the required documentation has
been received by the city.
   C.   Matters Pending Before The City Police Pension Board: In the event that
a timely application for pension benefits has been filed with the police
pension board, the following rules shall govern the submission of a PSEBA
application:
      1.   The submission deadline for the PSEBA application form shall be
extended to the date that is sixty (60) days after the date of any final ruling
by police pension board concerning any duty related disability.
      2.   The applicant shall be responsible for submitting all transcripts
and exhibits from the police pension board hearing that resulted in the award
of a duty related disability pension.
   D.   Processing Of Application By City Finance Director: Upon receipt of a
timely, complete and executed application form, the finance director shall
review the application and engage in such additional fact finding as the
finance director deems necessary to evaluate the application.
      1.   If fact finding is determined to be necessary or appropriate, the
applicant shall fully cooperate in such fact finding activity.
      2.   If the applicant refuses or otherwise fails to fully cooperate, then
a reminder notice shall be sent to the applicant explaining the duty of full
cooperation in the fact finding process.
      3.   If the applicant fails to cooperate as requested within twenty one
(21) days after receipt of such notice, then the application for benefits shall
be deemed withdrawn and waived.
   E.   Determination Of Eligibility: The determination shall be based on the
application and evidence provided by the applicant to the finance director as
well as such additional fact finding undertaken by the finance director.
   F.   City Finance Director's Determination: Within sixty (60) days following
receipt of the PSEBA application and all related evidence, the finance director
shall advise the applicant, in writing, of one of the following final
determinations:
      1.   The city approves the application and awards health insurance
benefits; or
      2.   The city denies the application and refuses to provide health
insurance benefits.
   G.   Reconsideration Of City Finance Director's Determination: In the event
the finance director denies a PSEBA application, the applicant will be afforded
an opportunity to present any additional arguments, evidence or testimony to
the finance director within thirty (30) days of the finance director's initial
determination. (Ord. O-19-2012, 7-9-2012)
1-9I-3: HEALTH INSURANCE BENEFITS:
If an applicant is awarded health insurance benefits, the following provisions
apply:
   A.   City Insurance Plan: If the city approves the application and awards
health insurance benefits, the city's basic health insurance plan will be the
only plan offered. If the applicant chooses to enroll in any other plan offered
by the city, the applicant must pay the difference in insurance premiums.
   B.   Other Health Insurance Benefits: Pursuant to state law, health
insurance benefits payable by any other source will reduce the benefits payable
from the city. Each applicant will be required to sign an affidavit attesting
to the fact that they are not eligible for insurance benefits from any other
source.
It is the responsibility of the applicant and/or benefit recipient to notify
the city within thirty (30) days of any changes to other sources of health
insurance benefits. Receipt of benefits in violation of this provision shall
require reimbursement to the city of any benefits received. The city reserves
the right on an annual basis to have the applicant and/or any benefit recipient
provide another affidavit affirming whether other health insurance is available
or payable to the applicant and/or any benefit recipient. (Ord. O-19-2012, 7-9-
2012)
ARTICLE J. SEXUAL HARASSMENT
SECTION:
1-9J-1:    Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-9J-2:    Definition Of Sexual Harassment
1-9J-3:    Procedure For Reporting An Allegation Of Sexual Harassment
1-9J-4:    Prohibition On Retaliation For Reporting Sexual Harassment
Allegations
1-9J-5:    Consequences Of A Violation Of The Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-9J-6:    Consequences For Knowingly Making A False Report
1-9J-7:    Reporting And Independent Review Of Allegations Of Sexual Harassment
Against An Elected Official By An Elected Official
1-9J-1: PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts have
determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under title VII
of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a
right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment
is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual
orientations. It is a policy of the City of Northlake, Illinois to prohibit
harassment of any person by any Municipal official, Municipal agent, Municipal
employee or Municipal agency or office on the basis of sex or gender. All
Municipal officials, Municipal agents, Municipal employees and Municipal
agencies or offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any person,
regardless of any employment relationship or lack thereof. (Ord. O-22-2018, 11-
5-2018)
1-9J-2: DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   A.   This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in the
Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual harassment as:
   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct
of a sexual nature when:
      1.   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment,
      2.   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or
      3.   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
   B.   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
      1.   Verbal: Sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor, and
jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature.
      2. Non-verbal: Suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls", "smacking"
or "kissing" noises.
      3.   Visual: Posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
      4.   Physical: Touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching, brushing
the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
      5.   Textual/electronic: "Sexting" (electronically sending messages with
sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually explicit
language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of electronic
communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line postings,
blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and Twitter).
   C.   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a "reasonable person". (Ord. O-22-2018, 11-5-2018)
1-9J-3: PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes herself/himself
to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident(s) as
directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his position to
the offending employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not necessary
for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual harassment,
including the following:
   A.   Electronic/Direct Communication: If there is sexual harassing behavior
in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly express
her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the offending
behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent messages are
needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
   B.   Contact With Supervisory Personnel: At the same time direct
communication is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or
intimidated by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the
immediate supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a
Director of Human Resources, an Ethics Officer, the City Manager or
Administrator, or the Chief Executive Officer of the Municipality.
   The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual harassment
must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there are no
witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other responsible
officer, the Municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of the
harassment.
   C.   Resolution Outside Municipality: The purpose of this policy is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
Municipality. However, all Municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within three hundred (300) days
of the alleged incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint with
the EEOC must be filed within three hundred (300) days.
Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what was said
or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not limited to,
written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and investigated
regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the Municipality.
However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment charges and
the difficulties associated with their investigation and the questions of
credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a vital component
of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome. (Ord. O-22-2018, 11-5-2018)
1-9J-4: PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ALLEGATIONS:
   A.   No Municipal official, Municipal agent, Municipal employee or Municipal
agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any Municipal
employee due to a Municipal employee's:
      1.   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this policy,
      2.   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation
of this policy, or
      3.   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
   B.   For the purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any Municipal employee that
is taken in retaliation for a Municipal employee's involvement in protected
activity pursuant to this policy.
   C.   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
   D.   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act1 provides whistleblower protection
from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, or
denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in retaliation for an employee who
does any of the following:
      1.    Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, State agency, or
other State employee that the State employee reasonably believes is in
violation of a law, rule, or regulation,
      2.   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member, State agency or other State
employee, or
      3.   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
   E.   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act 2, an employer may not retaliate
against an employee who discloses information in a court, an administrative
hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in any other
proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the
information discloses a violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or regulation3.
   F.   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act 4, it is a civil rights
violation for a person, or for two (2) or more people to conspire, to retaliate
against a person because he/she has opposed that which he/she reasonably and in
good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment, because he/she has
made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an
investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois Human Rights Act. An
employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or passed over for a
promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may file a retaliation
charge - due within three hundred (300) days (IDHR) or three hundred (300) days
(EEOC) of the alleged retaliation. (Ord. O-22-2018, 11-5-2018)
1-9J-5: CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION OF THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
Municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this policy or the
Prohibition on Sexual Harassment contained in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
5-65, may be subject to a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per
offense, applicable discipline or discharge by the Municipality and any
applicable fines and penalties established pursuant to local ordinance, State
law or Federal law. Each violation may constitute' a separate offense. Any
discipline imposed by the Municipality shall be separate and distinct from any
penalty imposed by an Ethics Commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a
court of law or a State or Federal agency. (Ord. O-22-2018, 11-5-2018)
1-9J-6: CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT:
A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser using the
sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping sexual
harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false report is
not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the seriousness
of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is a severe
offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of
this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
Municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreements.
In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act to
an Ethics Commission, an Inspector General, the State Police, a State's
Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official is guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor. An Ethics Commission may levy an administrative fine
of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) against any person who intentionally
makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation. (Ord. O-22-2018, 11-5-2018)
1-9J-7: REPORTING AND INDEPENDENT REVIEW OF ALLEGATIONS OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT
AGAINST AN ELECTED OFFICIAL BY AN ELECTED OFFICIAL:
   A.   Pursuant to Section 70-5 of the Act, elected City officials are
encouraged to promptly report claims of sexual harassment by another elected
official. Every effort should be made to file such complaints as soon as
possible, while    facts are known and potential witnesses are available. If
the elected official feels comfortable doing so, he or she should directly
inform the harassing individual that the individual's conduct or communication
is offensive and must stop.   
   B.   Elected officials should report claims of sexual harassment against an
alderman to the Mayor or the City Clerk. If the report is made to the Mayor,
the Mayor shall promptly notify the City Clerk. If the Mayor is the subject of
the complaint, the City Clerk shall notify the most senior alderman. If the
report is made to the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall promptly notify the
Mayor. If the City Clerk is the subject of the complaint, the Mayor shall
notify the most senior alderman. Reports of sexual harassment will be
confidential to the greatest extent possible.    
   C.   When a complaint of sexual harassment is made against an elected
official, the Mayor shall appoint a qualified law firm that has experience in
workplace investigations to conduct an independent review of the allegations.
If the allegations concern the Mayor, or the Mayor is a witness or otherwise
conflicted, the City Clerk shall make the appointment. If the allegations
concern both the Mayor and the City Clerk and/or they are both witnesses or
otherwise conflicted, the senior most alderman shall make the appointment. The
investigator shall prepare a written report and submit it to the Mayor and the
City Council.   
   D.   If the investigator finds that the elected official that is the subject
of the investigation has engaged in sexual harassment, the finding shall be
forwarded to the complainant and the Illinois Department of Human Rights. (Ord.
O-04-2020, 3-2- 2020)
CHAPTER 10
MUNICIPAL FINANCES
SECTION:
1-10-1: Municipal Budget
1-10-2: Surety Bonds
1-10-3: Deposit Of City Funds; Signatures On Warrants And Checks
1-10-4: Hold Harmless Agreement With County; City Projects On Rights-Of-Way
1-10-5: Insurance On City Vehicles
1-10-6: Contracts And Purchases
1-10-7: Wage Rates For Public Works Employees
1-10-8: Investment Of Public Funds
1-10-1: MUNICIPAL BUDGET:
   A.   Municipal Budget Procedure: 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.1
through 5/8-2-9.7, 5/8-2-9.9 and 5/8-2-9.10 are hereby adopted as the Municipal
budget procedure for the City in lieu of an annual appropriation ordinance.
(Ord. O-37-90, 7-2-1990)
   B.   Finance Director:
      1.   Appointment: The Finance Director, an executive officer of the City,
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council.
(Ord. O-20-99, 12-6-1999)
      2.   Duties:
         a.   The Finance Director shall perform the following duties: (Ord. O-
57-89, eff. 5-1-1990; amd. Ord. O-20-99, 12-6-1999)
            (1)   Prepare and encourage the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management
procedures;
            (2)   Compile an annual budget in accordance with paragraph 8-2-9.3
of the Illinois Municipal Code;
            (3)   Examine all books and records relating to monies received,
monies paid out, including debts and accounts receivable and amounts owed by or
to the City, its departments, commissions and boards; (Ord. O-57-89, eff. 5-1-
1990)
            (4)   Obtain such additional information from the City, its
departments, commissions and boards as may be useful for the purposes of
compiling an annual budget, such information to be furnished by the City, its
departments, commissions and boards in the form required, and any department,
commission or board which refuses to make such information, as is required of
it, available to the Finance Director shall not be permitted to make
expenditures under any subsequent budget for the City until such department,
commission or board complies in full with the request of the Finance Director;
(Ord. O-57-89, eff. 5-1-1990; amd. Ord. O-20-99, 12-6-1999)
            (5)   Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that
no expenditures are made by the City, its departments, commissions or boards
except as authorized by the budget; (Ord. O-57-89, eff. 5-1-1990)
            (6)   Be the ex officio City Comptroller and perform the duties of
said office as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-11-21 through 5/3-
11-24; (Ord. O-37-90, 7-2-1990)
            (7)   Serve as City Collector 1 . (Ord. O-50-90, 8-20-1990)
         b.   Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.6, "Revision of
Annual Budget", the Finance Director is authorized to make such revisions to
the annual budget as may be permitted by law. (Ord. O-50-90, eff. 8-20-1990;
amd. Ord. O-20-99, 12-6-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 9, article A of this title.
1-10-2: SURETY BONDS:
Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the City is required as a prerequisite to
exercising the duties of any office or position or to the issuance of a license
or permit or for the exercise of any special privilege, the surety on such bond
shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do business in this State as
a surety company. Whenever, in its opinion, additional surety may be needed on
any bond to indemnify the City against any loss or liability because of the
insolvency of the existing surety or sureties or for any other reason, the City
Council may order a new surety or sureties to be secured for such bond. If such
new surety or sureties are not procured within ten (10) days from the time such
order is transmitted to the principal on the bond, or its assignee, the City
Council shall declare the bond to be void, and thereupon, such principal or
assignee shall be deemed to have surrendered the privilege or position as
condition of which the bond was required. All premiums charged by such surety
company on any and every bond for officers or employees of the City shall be
paid directly by the City out of the monies from its general funds and not in
any case by the individual officer or employee so furnishing such bond. (1976
Code § 2-1-6)
1-10-3: DEPOSIT OF CITY FUNDS; SIGNATURES ON WARRANTS AND CHECKS:
   A.   Deposit Of City Funds; Intermingling Of Personal Funds Prohibited: The
Finance Director shall deposit the City funds in such depositories as may be
designated pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-10-3, and he shall not
intermingle his own money with it or make private or personal use of the City
funds. (Ord. O-32-90, 6-4-1990; amd. Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
   B.   Signature On Warrants And Checks: In payment of all bills, salaries,
vouchers and warrants ordered to be paid by ordinance, resolution or by a vote
of the majority of the City Council, unless otherwise provided by statute, all
checks drawn upon the City Treasury must be signed by the Finance Director or
the Deputy Finance Director; the Mayor or his designee; and the City Clerk or
the Deputy Clerk. (Ord. O-38-95, 8-7-1995; amd. Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
   C.   Copy Of Provisions To Depositories: The City Clerk shall file with all
depositories of the City a certified copy of this section under the Seal of the
City and shall certify to said depositories, from time to time, the names of
the officers of the City at the time authorized by this section to act
hereunder together with the specimen signatures of the persons holding the
offices named in this section. (Ord. O-32-90, 6-4-1990)
1-10-4: HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT WITH COUNTY; CITY PROJECTS ON RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
For and in consideration of waiver by the County of the insurance and surety
bond requirements as aforesaid for projects or activities which may be
undertaken by the City involving a disturbance of any right-of-way of the
County within the corporate limits of the City:
   A.   The City, or its successors or assigns, shall indemnify and save
harmless the County, its officers, agents, employees and servants against all
loss, damage or expense that it or they may sustain as a result of any suit,
actions or claims of any character brought on account of property damage,
injury to or death of any person or persons including persons performing any
work or activity under a permit issued by the Cook County Highway Department
which may arise in connection with the work or activities to be performed under
all permits arising in any manner from the negligence or wrongful acts or
failure to act by the City and its employees in the performance of the work or
activity, or any contractor doing emergency work or maintenance for the City;
and
   B.   The City shall, at its own expense, appear, defend and pay all charges
of attorneys, costs and other expenses arising therefrom or incurred in
connection therewith, and, if any judgment shall be rendered against the County
in any such action, the City shall, at its own expense, satisfy and the City
shall discharge the same.
The City shall also indemnify and save harmless the County from any claims
against or liabilities incurred by the City of any type or nature, to any
person, firm or corporation arising from the City's wrongful or negligent
performance of the work or activity.
No amendment or repealer of this section shall become effective until thirty
(30) days next following written notice to the County of such proposed
modification repealer. Said notice shall be served upon the County at the
Office of the Superintendent of Highways, 118 North Clark Street, Chicago, IL
60602.
Nothing in this section negates the necessity of obtaining a permit, where such
permit is otherwise required. This hold harmless agreement does not negate bond
and insurance from private contractors doing new construction for the
municipalities. (Ord. O-16-92, 7-6-1992)
1-10-5: INSURANCE ON CITY VEHICLES:
The City shall carry insurance coverage on all motor vehicles operated by the
City in the amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
per person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence for
bodily injury and the amount of not less than twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) per occurrence for property damage. (Ord. O-18-76, 7-14-1976; amd.
1992 Code)
1-10-6: CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES:
   A.   Purchasing Agent: The Finance Director shall be the general purchasing
agent of the City and, except where specific provision to the contrary is made
by law, is authorized to make expenditures pursuant to the purchasing
procedures set forth by the Corporate Authorities. All expenditures and
payments shall be subject to the limits as imposed by the City Council by the
adoption of a budget 1  or appropriation. When making any expenditure or
purchase, the Finance Director is required to exercise the judgment and care
which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the
management of their own affairs. (Ord. O-42-89, 10-2-1989; amd. 1992 Code; Ord.
O-20-99, 12-6-1999)
   B.   Contracts For Public Improvements: Whenever any construction work or
other public improvement shall be ordered by the Finance Director or the City
Council and before the letting of any contract by the City, the probable cost
of such work shall be first ascertained by the City Engineer or an architect or
another qualified person as the case may be. Contracts shall be let pursuant to
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-9-1 and further provided that the successful
bidder and the bidder's subcontractors must participate in active
apprenticeship and training programs approved and registered with the United
States Department of Labor's Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training for each of
the trades of work contemplated under the awarded contract. (Ord. O-27-2012,
12-17-2012)
   C.   Purchases Other Than Contracts For Public Improvements: Pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-9-2, the following procedures shall be followed
for all other expenditures and purchases made by, or on behalf of the City:
Expenditures or purchase or lease of personal property, materials, equipment or
supplies shall be made as provided in subsections C1 through C3 of this
section, unless exempted by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the Corporate
Authorities. (Ord. O-42-89, 10-2-1989; amd. 1992 Code)
      1.   Expenditures or purchases not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) shall require a purchase order, a requisition for disbursement or a
voucher approved by the Mayor before the expenditure or purchase is made. (Ord.
O-08-98, 1-26-1998)
      2.   Expenditures or purchases greater than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) but not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall require a
purchase order, a requisition for disbursement or a voucher approved by the
Finance Director before the purchase is made. The Finance Director shall first
obtain in writing, whenever possible, at least three (3) informal bids. The
Finance Director shall forward the three (3) informal bids along with his
recommendation to the Finance Committee of the City Council for approval;
provided, however, the Finance Director may approve such expenditures or
purchases without first obtaining three (3) informal bids if the expenditures
or purchase is made utilizing the procedures of the Illinois Purchasing Act 2
or from a vendor/product list previously approved by the Corporate Authorities.
(Ord. O-08-98, 1-26-1998; amd. Ord. O-20-99, 12-6-1999)
      3.   Expenditures or purchases in excess of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) shall require prior approval of the City Council. When the total
cost of a contract for purchase or lease of personal property, materials,
equipment or supplies is expected to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00),
the Finance Director shall issue a call for bids to be formally advertised.
Whenever any formal bids are required, the Finance Director shall advertise in
some newspaper published in the City and/or in such other publication or
newspapers of general circulation as in his judgment shall be desirable. A plan
or profile of the contract, accompanied by specifications for doing the same
and specifications for materials, supplies or equipment to be furnished shall
be first placed on file in the Office of the City Clerk before any such
advertisement shall be made, which plan or profile and the specifications for
materials or supplies or equipment shall at all times be open for public
inspection. Such advertisement shall be published not less than ten (10) days
before the day established for the opening of bids and shall state the work to
be done or material supplies or equipment to be furnished and the time and
place for opening of bids. All contracts for which bids are required shall be
let to the lowest responsible bidder within the judgment of the City Council.
The City Council reserves the right to reject any or all bids. (Ord. O-42-89,
10-2-1989; amd. 1992 Code; Ord. O-02-94, 2-7-1994; Ord. O-20-99, 12-6-1999)
Bidding in all instances may be waived by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the City
Council. (Ord. O-42-89, 10-2-1989; amd. 1992 Code; Ord. O-02-94, 2-7-1994)
The procedures outlined in this subsection C do not apply to contracts which,
regardless of their amount, by their nature, are not adapted to award bidding
such as contracts for the services of individuals possessing a high degree of
professional skill where the ability or fitness of an individual plays an
important part, or contracts for supplies, materials, parts or equipment which
are available from only a single source or contracts for utility services such
as water, light, heat or telephone. It is further provided, in emergency
situations where the health and safety of employees or residents or other
persons or property are at a risk, and/or in situations where the need arises
for adjustments, equipment, repairs, software updates, etc., to the City
computer network system and where such needs are crucial to the continuing
service to the employees and residents of the City as determined by the Finance
Director, and it is not practical to await prior approval of the City Council,
the Finance Director is authorized to make an expenditure or purchase in excess
of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) without prior approval of the City Council
and shall issue forthwith a written report of such expenditure to be acted upon
by the Corporate Authorities at the next scheduled meeting of the City Council;
provided, however, the Finance Director may approve such expenditures or
purchases without first obtaining City Council approval or formal bids when the
expenditure or purchase is made utilizing the procedures of the Illinois
Purchasing Act or from a vendor/product list previously approved by the
Corporate Authorities. (Ord. O-42-89, 10-2-1989; amd. 1992 Code; Ord. O-02-94,
2-7-1994; Ord. O-20-99, 12-6-1999)
   D.   Gas Purchase By Department Of Public Works: The Department of Public
Works shall be authorized to purchase gas when the cost exceeds five hundred
dollars ($500.00) without City Council approval; provided, that three (3)
estimates for such purchase are obtained. (Ord. O-03-92, 2-17-1992; amd. Ord.
O-06-94, 3-7-1994; Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-10-1 of this chapter.
2 1. 30 ILCS 505/1 et seq.
1-10-7: WAGE RATES FOR PUBLIC WORKS EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Rates Established: To the extent and as required by the Prevailing Wage
Act 1 , the general prevailing rates of wages in this locality for laborers,
mechanics and other workers engaged in construction of public works coming
under the jurisdiction of the City is hereby ascertained to be the same as the
prevailing rates of wages for construction work in the Cook County area, as
determined by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois as of June of
the current year as set forth in exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified
herein and incorporated herein by reference. The definition of any terms
appearing in the ordinance codified herein, which are also used in the Act,
shall be the same as in the Act.
As required by the Act, any and all revisions of the prevailing rates of wages
by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois shall supersede the
department's June determination and shall apply to any and all public works
construction undertaken by the City.
   B.   Applicability: Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply
said general prevailing rates of wages as herein ascertained to any work or
employment except public works construction undertaken by the City to the
extent required by the Act.
   C.   Rates Posted: The City Clerk shall publicly post this determination or
any revisions of such prevailing rates of wages and keep it available for
inspection at the City Hall by any interested party. A copy of the
determination or of the currently revised determination of the prevailing rates
of wages then in effect shall be attached to all contract specifications.
   D.   Availability: The City Clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to
any employer and to any association of employers and to any person or
association of employees who have filed their names and addresses and have
requested copies of any determination stating the particular rates and the
particular class of workers whose wages will be affected by such rates. (Ord.
O-17-2017, 10-16-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
1-10-8: INVESTMENT OF PUBLIC FUNDS:
   A.   The Finance Director shall, monthly, or more often as necessity
demands, confer with the Mayor to determine the financial posture and condition
and the cash flow budget requirements of the City insofar as past and
anticipated required expenditures are concerned. A statement will then be made
to the Committee On Finance of the City Council by the Finance Director
depicting the financial requirements and expenditures on a monthly and ninety
(90) day basis. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. 1992 Code; Ord. O-20-99, 12-6-
1999; Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
   B.   The Committee On Finance of the City Council shall determine the amount
of the required expenditures within a ninety (90) day period from and after the
date of any investment to be made by the City in any bonds, notes, certificates
of indebtedness, treasury bills or other securities, now or hereafter issued,
by and constituting direct obligations of the United States of America or any
investments in certificates of deposit or time deposit constituting direct
obligations of any bank, as defined by the Illinois Banking Act 1 .
   C.   The Committee On Finance of the City Council shall make its judgment
known to the full Council, and the full Council shall, by resolution, make an
express judgment as to what the expenditure requirements for the City shall be
within a period of ninety (90) days from and after the date of any contemplated
investment of public funds. The full City Council shall then determine what
funds, and the amount thereof, can be invested pursuant to 30 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 235/2, as amended from time to time. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd.
1992 Code)
   D.   The Finance Director may invest any public monies exceeding the ninety
(90) day anticipated requirement for expenditures as expressed by the City
Council in its judgment made in a resolution adopted by the Council.
   E.   The Finance Director, in his monthly report to the City Council, shall
include in the report the ninety (90) day requirement for expenditures, in the
event such judgment has been made by the Council. He shall also include in his
monthly report a detailed list of all investments made by the City detailing
the amounts, date of inception, maturity date and all other pertinent data
relating to such investment. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. 1992 Code; Ord. O-
24-2018, 11-19-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/395-1 et seq.
CHAPTER 11
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-11-1: State Law To Govern
1-11-2: Election Wards
1-11-1: STATE LAW TO GOVERN:
Elections for municipal offices shall be held as is provided by statute and at
the time prescribed by statute 1 . (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. 46 ILCS.
1-11-2: ELECTION WARDS:
The city shall be divided into four (4) wards as follows: (Ord. O-65-90, 12-3-
1990)
WARD I: The boundaries of ward I shall be as follows: Beginning at the center
of the intersection of Roy Avenue and Fullerton Avenue, running west along the
center line of Fullerton Avenue as extended to the center line of County Line
Road, then south along the center line of County Line Road as extended to the
center line of North Avenue, then east along the center line of North Avenue to
the center line of Wolf Road, then north along the center line of Wolf Road to
the center line of Country Club Drive, then east along the center line of
Country Club Drive to the center line of Belle Drive, then north along the
center line of Belle Drive to the rear yard line dividing the lots in Block 12
of Midland Development Company's Northlake Village Unit No. 3 as extended, then
east along said rear yard line to the center line of Prater Avenue, then north
along the center line of Prater Avenue to the rear yard line dividing the lots
in Block 28 of Section 1 of Country Club Addition to Midland Development
Company's Northlake Village as extended, then east along said rear yard line as
extended to the center line of Roy Avenue, then north along the center line of
Roy Avenue to the point of beginning.
WARD II: The boundaries of ward II shall be as follows: All that part of the
City of Northlake lying south of the center line of North Avenue.
WARD III: The boundaries of ward III shall be as follows: Beginning at the
center line of Roy Avenue with its intersection of the centerline of Lyndale
Avenue, then east along the center line of Lyndale Avenue to its intersection
with the center line of Dewey Avenue, then south and east along the center line
of Dewey Avenue to the easterly city limits of the City of Northlake, then
south along the easterly city limits of the City of Northlake to the center
line of North Avenue, then west along the center line of North Avenue to the
center line of Wolf Road, then north along the center line of Wolf Road to the
center line of Country Club Drive, then east along the center line of Country
Club Drive to the center line of Belle Drive, then north along the center line
of Belle Drive to the rear yard line dividing the lots in Block 12 of Midland
Development Company’s Northlake Village Unit No. 3 as extended, then east along
said rear yard line to the center line of Prater Avenue then north along the
center line of Prater Avenue to the rear yard line dividing the lots in Block
28 of Section 1 of Country Club Addition to Midland Development Company’s
Northlake Village as extended, then east along said rear yard line as extended
to the center line of Roy Avenue, then north along the center line of Roy
Avenue to the point of beginning.
WARD IV: The boundaries of ward IV shall be as follows: Beginning at the
intersection of the easterly city limits of the City of Northlake and the
centerline of Dewey Avenue, then west and north along the center line of Dewey
Avenue to its intersection with the center line of Lyndale Avenue, then west
along the centerline of Lyndale Avenue to its intersection with the centerline
of Roy Avenue, then north along the centerline of Roy Avenue to the centerline
of Fullerton Avenue, then west along the center line of Fullerton Avenue as
extended to the westerly limits of the City of Northlake, then north along the
westerly limits of the City of Northlake to the northerly limits of the City of
Northlake, then along the northerly and easterly limits of the City of
Northlake to the point of beginning. (Ord. O-19-2001, 11-19-2001; Ord. O-14-
2022, 10-3-2022)
CHAPTER 12
ACCESS TO RECORDS; FREEDOM OF INFORMATION
SECTION:
1-12-1: Requests for Records
1-12-2: Authority to Issue Records
1-12-3: Fees for Copies
1-12-4: Denial of Requests; Appeals
1-12-5: Documents Relating to Public Records Prepared
1-12-1: REQUESTS FOR RECORDS:
The City Clerk is hereby designated as the person to whom all initial requests
for access to the records of the City shall be referred. Such requests shall be
made in writing at the offices of the City at 55 East North Avenue, Northlake,
Illinois, during regular business hours. (Ord. 0-15-94, 5-2-94)
1-12-2: AUTHORITY TO ISSUE RECORDS:
Any records which are the subject of a request under the Freedom of Information
Act shall be retrieved from such places as they are stored, by the City Clerk
or the Deputy City Clerk, or by an employee of the City acting under the
direction of the Clerk or Deputy Clerk. In no event shall records be retrieved
by the party requesting them or by any person who is not employed by the City.
(Ord. 0-15-94, 5-2-94)
1-12-3: FEES FOR COPIES:
If copies of records are requested, the fees for such copies, whether certified
or not, shall be as determined from time to time by the City Clerk 1 . The City
Clerk shall maintain a written schedule of current fees in the Clerk's office.
The fees so charged shall reflect the actual cost of copying the records, and
the cost of certifying copies, if certification is requested. (Ord. 0-15-94, 5-
2-94)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  1-10-7 of this Code.
1-12-4: DENIAL OF REQUESTS; APPEALS:
In the event that a request to inspect City records is denied by the City Clerk
or the Deputy City Clerk, the denial may be appealed to the Mayor. Such an
appeal must be made in writing within fourteen (14) days after the requesting
party receives the written notice denying said request, or in the event that
the denial is not by letter, the appeal must be made fourteen (14) days after
the request is effectively denied. (Ord. 0-15-94, 5-2-94)
1-12-5: DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PUBLIC RECORDS PREPARED:
The Mayor shall prepare:
   A.   A Municipal directory of City officers and employees;
   B.   A block diagram of the functional subdivision of the City government;
   C.   Rules and regulations regarding access to public information; and
   D.   A records catalogue;
all of which shall be substantially in the form as the documents attached to
Ordinance Number 0-15-94 and made a part hereof as Exhibits A, B, C and D.
(Ord. 0-15-94, 5-2-94)
CHAPTER 13
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-13-1: Jurisdiction Of City
1-13-2: Notices
1-13-3: Documents To Be In English
1-13-4: Franchises And Special Privileges
1-13-5: City Seal
1-13-6: Display Of Flag Upon Deaths Of Servicemen
1-13-7: Advertisements On City Mailings
1-13-8: Exemption From Paid Leave From All Workers Act
1-13-1: JURISDICTION OF CITY:
This code shall refer only to the commission or omission of acts within the
territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside this city over
which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or
statutory provision or any law. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
1-13-2: NOTICES:
   A.   Service Of Notice: Unless otherwise specifically provided, whenever a
notice is required to be given pursuant to any section of this code, such
notice shall be given either by personal delivery to the person to be notified
or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid,
addressed to the person to be notified at his last known business or residence
address as the same appears in the public records or other records pertaining
to the matter for which such notice is served or by any other method of
delivery approved by law. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been
completed at the time of deposit in the post office or any United States
mailbox.
   B.   Proof Of Giving Notice: Proof of giving any notice may be made by the
certificate of any officer or employee of this city or by affidavit of any
person eighteen (18) years of age or over who actually accomplished personal
service in conformity with this code or other provisions of law applicable to
the subject matter concerned or by a return receipt signed by the recipient
notified by United States mail. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
1-13-3: DOCUMENTS TO BE IN ENGLISH:
All notices, reports, statements, applications or records required or
authorized by this code shall be made in writing in the English language unless
specifically provided otherwise. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
1-13-4: FRANCHISES AND SPECIAL PRIVILEGES:
   A.   Deposit Required: Any person requesting any special privileges, grants
or franchises from the city shall be required to deposit with the clerk such
sums of money as the council may deem sufficient to defray all expenses
incident to the procuring of such special privileges, grants or franchises;
provided, that if any money remains after the payment of all expenses, it shall
be refunded to the party paying it to the clerk.
   B.   Termination Of Franchise Or Privilege For Violations: Any violation of
the duties and obligations imposed and prescribed to be done and performed by
the grantee of any franchise or special privilege or of the conditions of such
franchise or grant or of the relevant provisions of this code shall terminate
and end all rights and privileges of such franchise or grant. (Ord. O-23-79,
11-20-1979)
1-13-5: CITY SEAL 1 :
   A.   Seal Adopted; Description: There is hereby adopted the official seal of
the city as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1d1300d496ebe964abc7de90476368240ad48dd1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2558.gif]
   B.   Required Display Of Seal: Where feasible, all city equipment, public
buildings and other municipal property shall display this seal.
   C.   Reproduction Of Seal: The reproduction of the official seal of the city
is authorized and permitted when reproduced in the shade of blue as used in the
flag of the United States of America upon a white sheet or background for use
as the official flag or banner of the city. (Ord. O-06-90, 2-5-1990)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  1-7-3D of this title.
1-13-6: DISPLAY OF FLAG UPON DEATHS OF SERVICEMEN:
The flag of the United States of America on all public buildings under the
jurisdiction of the city shall fly at half mast on the date of burial of all
servicemen who were killed in the line of duty and whose legal residence was
the city prior to their death, provided the next of kin notify the city, and at
such other times as may be ordered by the president of the United States, the
governor of the state of Illinois, the mayor or the city council. (Ord. O-23-
79, 11-20-1979; amd. 1992 Code)
1-13-7: ADVERTISEMENTS ON CITY MAILINGS:
   A.   This policy shall govern all advertisements appearing in the city of
Northlake monthly newsletter and on utility bills issued by the city.
   B.   All commercial advertising must be truthful. False, deceptive, or
misleading commercial advertising is not permitted.
   C.   Commercial advertising that proposes transactions which would
constitute unlawful discrimination or would be illegal for any other reason is
not permitted.
   D.   Advertising that is legally obscene is not permitted. In addition,
sexually explicit advertising depicting nudity (male or female genitals, pubic
areas, or buttocks with less than fully opaque covering; female breasts with
less than fully opaque covering or any part of the areola or nipples or the
covered genitals in a discernibly turgid or other recognizable state) or sexual
intercourse or other sexual acts is not permitted.
   E.   Advertising that portrays graphic violence, such as through the
depiction of human or animal bodies, body parts, or fetuses in states of
mutilation, dismemberment, disfigurement or decomposition, is not permitted.
   F.   Advertising that is directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless
action and is likely to incite or produce such action, including, but not
limited to, unlawful action based on a person's race, color, sex, age,
religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital or
parental status, military discharge status, or source of income, is not
permitted.
   G.   If advertising contains a testimonial, then the sponsor shall provide
to the city documentation that the person making the testimonial has authorized
its use in advertising.
   H.   Advertisements for tobacco products (i.e., cigarettes, cigars, chewing
tobacco), alcohol, X rated movies, adult bookstores, massage parlors,
pawnshops, tattoo parlors and check cashing facilities are prohibited.
   I.   All political, religious, public service and public issue advertising
is prohibited.
   J.   The mayor or his designee retains the right to refuse any advertisement
he determines to violate the above standards, to be in conflict with the
purposes and goals of this policy, to be controversial, or to be incompatible
with the best interests of the city and/or its residents. (Ord. O-13-2010, 4-
19-2010)
1-13-8: EXEMPTION FROM PAID LEAVE FROM ALL WORKERS ACT:
   A.   Northlake hereby adopts its current paid leave policy for all Northlake
employees as set forth in the Northlake City Codes, Employee Handbook, Annual
Salary Ordinances, any collective bargaining agreements to which Northlake is a
party and all other binding legislative actions governing paid leave adopted by
the Mayor and City Council, as the same may be amended from time to time.
However, in no event shall Northlake, as an employer, provide less than one (1)
day of paid leave per year to any Northlake employee.
   C.   Pursuant to Northlake's home rule authority, Northlake hereby declares
that Northlake, as an employer, is exempt from the requirements of the Cook
County Paid Leave Ordinance passed on December 14, 2023. Northlake, as an
employer, shall have no additional obligations with regard to mandatory paid
leave, including, without limitation, any obligations provided under the Act,
except those obligations required by federal and/or state law which validly
preempt Northlake's home rule authority. (Ord. O-26-2023, 12-4-2023; amd. Ord.
O-28-2023, 12-18-2023)
CHAPTER 14
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY TAX RELIEF
SECTION:
1-14-1: Short Title
1-14-2: Purpose
1-14-3: Definitions
1-14-4: Grant Procedure
1-14-5: Eligibility
1-14-6: Denial Of Fraudulent Claims
1-14-7: Determination Of Availability Of Funds
1-14-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF NORTHLAKE MUNICIPAL
PROPERTY TAX RELIEF ORDINANCE. (Ord. O-37-94, 12-19-1994)
1-14-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide grants to residential property owners
and not-for-profit veterans' organizations within the City to relieve the
citizens from the burden of the Municipal property tax. (Ord. O-37-94, 12-19-
1994)
1-14-3: DEFINITIONS:
ARREARS: Money which is overdue and unpaid; e.g., water bills or damage of
property.
CITY: The City of Northlake, Cook County, Illinois.
CLAIMANT: An individual who has filed a claim under this Chapter.
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY TAX: The tax imposed and passed on to residents owning
residential real property pursuant to the Constitution of Illinois 1970,
article VII, section 6(a).
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Condominiums and real property zoned as R-1 (Single-
Family Residence Districts) and R-2 (Two-Family Residence Districts) pursuant
to the City of Northlake's Official Zoning Map.
TAXABLE YEAR: The calendar year during which Municipal property taxes became
due and payable by the owner of the residential real property. (Ord. O-37-94,
12-19-1994)
1-14-4: GRANT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Claims for the taxable year must be filed between August 1 and December
1 of the following year on forms prescribed by the City. Effective August 1,
1995, claimants receiving their second installment of property tax bills for
the taxable year 1994 may file a claim with the City. Grants shall not be
awarded to claimants for the taxable years preceding the year of 1994.
   B.   The amount of the grant which a claimant is entitled to claim for
relief from Municipal property taxes will equal the amount imposed on real
residential property by the City.
   C.   Upon receipt of claimant's property tax bill, the Budget Director or
his designee shall determine whether the claimant is a person entitled to a
grant under this Chapter. If said claimant is determined to be eligible, the
City will issue a check to the claimant immediately upon receipt of said claim.
The City shall require the claimant to furnish reasonable proof of Municipal
property taxes paid and other matters on which entitlement is based, and may
withhold payment of a grant until such additional proof is furnished. (Ord. O-
37-94, 12-19-1994)
1-14-5: ELIGIBILITY:
   A.   Liens And Arrears: Any property owner having outstanding liens or any
court judgments affecting ownership of property; or any property owner with any
arrears owed to the City shall not be eligible for said property tax relief
grant until the arrearage, lien or judgment has been settled. (Ord. O-37-94,
12-19-1994)
   B.   Multi-Ownership: Claimants receiving more than one property tax bill in
a taxable year for property owned within the City shall be allowed to file a
claim only for such property in which the claimant resides during the time of
filing such claim. (Ord. O-47-95, 9-18-1995)
   C.   Not-For-Profit Organizations: Veterans' organizations shall be the sole
not-for-profit organizations which may be eligible for the grant.
   D.   Personal Claim: The right to file a claim under this Chapter shall be
personal to the claimant and shall not survive his death, but such right may be
exercised on behalf of a claimant by his legal guardian or by means of power of
attorney. If a claimant files a claim and his claim is pending for the purpose
of furnishing Municipal property taxes paid and/or other matters in which
entitlement is based, the amount thereof shall be disbursed to his surviving
spouse or, if no spouse survives, to his surviving dependent children in equal
parts. If at the time of disbursement neither the claimant nor his spouse is
surviving, and no dependent children of the claimant are surviving, the amount
of the claim shall escheat to the City. (Ord. O-37-94, 12-19-1994)
1-14-6: DENIAL OF FRAUDULENT CLAIMS:
   A.   General: The Budget Director or his designee shall deny claims which
have been fraudulently prepared primarily for the purpose of receiving a grant
under this Chapter. If a claim is denied, the Budget Director or his designee
shall cause written notice of that denial and the reasons for said denial to be
sent to the claimant.
   B.   Right To Appeal: Any claimant aggrieved by the denial of the claim may
request in writing that the Budget Director or his designee reconsider his
prior determination, setting out the facts on which his request is based. The
Budget Director or his designee shall consider the request and either modify or
affirm his prior determination.
   C.   City Council Review: The decision of the Budget Director or his
designee to affirm his prior determination, or the failure of the Budget
Director or his designee to act on a request for reconsideration within sixty
(60) days, may be appealed to the Finance Committee of the City Council for
review. The Finance Committee shall consider the appeal and either modify or
affirm the Budget Director or his designee's prior recommendation. (Ord. O-37-
94, 12-19-1994)
1-14-7: DETERMINATION OF AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed or interpreted as imposing an
absolute obligation on the City to award property tax relief grants. Not less
than once annually the corporate authorities shall determine whether the City
has sufficient funds to allow the property tax relief grants. No such grants
shall be allowed unless the corporate authorities first determine that
sufficient funds are available to meet all of the City's financial obligations.
(Ord. O-05-98, 1-5-1998)
CHAPTER 15
JUDICIARY
SECTION:
1-15-1: Purpose
1-15-2: Creation
1-15-3: Administrative Composition
1-15-4: Procedure
1-15-5: Service
1-15-6: Administrative Hearings
1-15-7: Notices
1-15-8: Final Determination Of Liability
1-15-9: Judicial Review
1-15-10: Enforcement Of Judgment
1-15-11: Schedule Of Fines/Penalties
1-15-12: Immobilization/Towing And Impoundment Of Motor Vehicles
1-15-13: Request For Hearing In Case Of Towing And Impoundment Of Motor
Vehicles
1-15-14: Notice Affixed To Vehicle In Cases Of Immobilization
1-15-15: Towing Of Immobilized Vehicle
1-15-16: Post-Impoundment Notice
1-15-17: Hearing In Case Of Vehicle Immobilization
1-15-18: Fines And Fees For Immobilization
1-15-19: Towing Services
1-15-1: PURPOSE:
The stated purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the fair and efficient
enforcement of City ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by
ordinance, through an administrative adjudication of violations of such City
ordinances and establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority
and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-
5-1998)
1-15-2: CREATION:
There is hereby established an executive department to be known as the
Northlake Ordinance Enforcement Department which shall have the power to
enforce compliance with all Municipal ordinances as from time to time
authorized by the City Council, except for any offense under the Illinois
Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the
movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under section 6-204
of the Illinois Vehicle Code. The establishment of the Northlake Ordinance
Enforcement Department does not preclude the Mayor and City Council from using
any other method to enforce the ordinances of the City. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-
1998)
1-15-3: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:
The Northlake Ordinance Enforcement Department shall be composed of a Hearing
Officer, an Ordinance Enforcement Administrator and hearing room security
personnel, with the power and authority as hereinafter set forth:
   A.   Hearing Officer:
      1.   The Hearing Officer shall preside over all adjudicatory hearings and
shall have the following powers and duties:
         a.   Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the
existence of the Code violation;
         b.   Issuing subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant
testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
         c.   Preserving and authenticating the record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
         d.   Issuing and signing a written finding, decision and order stating
whether a Code violation exists; and
         e.   Imposing penalties consistent with applicable Code provisions and
assessing costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation, except
however, that in no event shall the Hearing Officer have authority to impose a
penalty of incarceration or any other penalty in excess of that allowed by law.
      2.   Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings, the
Hearing Officer shall have successfully completed a formal training program
which includes the following:
         a.   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative
hearings which the Hearing Officer;
         b.   Orientation to each subject area of the Code violations that they
will adjudicate;
         c.   Observation of administrative hearings; and
         d.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence
and issuing final orders.
In addition, a Hearing Officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in
the State for at least three (3) years.
   B.   Ordinance Enforcement Administrator: The Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator is authorized and directed to:
      1.   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of City
ordinance violation as may be permitted by law and directed by ordinance.
      2.   Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under
this Chapter or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this
Chapter.
      3.   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final
determination of liability.
      4.   Certify copies of final determinations of an ordinance violation
adjudicated pursuant to this Chapter, and any reports verifying the final
determination of any violation liability which was issued in accordance with
this Chapter, the laws of the State, including 525 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-208.3.
      5.   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation of
suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter as hereinafter set forth, and those of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/6-306.5.
      6.   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
      7.   Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection
agencies and pursuit of all post-judgment remedies available by law.
   C.   System Coordinator/Computer Operator: The system coordinator/computer
operator is hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain the computer
programs for the administrative adjudication system of the Northlake Ordinance
Enforcement Department hereby created, on a day-to-day basis including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Input of violation notice information.
      2.   Establishing court dates and notice dates.
      3.   Record fine and penalty assessment and payments.
      4.   Issue payment receipts.
      5.   Issue succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final determination
of liability; issue notice of immobilization; issue notice of impending
impoundment; issue notice of impending driver's license suspension, as directed
by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator in accordance with the provision
hereinafter set forth.
      6.   Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, sanctions imposed, if any, fines and
penalties assessed and paid.
   D.   Hearing Room Security Personnel: Hearing room security personnel shall
be qualified off-duty, full-time, part-time or auxiliary police officers who
are hereby authorized and directed to:
      1.   Maintain hearing room decorum.
      2.   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of
the Circuit Court.
      3.   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and
as directed by the Hearing Officer or Ordinance Enforcement Administrator.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint persons to hold the positions above
set forth. Other than the Hearing Officer, one person may hold and fulfill the
requirements of one or more of the above stated positions and compensation for
each of the above stated positions shall be as approved by the City Council.
(Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-1998)
1-15-4: PROCEDURE:
The system of administrative adjudication of any City ordinance violation
authorized to be adjudicated hereunder, shall be in accordance with the
following procedures:
   A.   Violation notice of any ordinance violation including violations of the
City traffic code shall be issued by the persons authorized under this Code and
shall contain information and shall be certified and constitute prima facie
evidence of the violation cited as hereinafter set forth.
   B.   All full-time, part-time and auxiliary police officers as well as other
specifically authorized individuals shall have the authority to issue violation
notices.
   C.   Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who
detects an ordinance violation is authorized to issue notice of violation
thereof and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set forth.
   D.   The violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the
following information:
      1.   The name of the party violating the ordinance, if known.
      2.   The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
      3.   The particular ordinance violated.
      4.   Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable).
      5.   The fine and penalty which may be assessed for late payment.
      6.   The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice.
      7.   The date and the location of the adjudicating hearing of ordinance
violations other than violations of the City traffic code, the legal authority
and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held and the penalties for
failure to appear at the hearing. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-1998)
1-15-5: SERVICE:
   A.   Service of any violation notice shall be made by the person issuing
such notice:
      1.   In the case of violation of the City traffic code by:
         a.   Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to the
vehicle;
         b.   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of
the vehicle, if present; or
         c.   Handing the notice to the responsible person or leaving the
notice with any person twelve (12) years of age or older at the residence of
the responsible owner.
      2.   In the case of any ordinance violation other than a violation of the
City traffic code by:
         a.   Handing the notice to the person responsible for the ordinance
violation;
         b.   Handing the notice to the responsible person or leaving the
notice with any person twelve (12) years of age or older at the residence of
the responsible person; (Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-1998)
         c.   Mailing the notice by first class mail to the person responsible
for the ordinance violation; or (Ord. O-02-99, 3-15-1999)
         d.   Posting the notice upon the property where the violation is found
when the person is the owner or manager of the property.
   B.   The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be
verified by the person issuing said notice by:
      1.   Signing his/her name to the notice at the time of issuance; or
      2.   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a
single certificate, to be kept by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under
his/her control.
   C.   The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained
by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator and kept as a record in the ordinary
course of business.
   D.   Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance herewith,
or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie
evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-
5-1998)
1-15-6: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
An administrative hearing to adjudicate any alleged ordinance violation on its
merits, or to contest the validity of a notice of impending immobilization or
impending impoundment, or the validity of a notice of impending driver's
license suspension shall be granted to the registered owner or operator of the
cited vehicle, pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 or the
lessee of the cited vehicle, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1306,
incorporated herein by reference and at the date, time and place as if set
forth by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator and served upon the registered
owner, operator or lessee for hearings contesting the validity of notices of
impending immobilization or impending impoundment or driver's license
suspension. All administrative hearings shall be recorded and shall culminate
in a determination of liability or nonliability, made by the Hearing Officer,
who shall consider facts and/or testimony without the application of the formal
or technical rules of evidence. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted
only it if is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonable prudent persons in
the conduct of their affairs. The Hearing Officer shall, upon a determination
of liability, assess fines and penalties in accordance with Section
1-15-10 of this Chapter. Persons appearing to contest the alleged violation on
its merits may be represented by counsel at their own expense. The burden of
proof shall be on the alleged offender to refute the prima facie case set forth
in the verified notice of violation. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-1998)
1-15-7: NOTICES:
   A.   Upon failure of the person receiving a notice of a violation of a City
ordinance, other than a City Traffic Code violation, to appear at the time and
date designated for a hearing or, in the case of a violation of the City
Traffic Code, the registered owner, operator or lessee of the cited vehicle to
pay the fine, in full as stated on said notice, the Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator shall send or cause to be sent notices by first class mail,
postage prepaid, to the person who received the notice of an ordinance
violation; or, in the case of the violation of the City Traffic Code, the
registered owner or operator of the cited vehicle at the address as is recorded
with the Secretary of State, and shall be sent to the lessee of the cited
vehicle at the address last known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the
time of the lease. Service of notices sent in accordance herewith shall be
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
   B.   The notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the following
sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
      1.   Upon the failure of the person receiving the notice of an ordinance
violation or, in the case of a notice of a violation of the City Traffic Code,
the registered owner, operator or lessee of the cited vehicle to pay the fine
in full as stated on said notice, a notice shall be sent, as above set forth,
and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
         a.   Date and location of violation cited in the violation notice.
         b.   Particular ordinance violated.
         c.   Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable).
         d.   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment.
         e.   A section entitled "Notice of Hearing" which shall clearly set
forth that the person receiving a notice of ordinance violation, in the case of
a violation of the City Traffic Code, or the registered owner, operator or
lessee may appear at an administrative hearing to contest the validity of the
violation notice on the date and at the time and place as specified in the
Notice of Hearing.
         f.   Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the
alleged violation may be contested on its merits.
         g.   Statement that failure to either pay fine and any applicable
penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at
the time and place specified will result in a final determination of liability
for the cited violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated.
         h.   Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of
liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust,
available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or
penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the City, except that in the case
of alleged violations of the City Traffic Code, the alleged violator shall be
given no less than three (3) opportunities to appear and failure to appear
shall result in a final determination of liability.
   C.   A notice of final determination of liability shall be sent following
the conclusion of administrative hearing, as is hereinafter set forth, and
shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information and warnings:
      1.   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt
due and owing the City.
      2.   A statement of any sanction ordered or costs imposed which costs are
debts due and owing the City.
      3.   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and owing
the City within the time specified may result in proceeding with collection
procedures in the same manner as a judgment entered by any court of competent
jurisdiction.
      4.   A warning that the person's driver's license may be suspended for
failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more vehicular standing or
parking violations under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5, incorporated
herein by reference.
      5.   A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located within
the City may be immobilized and impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties
for ten (10) or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violations.
      6.   Any other warning of possible impoundment as permitted by law or
ordinance.
   D.   A notice of impending suspension of a person's driver's license shall
be sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment of any fine or
penalty that remains due and owing on ten (10) or more vehicular standing or
parking regulation violations:
      1.   The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or penalty
owing within forty five (45) days of the date of the notice will result in the
City's notifying the Secretary of State that the person is eligible for
initiation of suspension proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
306.5, incorporated herein by reference.
      2.   The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by
first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary
of State. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-1998)
1-15-8: FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A final determination of liability shall occur following the failure to pay the
fine or penalty after the Hearing Officer's determination of liability and the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, any administrative review procedures
hereinafter set forth. Where a person fails to appear at the administrative
hearing to contest the alleged violation on the date and at the time and place
specified in a prior served or mailed notice pursuant to Section
1-15-7 of this Chapter, the Hearing Officer's determination of liability shall
become final either upon a denial of a timely petition to set aside that
determination or upon the expiration of the period of filing a petition without
a filing have been made. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-1998)
1-15-9: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any final decision by a Hearing Officer that a Code violation does or does not
exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review
under the Illinois Administrative Review Law. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-1998)
1-15-10: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:
   A.   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois Administrative
Review Law are a debt due and owing the Municipality and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   B.   After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of a
Code violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
findings, decision, and order of the Hearing Officer may be enforced in the
same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   C.   In any case in which a Hearing Officer finds that a defendant has
failed to comply with a judgment ordering a defendant to correct a Code
violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of a Code
violation, any expenses incurred by a municipality to enforce the judgment
including, but not limited to, attorney fees, court costs, related to property
demolition or foreclosure after they are fixed by the Hearing Officer, shall be
a debt due and owing the municipality and may be collected in accordance with
applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by a Hearing Officer pursuant
to this subsection, the City shall provide notice to the defendant that states
that the defendant shall appear at a hearing before the Administrative Hearing
Officer to determine whether the defendant has failed to comply with the
judgment. The notice shall set the date for such a hearing, which shall not be
less than seven (7) days from the date that notice is served. If notice is
served by mail, the seven (7) day period shall begin to run on the date that
the notice was deposited in the mail.
   D.   A lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both,
of the defendant in the amount of any debt due and owing the Municipality. The
lien may be recorded and enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien
pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. No lien may be
enforced under this Section until it has been recorded in the manner provided
by article XII of the Code of Civil Procedure or by the Uniform Commercial
Code.
   E.   A Hearing Officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and set
a new hearing date upon a petition field within twenty one (21) days after the
issuance of the order of default if the Hearing Officer determines that the
petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any time
if the petitioner establishes that the Municipality did not provide proper
service of process. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-1998)
1-15-11: SCHEDULE OF FINES/PENALTIES:
The fines and penalties which shall be imposed shall be as follows:
   A.   For violation of any City ordinance other than a violation of the
Traffic Code of the City, fines and penalties shall be as provided in this Code
and shall include the assessment of costs upon finding a defendant liable for
the charge violation, except, in no event shall the Hearing Officer have
authority to: 1) impose a penalty of incarceration, or 2) impose a fine in
excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The monetary fines shall be
exclusive of the cost of enforcement or the costs imposed to secure compliance
with this code and shall not be applicable in cases to enforce the collection
of any tax imposed and collected by the city. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-1998)
   B.   Unless otherwise provided in this code, the fines and penalties which
shall be imposed for the violation of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) shall be as follows:
   FINE PAYMENT SCHEDULE
 
      Fine Schedule                         General     Handicapped Traffic
                                             Fine Amount Fine Amount Compliance
       Upon service of a violation and paid
       within 10 days of the violation
Step 1 notice issuance, and no "request for  $ 50.00     $100.00     $ 50.00
       hearing" has been timely filed, the
       fine amount owed shall be:
       Having failed to pay the fine amount
       by the deadline date (within 10 days
       of the violation notice of issuance)
Step 2 as specified in step 1, the fine      100.00      150.00      100.00
       amount, if paid after the deadline
       date in step 1 but prior to the first
       hearing date, will be:
       Having failed to pay the fine amount
       specified in step 2 prior to the
Step 3 commencement of the second hearing    150.00      175.00      150.00
       date, the fine amount, if paid on the
       second hearing date or prior to the
       third hearing date, will be:
       Having failed to pay the fine amount
       specified in step 3 prior to the
       commencement of the third hearing
Step 4 date, or upon the finding of          250.00      250.00      250.00
       liability for the violation, after
       failure to appear at the third
       hearing, will be:
 
(Ord. O-29-2004, 12-20-2004)
   C.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in subsections A and
B of this section or any other provision of this code, the hearing officer may,
with the consent of the defendant, impose a period of community service as an
alternative to the payment of a fine and costs. For purposes of this
subsection, "community service" means service performed on behalf of a
religious, charitable or governmental entity which has been approved by the
hearing officer as an eligible beneficiary of community service pursuant to
this subsection. (Ord. O-13-2009, 4-20-2009)
1-15-12: IMMOBILIZATION/TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
   A.   Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined to be
liable for ten (10) or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violation
(s), for which the fines or penalties assessed remain unpaid, may be
immobilized, booted or towed and impounded if:
      1.   The ordinance enforcement administrator has determined that a person
has been determined to be liable for ten (10) or more ordinance violations, for
which the fines or penalties remain unpaid.
      2.   The person determined to be liable for ten (10) or more violations
is the registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the city's
geographical boundaries.
      3.   A seizure notice has been sent to the registered owner of the motor
vehicle located within the geographical boundaries of the city which contains,
but shall not be limited to, the following:
         a.   A final determination has been made on ten (10) or more ordinance
violations, for which the fines and penalties remain unpaid.
         b.   A listing of the violations for which the person has been
determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:
            (1)   The ordinance violation notice number;
            (2)   Date of issuance; and
            (3)   Total amount of fines and penalties assessed.
         c.   The motor vehicle owned by the person and located within the city
are subject to immobilization and/or towing and impoundment if the fines and
penalties are not paid within, but not later than fifteen (15) days of the date
of the notice.
         d.   Date of immobilization;
         e.   Date of impending towing and impoundment; and
         f.   The registered owner may contest the validity of the notice by
appearing in person before the ordinance enforcement administrator within
fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice and submitting evidence which would
conclusively disprove liability, such as the following:
            (1)   The registered owner was not the owner or lessee of the
vehicle on the date or dates the notices of violation were issued; or
            (2)   The fines or penalties for the violations cited in the notice
were paid in full; or
            (3)   The registered owner has not accumulated ten (10) or more
ordinance violation notices which are unpaid, not adjudicated or for which no
appearance was made.
      4.   The motor vehicle of the registered owner to whom notice is sent has
failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the notice and
has failed to appear with evidence to conclusively disprove liability before
the ordinance enforcement administrator to contest the validity of the notice.
(Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-1998)
1-15-13: REQUEST FOR HEARING IN CASE OF TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR
VEHICLES:
Upon receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the
immobilization or towing and impoundment, the ordinance enforcement
administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the validity
of the immobilization or towing and impoundment on the next scheduled hearing
date or if sooner scheduled by the ordinance enforcement administrator for good
cause shown, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than thirty
(30) days after the request for hearing is filed and shall serve the notice of
the hearing date upon the registered owner by first class mail, postage
prepaid, to the address as is set forth on the request for hearing. Service of
the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United States
mail. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-1998)
1-15-14: NOTICE AFFIXED TO VEHICLE IN CASES OF IMMOBILIZATION:
Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a notice shall be affixed to the
vehicle in a conspicuous place. Such notice shall warn that the vehicle is
immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its damage.
The notice shall also state that the unauthorized removal of or damage to the
immobilizing restraint is a violation of sections 16-1 and 21-1 of the Illinois
criminal code. The notice also shall provide the following information
specifying that a release of the immobilizing restraint may be had by:
   A.   Paying all the fines and penalties, if any, on the outstanding
complaints for which notice has been sent prior to the date of the
immobilization; or
   B.   Completing appearance forms on all outstanding parking violation
complaints for which notice had been sent prior to the date of the
immobilization and depositing collateral in the amount of fifty percent (50%)
of the total fines for these outstanding parking violation complaints, or five
hundred dollars ($500.00), whichever is less. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-1998)
1-15-15: TOWING OF IMMOBILIZED VEHICLE:
Except where the vehicle is otherwise subject to towing, if the immobilizing
restraint has not been released as hereinabove provided, within seventy two
(72) hours of its placement, the vehicle shall be towed and impounded. (Ord. O-
06-98, 1-5-1998)
1-15-16: POSTIMPOUNDMENT NOTICE:
Within ten (10) days after a vehicle has been impounded, notice of impoundment
shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered
owner of the vehicle. The notice shall state that the owner has the right to a
postimmobilization and posttowing hearing as provided in section
1-15-17 of this chapter and that if the vehicle is not claimed within thirty
(30) days from the date of the notice, the vehicle may be sold or otherwise
disposed of in accordance with the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-
1998)
1-15-17: HEARING IN CASE OF VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION:
The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other interested person shall have the
right to a hearing to determine whether the immobilization or any subsequent
towing was erroneous or whether the vehicle was properly included on an
immobilization list, if the owner files a written demand for a hearing before
the ordinance enforcement administrator within fourteen (14) days after
issuance of the notice specified in section
1-15-14 of this chapter or within fourteen (14) days of immobilization,
whichever is later. A hearing shall be conducted on any business day within
forty eight (48) hours of receipt of a written demand for hearing, unless
otherwise mutually agreed by the parties. Failure to request or attend a
scheduled hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. In the
event of such failure, any amount deposited pursuant to section
1-15-14 of this chapter shall be forfeited. A hearing provided by this section
shall not determine the validity of or otherwise adjudicate any citation or
notice of ordinance violation issued relative to the immobilized vehicle, but
shall only relate to whether the vehicle was properly immobilized or towed by
determining whether the owner previously submitted evidence required by section
1-15-12 of this chapter. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-1998)
1-15-18: FINES AND FEES FOR IMMOBILIZATION:
The fine for immobilization shall be sixty dollars ($60.00) and the fine for
impoundment and towing shall be an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00). The owner of the vehicle shall also be charged reasonable storage
and towing fees should the vehicle be removed to a private storage facility,
provided that no fees shall be assessed for any immobilization or tow which has
been determined to be erroneous. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-1998)
1-15-19: TOWING SERVICES:
The ordinance enforcement administrator shall appoint or retain the services of
an individual, agency or company to tow and impound vehicles in accordance
herewith, provided that that individual, agency or company is fully insured and
licensed according to local or state law and has available a secured impound
area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the purpose of
this section a "secured area" shall mean an area bounded by a fence, chainlink
or otherwise, of a sufficient height and with locking gates so as to minimize
or prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles. (Ord. O-06-98, 1-5-
1998)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS CONCERNING BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Attendance At Meetings
2-1-2: Basis For Compensation
2-1-3: Compensation Established
2-1-4: Background Checks Required
2-1-5: Eligibility Requirements
2-1-1: ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
All commission members shall attend all required meetings/hearings of the
commission they serve on. (Ord. O-46-93, 12-20-1993)
2-1-2: BASIS FOR COMPENSATION:
All salaries for commission members shall be prorated on a per regular meeting
basis. Any member who is absent from a required meeting/hearing shall not be
compensated for that meeting/hearing. In addition, three (3) unexcused
absences, within a calendar year, by an appointed member, shall constitute
grounds for removal. (Ord. O-46-93, 12-20-1993)
2-1-3: COMPENSATION ESTABLISHED:
The below listed compensation shall be budgeted for each commission of the city
effective on January 1, 2003:
Board of fire and police      Chair     $250.00 per month
commissioners                 2 members 225.00 per month
Zoning, planning and economic Chair     125.00 per month
development commission        6 members 100.00 per month
Neighborhood watch commission Chair     125.00 per month
                              5 members 100.00 per month
Community events and affairs  Chair     150.00 per month
commission                    8 members 125.00 per month
Senior commission             Chair     125.00 per month
                              6 members 100.00 per month
Youth commission              Chair     125.00 per month
                              5 members 100.00 per month
 
(Ord. O-22-2002, 12-16-2002)
2-1-4: BACKGROUND CHECKS REQUIRED:
Prior to the appointment of a board or commission member, the chief of police
or his designee shall be directed to conduct a background check on said
prospective appointee. Upon receipt of the results of the background check, the
mayor shall determine whether or not to appoint said prospective appointee.
(Ord. O-43-96, 9-16-1996; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
2-1-5: ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No person shall be eligible for appointment to any commission unless
that person is a qualified elector of the city.
   B.   A vacancy occurs in the office of any commission by reason of
resignation, failure to qualify, death, permanent physical or mental disability
rendering the person incapable of performing the duties of his or her office,
conviction of a disqualifying crime, abandonment of office, removal from office
or removal of residence from the city. For purposes of this section, a
conviction for an offense that disqualifies a person from serving as a
commissioner occurs on the date that a person pleads guilty, enters into a
written agreement to plead guilty, the return of the guilty verdict or, in the
case of a trial by the court, the entry of a finding of guilt. (Ord. O-15-2014,
5-5-2014)
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-2-1: Board Established; Appointment
2-2-2: Organization
2-2-3: Duties
2-2-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby established the Board of Local Improvements as provided by law
1 . The members of the Board shall consist of the Mayor, City Engineer and
Director of Public Services. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79; 1992 Code; amd. Ord. 0-
06-94, 3-7-94)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/9-2-7.
2-2-2: ORGANIZATION:
The Board of Local Improvements shall adopt its own rules of procedure with the
approval of the corporate authority and shall select its officers from among
its members. The chairman of the Board shall be named by the Mayor. (Ord. 0-23-
79, 11-20-79)
2-2-3: DUTIES:
The Board shall have all the duties as provided by statute and ordinance 1 .
(Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
 
Notes
1 2. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/9-2-1 et seq.
CHAPTER 3
ZONING, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-3-1: Creation; Appointment
2-3-2: Meetings And Procedures
2-3-3: Powers And Duties
2-3-1: CREATION; APPOINTMENT:
The plan commission, zoning board of appeals and economic development
commission shall be consolidated as one board, to be known as the "zoning,
planning and economic development commission".
The zoning, planning and economic development commission shall consist of six
(6) members and one chairperson. The members and the chairperson shall be
appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, for
the term set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-3(b). (Ord. O-13-
2007, 4-16-2007)
2-3-2: MEETINGS AND PROCEDURES:
The zoning, planning and economic development commission shall meet from time
to time, as necessary to address itself to matters which appropriately come to
its attention. (Ord. O-30-97, 7-21-1997)
2-3-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
In addition to such powers and duties as may be prescribed by statute or
ordinance, the zoning, planning and economic development commission shall have
the following powers and duties:
   A.   The preparation and presentation to the mayor and the city council,
from time to time, of recommendations regarding the development of business and
commercial districts within the city;
   B.   Review the history and existing studies and planning ordinances of the
city;
   C.   Conduct such studies as are necessary to gather information within the
area of economic development;
   D.   Conduct a comprehensive review of the financial alternatives which are
available and feasible for the city to use to encourage economic growth
including, but not limited to, industrial revenue bonds, community development
block grant funds, federal economic development programs, tax incremental
financing, commercial development bonds and motor fuel tax for road
construction in commercial areas;
   E.   Study both long and short term activities to be recommended to the
mayor and city council;
   F.   Study any and all other matters that are pertinent to the subject of
economic development as may seem appropriate;
   G.   The accomplishment of such other powers and duties as may be assigned
or directed by the mayor and city council;
   H.   To exercise the powers enumerated in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-74.4-1 et seq., known as the "tax increment allocation redevelopment act",
subject to the approval of the corporate authorities; the power to hold public
hearings required by the tax increment allocation redevelopment act and make
recommendations to the corporate authorities concerning the adoption of
redevelopment plans, redevelopment projects and designation of redevelopment
project areas. (Ord. O-30-97, 7-21-1997)
CHAPTER 4
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
2-4-1: Board Established; Membership; Appointment And Term
2-4-2: Bond And Oath
2-4-3: Powers And Duties
2-4-4: Additional Powers Of The Board
2-4-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
There is hereby established the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, which
Board shall consist of three (3) members to be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the City Council. The members of the Board shall be
appointed for a term of three (3) years. Each member so appointed shall serve
until his successor is appointed and qualified.
The Board shall select a chairman and a secretary. (Ord. O-27-97, 7-7-1997)
2-4-2: BOND AND OATH:
The members of the Board shall be required to give bond and take oath and
qualify in the same manner as all other City officers 1 . (1976 Code § 2-13-4)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  1-9-2 of this Code.
2-4-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Board shall have only those powers as are prescribed by 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-1 et seq. (Ord. O-27-2000, 8-21-2000)
2-4-4: ADDITIONAL POWERS OF THE BOARD:
The Board shall possess the powers granted by the State statutes to suspend and
discharge police officers and in addition, shall possess the power, after a
hearing, to reduce the rank of a police officer no more than one grade or rank.
The Board, in rules and regulations drafted in conformity with this Chapter,
may exercise such other powers as shall be inherent in an administrative body
of a home rule municipality and which are necessary to carry out its functions.
The exercise of such additional powers, however, shall not conflict with any
provision of the ordinances of the City. (Ord. O-19-95, 5-15-1995)
CHAPTER 5
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. O-30-97, 7-21-1997)
CHAPTER 6
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. O-35-95, 7-17-1995)
CHAPTER 7
SENIOR CITIZEN COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-7-1: Commission Established; Membership; Appointment And Terms
2-7-2: Organization
2-7-3: Purposes And Functions
2-7-4: Compensation And Expenses
2-7-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
There is hereby established a senior citizen commission for the city. Said
commission shall consist of seven (7) members, four (4) of which shall
constitute a quorum. They shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years or
until their successors are appointed and qualified. The members shall be
appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. All
members of the commission shall be over the age of sixty (60) years. (Ord. O-
06-2003, 2-3-2003)
2-7-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Officers:
      1.   The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall
appoint a chairman of the commission from its members, who shall serve for a
term of one year and until his/her successor shall be appointed and take
office.
      2.   The commission may elect from its members a secretary and such other
officers as it may deem advisable.
   B.   Meetings:
      1.   All meetings of the commission shall be held on the third Wednesday
of each month and at such other times as the commission may determine.
      2.   The commission shall keep minutes of its meetings which shall be
submitted to the city clerk for distribution to the mayor and city council.
      3.   The facilities of city hall shall be available to the commission for
all meetings.
      4.   All meetings conducted by the commission shall be open to the
public. Any person may appear and testify at a meeting, either in person or by
a duly authorized agent or attorney.
   C.   Rules Of Order And Procedure: The commission may adopt rules of order
and procedure for the conduct of its business. (Ord. O-02-90, 1-22-1990)
2-7-3: PURPOSES AND FUNCTIONS:
The purposes and functions of the senior citizen commission shall be as
follows:
   A.   To assess the current status of community programs and services offered
to older residents and to initiate the development of expanded services; and
   B.   To coordinate the development of long range programs among agencies
serving the aged; and
   C.   To develop budget needs based on total community service and seek
appropriate federal funding to implement proposed programs and be responsible
for the disbursement of such funds in accordance with the budget needs of those
agencies offering service and programs; and
   D.   To advise the mayor and the city council as to the needs of expanded
service with respect to the aged community; and
   E.   To disseminate information relative to services and programs to the
citizens of the city; and
   F.   To prepare and submit to the mayor and city council, annually, a
summary report of its operations during the preceding fiscal year along with a
statement of projected plans for action by the commission and a request for
allocations of necessary funds. (Ord. O-02-90, 1-22-1990)
2-7-4: COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES:
The members of the commission shall serve with such compensation as may be
provided by ordinance by the city council. No expenses for the operation and
conduct of the affairs of the commission shall be incurred without the prior
approval as set forth in section
1-10-6 of this code. (Ord. O-02-90, 1-22-1990; amd. 1992 Code)
CHAPTER 8
COMMISSION ON COMMUNITY EVENTS AND AFFAIRS
SECTION:
2-8-1: Commission Created; Membership; Appointment And Term
2-8-2: Organization
2-8-3: Duties
2-8-4: Compensation
2-8-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
There is hereby created the Northlake Commission on Community Events and
Affairs for the purpose of promoting community activities and for the
development of the recreational needs in the City.
The Commission shall consist of six (6) members appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the Council. (Ord. O-01-99, 2-1-1999)
2-8-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Officers: The chairman shall be named by the Mayor. The Commission
shall select a secretary from its own members.
   B.   Rules And Regulations: The Commission on Community Events and Affairs
shall formulate and present to the Council for its approval, such rules and
regulations necessary for the operation of the Commission. (1992 Code)
2-8-3: DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The Commission on Community Events and Affairs shall:
      1.   Make or cause to be made studies and surveys of community conditions
and issues affecting communitywide recreational needs in the City;
      2.   Recommend plans for wholesome and popular community events and
affairs in the City;
      3.   Coordinate and integrate its efforts with other governmental and
private agencies;
      4.   Request and obtain such cooperation, assistance and data from
governmental departments and public and private agencies as may be reasonably
necessary to carry out its work;
      5.   Create subcommittees composed of members of the Commission to aid
and assist in the work of the Commission.
   B.   Annual Report: Each year the Commission on Community Events and Affairs
shall prepare and submit to the Council a summary report of its operations
during the preceding year along with a statement of projected plans and a
request for allocation of necessary funds. (Ord. O-16-97, 5-19-1997)
2-8-4: COMPENSATION:
The members of the Commission on Community Events and Affairs shall receive
such compensation as provided by ordinance by the City Council. (1992 Code)
CHAPTER 9
INTERNAL INVESTIGATION BOARD
SECTION:
2-9-1: Board Created
2-9-2: Membership; Appointment and Term
2-9-3: Duties
2-9-4: Investigation of Violation
2-9-5: Actions Following Investigation
2-9-1: BOARD CREATED:
The City Council of the City of Northlake hereby establishes the Internal
Investigation Board, which will be referred to as the IIB. (Ord. 0-43-93, 12-6-
93)
2-9-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
The IIB shall consist of three (3) members, who shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council. The IIB members shall serve
staggered three (3) year terms. (Ord. 0-43-93, 12-6-93)
2-9-3: DUTIES:
The IIB shall be responsible for the prompt and thorough investigation of all
complaints regarding alleged violations of Northlake's Harassment in the
Workplace Policy 1  and all alleged violations of general workplace policy
which are not covered by collective bargaining agreements. (Ord. 0-43-93, 12-6-
93)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 9G of this Code.
2-9-4: INVESTIGATION OF VIOLATION:
The IIB's investigations of violations should include:
   A.   A discussion with the employee involved;
   B.   Interviews and statements from witnesses;
   C.   A determination of whether or not disciplinary action is necessary; and
   D.   A review of the employee's file or any other relevant documents to
determine the degree of discipline to be imposed. (Ord. 0-43-93, 12-6-93)
2-9-5: ACTIONS FOLLOWING INVESTIGATION:
The IIB shall conclude its investigation with one of the following actions:
   A.   Dismissal of Complaint: If the IIB has not discovered evidence of any
violation of the Harassment in the Workplace Policy, it shall dismiss the
complaint.
   B.   Oral Warning: An oral warning is a private conversation between the
employee, his/her department head, if appropriate, and an IIB member. The
employee shall be notified of the specific infraction and shall be permitted to
present his/her side of the story. During the conversation, the following shall
be discussed:
      1.   The policy provision which was violated,
      2.   The negative impact of the act,
      3.   A plan for future improvement if necessary, and
      4.   The consequences of failure to improve.
After the interview, the IIB member shall fill out an oral warning report, give
a copy to the employee, forward a copy to the employee's personnel file, and
keep a copy for its records.
   C.   Written Warning: This document shall be filled out by an IIB members
and its cause shall be discussed beforehand with the accused employee. One copy
shall be given to the employee, a second copy forwarded to the employee's
personnel file, and another copy retained by the IIB.
The written warning shall cover the following points in a direct and concise
manner:
      1.   The finding of violation,
      2.   Oral warnings or previous written warnings pertinent to the case,
      3.   Expectations for improvement, and
      4.   Consequences of failure to improve.
   D.   Suspension: Suspension without pay is appropriate when the gravity of
the offenses necessitates corrective action of a greater severity. Unless delay
in the imposition of discipline will result in a clear harm or damage to the
employer or victim, the accused employee shall be informed in writing of the
proposed suspension and the reasons therefor at least four (4) working days
prior to the effective date of the proposed suspension and be provided with
copies of pertinent documents, if any, on which the proposed suspension is
based. The employee shall have two (2) working days after being informed of the
proposed suspension within which to address to the Mayor or his designee, a
written rebuttal to the reasons given for the suspension. A decision of the
Mayor or his designee not to suspend the employee shall be rendered in writing
before the proposed suspension date.
   E.   Discharge: An accused employee may be discharged from duty if prior
disciplinary actions have failed to rectify the violations or if the accused
employee's offense is serious enough in nature to warrant dismissal. Rebuttal
and appeal procedures shall be the same as in the case of suspension.
   F.   Discharge for Criminal Conduct: The procedure for criminal conduct
discharge shall be the same as in Section 1-9E-9, subsections B5 and F of the
Municipal Code. (Ord. 0-43-93, 12-6-93)
CHAPTER 10
DISCRIMINATION REVIEW BOARD
SECTION:
2-10-1: Establishment
2-10-2: Membership
2-10-3: Powers and Duties; Salary
2-10-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
The City is hereby authorized to combine the Internal Investigation Board and
the Human Relations Commission to establish the Discrimination Review Board.
(Ord. 0-10-95, 5-1-95)
2-10-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The members of the Discrimination Review Board shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the City Council. Said Board shall consist of
three (3) members who shall be residents of the Municipality and shall each
serve staggered three (3) year terms. (Ord. 0-10-95, 5-1-95)
2-10-3: POWERS AND DUTIES; SALARY:
The powers and duties for each Board member shall be subject to the existing
powers and duties previously exercised by the Internal Investigation Board and
the Human Relations Commission. All salaries shall be determined by the Finance
Committee upon review of the City's annual budget. (Ord. 0-10-95, 5-1-95)
CHAPTER 11
NORTHLAKE YOUTH COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-11-1: Commissions Created; Membership; Appointment And Term
2-11-2: Organization
2-11-3: Duties
2-11-4: Duties Of Advisory Commission
2-11-1: COMMISSIONS CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
The Northlake Youth Commission and Advisory Commission are hereby created to
promote youth activities and development in the City.
   A.   The Northlake Youth Commission shall consist of five (5) members and a
chairperson appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council. One of the five (5) members shall be Miss Northlake whose tenure on
the Commission shall be coterminous with her respective term as Miss Northlake.
The initial appointees shall serve a term expiring May 1, 1999. Thereafter,
Commission members shall serve a term of two (2) years expiring on May 1 of
each odd-numbered year. Commission members shall serve until their successors
are appointed and qualified.
   B.   The Advisory Commission shall consist of five (5) Northlake residents
between the ages of thirteen (13) through eighteen (18) to be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The initial appointees
shall serve a term expiring May 1, 2001. Thereafter, Commission members shall
serve a term of two (2) years expiring on May 2 of each odd-numbered year.
Advisory Commission members shall serve until the successors are appointed and
qualified. (Ord. O-01-99, 2-1-1999)
2-11-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Officers: The Mayor shall name the chairman of the Commission. The
Commission shall select a secretary and such other officers as it deems
necessary.
   B.   Rules And Regulations: The Commission may formulate and present such
rules and regulations as it deems appropriate for its operation to the City
Council for approval. (Ord. O-16-97, 5-19-1997)
2-11-3: DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The Youth Commission shall:
      1.   Studies And Surveys: Conduct studies and surveys of community
conditions, needs and problems affecting youth of various age groups in the
community.
      2.   Recommendations: Recommend plans for the improvement of
opportunities for the wholesome development of youth in the City, propose
necessary action for the protection of children from exposure to harmful
influences and conditions, propose plans for the prevention of delinquency and
for the development of services for the rehabilitation of children and
recommend the necessary recreational needs of youth in the community.
      3.   Assistance: Request and obtain such cooperation, assistance and data
from governmental departments and public and private agencies as may be
reasonably necessary to carry out its work.
      4.   Subcommittees: Create subcommittees composed of members of the
Commission to aid and assist in the work of the Commission.
      5.   Studies And Proposals: Conduct feasibility studies on potential
recreation sites and solicit citizen input on youth needs; propose necessary
action for the protection of children from exposure to harmful influences and
conditions, propose plans for the prevention of delinquency and for the
development of services for the rehabilitation of children.
      6.   Other Agencies: Coordinate its efforts with other governmental and
private agencies, especially schools, serving youth in the community.
      7.   Annual Report: Each year prepare and submit to the Council a summary
report of its operations during the preceding year along with a statement of
projected plans and a request for allocation of necessary funds. (Ord. O-01-99,
2-1-1999)
2-11-4: DUTIES OF ADVISORY COMMISSION:
The Advisory Commission shall:
   A.   Attend and participate in all meetings of the Youth Commission.
   B.   Make recommendations to the Youth Commission relative to the programs
and activities organized and sponsored by the Youth Commission. (Ord. O-01-99,
2-1-1999)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSE AND PERMIT PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: License Required
3-1-2: Persons Subject To License Or Permit
3-1-3: Applications For Licenses And Permits
3-1-4: Investigations, Inspections, And Lease Agreements
3-1-5: Approval Or Disapproval Of License Or Permit; Issuance
3-1-6: License Fees
3-1-7: Term Of License; Expiration; Renewal
3-1-8: Separate Licenses Or Permits Required
3-1-9: Conditions Of Licenses And Permits
3-1-10: Damage To License Or Permit; Unlawful Use
3-1-11: Building And Location
3-1-12: Nuisance Businesses Prohibited
3-1-13: Health And Sanitary Conditions
3-1-14: Refuse Disposal
3-1-15: Conditions For Businesses Open To Public
3-1-16: Business Vehicles
3-1-17: Revocation Or Suspension Of License: Penalty
3-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct, engage in, maintain, operate, carry on or manage any
business, occupation, activity or establishment within the city, by himself or
through an agent, employee or partner, for which a license is required by this
code or by any municipal ordinance without first having obtained a license for
such business, occupation, activity or establishment. The requirement of this
section shall not apply to a publishing business, occupation, activity or
establishment whose only physical contact with the city is the maintenance of a
post office box. (Ord. O-49-96, 12-16-1996)
   A.   Background Checks Required: Prior to the issuance of a business or
contractor's license, the chief of police or his designee shall be directed to
conduct a background check on said prospective applicant. Upon receipt of the
results of the background check, the director of public services shall
determine whether or not to approve said business or contractor's license.
(Ord. O-43-96, 9-16-1996; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
3-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Whenever a license or permit is required for the maintenance, operation or
conduct of any business or establishment or for doing business or engaging in
any activity or occupation, any person shall be subject to the requirement if,
by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he is held forth as being
engaged in the business, activity or occupation or if he solicits patronage
therefor, actively or passively, or if he performs or attempts to perform any
part of such business, activity or occupation in the municipality. (Ord. O-62-
89, 12-18-1989)
3-1-3: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES AND PERMITS:
Applications for all licenses and permits shall be made to the municipal clerk,
in writing, on a form provided for that purpose, except as otherwise provided.
If the applicant is an individual (sole proprietorship), the application shall
contain his name, residence address and residential telephone number; if the
applicant is a partnership or other noncorporate business entity, the
application shall contain the name and residential address and residential
telephone number of each partner, principal or member thereof; if the applicant
is a corporation, the application shall contain the name, residential address
and residential telephone number of each principal officer and the registered
agent thereof.
Each application shall also contain:
   A.   A designation of the type or kind of license or permit desired;
   B.   The location or proposed location of the place of business, occupation
or activity;
   C.   The applicable fee to be paid as provided in section
3-1-6 of this chapter;
   D.   The number of the certificate of registration required under the
retailer's occupation tax act 1 , service occupation tax act 2 , and/or use tax
act 3 , if applicable; and
   E.   Such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of
municipal officials in the evaluation of such application, including proof of
any insurance policy or bond required by this code 4 . (Ord. O-62-89, 12-18-
1989)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
2 2. 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
3 3. 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.
4 4. See section
  1-10-2 of this code for sureties required on bonds.
3-1-4: INVESTIGATIONS, INSPECTIONS, AND LEASE AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Investigations And Inspections Prior To Issuance Of License Or Permit:
Where this code authorizes or necessitates an investigation or inspection by
any department or official of the municipality before the issuance of a license
and requires the approval by such department or official regarding the proper
location or condition of the premises in which the business, occupation or
activity for which a license is applied is to be managed, conducted, operated
or carried on or regarding the condition and nature of the equipment and
methods intended to be used by the applicant in such business, occupation or
activity, then the clerk shall transmit to the appropriate official or
department such information necessary for the required investigation or
inspection. The aforementioned investigations shall include criminal background
checks for any individual(s) whose name(s) will appear on the application for a
business license whenever a criminal history is relevant to the applicant's
eligibility for such license. (Ord. O-44-93, 12-6-1993)
The designated official or department:
      1.   Shall make all necessary investigations and inspections, and the
results thereof shall be reported in writing to the Clerk; and (Ord. O-62-89,
12-18-1989)
      2.   Shall indicate on the application a recommendation for the approval
or disapproval thereof. All related investigative and inspection reports shall
be forwarded to the City Clerk for determination. (Ord. O-35-97, 8-18-1997)
   B.   Authority Of Inspectors:
      1.   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with
the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required
by this Code or any ordinance or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance
with the provisions of any ordinance or regulation of the Municipality or to
detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person
in charge of the premises to admit thereto for the purpose of making the
inspection any officer or employee of the Municipality who is duly authorized
to make such inspection at any reasonable time that such admission or entry is
requested.
      2.   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this Code or of any
ordinance or regulations or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty
of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give to any duly
authorized officer or employee of the Municipality requesting the same
sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon
official request. (Ord. O-62-89, 12-18-1989)
      3.   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Mayor
may authorize the Superintendent of Public Works to revoke, under the
provisions of this Code, the license of any owner or operator of a licensed
business in the Municipality who refuses to permit any duly authorized officer
or employee to make such inspection or to take an adequate sample of said
commodity or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the
performance of his duties. (Ord. O-62-89, 12-18-1989; 1992 Code; amd. Ord. O-
06-94, 3-7-1994; Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
   C.   Lease Agreements: Prior to issuance of license or permit, each
applicant shall submit to the Clerk's office a copy of an executed lease
agreement for the premises in which the business, occupation or activity is to
be managed, conducted, operated or carried on. (Ord. O-15-96, 2-5-1996)
3-1-5: APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; ISSUANCE:
   A.   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and related investigative and inspection reports, the City Clerk
determines that the application is satisfactory, the Clerk shall notify the
applicant that the application is approved. The license or permit shall be
signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk, and then issued to the licensee.
   B.   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and related investigative reports, the City Clerk determines that
matters concerning the application are unsatisfactory, the Clerk shall
disapprove the application and notify the applicant of the denial and the
reasons therefor, and that no license or permit shall be issued. (Ord. O-35-97,
8-18-1997)
3-1-6: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fee Schedule: License fees, under the terms of this Chapter, for the
businesses, occupations, activities and uses set forth, shall be as provided in
the fee schedule which is a part of this Code 1 . License fees shall be paid
annually unless otherwise provided, and proof of any bond or liability
insurance policy required by this Code shall be provided with the license fee.
   B.   Late Penalty: If the applicant fails to pay the license fee on or
before May 1, the licensee shall be assessed an amount equal to one-half (1/2)
the license fee provided in the fee schedule for reinstatement expenses and
costs. The fee set forth herein shall be in addition to any other remedies or
penalties set forth in this Chapter.
   C.   Prorated Fee For Permanent New Businesses: The license fee for a
permanent new business applicant shall be prorated when said applicant has not
engaged in the business until after the first quarter of the current license
year, that being May 1 through July 31. After July 31 of current license year,
the license fee shall be prorated by quarters, according to the type of
business license, and said prorated fee shall be paid for each quarter during
which the business has been or will be conducted. Such proration shall not be
applied to temporary or seasonal business applicants. (Ord. O-24-95, 6-5-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. See Article A of this Chapter.
3-1-7: TERM OF LICENSE; EXPIRATION; RENEWAL:
   A.   Each license shall indicate its term. All annual licenses shall be
operative, and the license year for the Municipality shall commence on May 1 of
each year. No license shall be granted for a period longer than one year.
Except where otherwise provided herein, every license shall expire on April 30
following the date of issuance.
   B.   The Clerk shall endeavor to notify each annual licensee of the time of
expiration of the license held by the licensee at least twenty one (21) days
prior to such expiration date; provided, however, that a failure to make such
notification or the licensee's failure to receive it shall not exclude the
licensee from the obligation to obtain a new license or a renewal. (Ord. O-62-
89, 12-18-1989)
   C.   Except as otherwise provided herein, each license may be renewed upon
proper application, payment of the required fee and proof of payment of any
lien, fine, penalty, charge or charges in arrears owed to the City. The
requirements and procedures for granting and issuing a license renewal shall be
the same as the requirements and procedures for granting a new license.
   D.   Other Fees: No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be renewed
or issued if the licensee or applicant owes any other fee, tax, penalty of any
nature to the City. (Ord. O-19-93, 6-7-1993; amd. Ord. O-24-95, 6-5-1995; Ord.
O-10-2021)
3-1-8: SEPARATE LICENSES OR PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Separate License Or Permit For Each Location: No license or permit for
the operation of a business, establishment or activity in the Municipality
shall be construed to permit its operation in more than one location in the
Municipality; a separate license or permit shall be required for each location.
For the purpose of this Code, the existence of a single location shall be
evidenced by the fact that all buildings containing the principal or accessory
uses:
      1.   Shall be connected or shall be located on the same lot or parcel,
      2.   Shall be operated and managed by the same person or owner, and
      3.   Shall be an establishment with the same classification.
   B.   Separate License Or Permit For Each Business: Unless otherwise provided
in this Code, each individual business or commercial activity within the
Municipality shall be required to obtain only one license but shall be required
to comply with all applicable regulations contained in this Chapter or
elsewhere. The license fee required to be paid by an individual business which
is subject to two (2) or more licenses in this Chapter shall be the largest of
those applicable. A business shall be considered to be individual only if it is
owned by identical persons or entities, is contained within one single building
and conducts activities which are closely related. (Ord. 0-62-89, 12-18-89)
3-1-9: CONDITIONS OF LICENSES AND PERMITS:
   A.   Licenses And Permits Nonassignable: No license or permit may be
assigned, sold, loaned, transferred, used as collateral or otherwise
encumbered. No person shall use or display any license certificate, tag, badge
or sticker which has been improperly acquired.
   B.   License To Be Posted: It shall be the duty of any person conducting a
licensed business in the Municipality to keep his license displayed at all
times in a prominent place on the premises, machine or vehicle used for such
business. (Ord. 0-62-89, 12-18-89)
3-1-10: DAMAGE TO LICENSE OR PERMIT; UNLAWFUL USE:
   A.   No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove or carry away,
without the consent of the owner, any license, certificate, plate or sticker
which has been issued by the Municipality except when such license,
certificate, plate or sticker has been discontinued or the licensed premises
have been abandoned. Nothing herein shall prevent the City or its duly
authorized representative from removing any license, certificate, plate or
sticker from the possession of a former licensee, his premises, any vehicle or
any machine when said license has been revoked under the provisions of this
Code.
   B.   No person shall alter, deface, forge or counterfeit any license,
certificate, plate, tag, badge or sticker issued by the Municipality. (Ord. 0-
62-89, 12-18-89)
3-1-11: BUILDING AND LOCATION:
   A.   Building And Premises: No license shall be issued for the conduct of
any business and no permit shall be issued for any purpose or activity if the
premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with all
applicable ordinances and regulations of the Municipality and the State of
Illinois.
   B.   Change Of Location: The location of any licensed business or
occupation, other than the sale of alcoholic liquors, or the location of any
permitted act may be changed; provided, that the Clerk's office shall be given
sufficient notice of such intended change in location to determine that the
operation for which the license is required conforms with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Municipality at its new location. (Ord. 0-62-
89, 12-18-89)
3-1-12: NUISANCE BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Generally: No business or establishment, whether or not licensed, shall
be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact, and no
building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises or part thereof shall be
used, kept, maintained or operated in connection with any business or
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance or so as to be dangerous to life
or detrimental to health. Any charge of conducting or operating a nuisance may
be made under this Chapter or under the provisions of this Code prohibiting
nuisances generally 1 .
   B.   Unsafe Or Unhealthful Business:
      1.   No building or structure utilized, constructed or maintained in
connection with any business or occupation shall evidence an unsanitary, unsafe
or dangerous condition.
      2.   No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatever which shall be
dangerous or detrimental to health shall be allowed to exist in connection with
any business or occupation or be used in any work or labor performed in the
Municipality. (Ord. 0-62-89, 12-18-89)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 4, Chapter 2 of this Code.
3-1-13: HEALTH AND SANITARY CONDITIONS:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   No owner, lessee, manager or superintendent of any store, factory,
workshop or other place shall allow or cause any room or part thereof to be
overcrowded or inadequate or faulty in respect to light, ventilation, heat or
cleanliness.
      2.   All such places of employment shall be kept in a clean condition,
free from the effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy, stable or other nuisance;
also, as far as practicable, such premises shall be free from all gases,
vapors, dust or otherwise which are injurious to health. Sufficient washroom
facilities for all employees shall be provided, and such facilities shall be
properly ventilated.
   B.   Heat Requirements: It shall be the duty of every person owning or
controlling the heating plant which furnishes heat to any factory, workshop,
retail business or other commercial establishment to maintain a temperature
when workers are present within such factory or workshop of not less than sixty
eight degrees (68o) Fahrenheit or twenty degrees (20o) Celsius without such
undue restriction of ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary
conditions therein; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to
any factory or workshop where the business conducted therein is of such a
nature that a lower temperature than sixty eight degrees (68o) Fahrenheit or
twenty degrees (20o) Celsius is necessary or expedient for the work or
manufacturing process of such business.
   C.   Inspections: The appropriate Municipal officials shall visit or cause
to be visited all such places of employment in the Municipality as often as
they shall deem necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this
Section and to have such arrangements made as may be deemed necessary for the
health and safety of the employees. (Ord. 0-62-89, 12-18-89)
3-1-14: REFUSE DISPOSAL 1 :
   A.   Refuse Containers:
      1.   Specifications: The standard refuse container required by this Code
shall be a receptacle of not less than twenty (20) gallons' capacity or
constructed of impervious and sturdy material, with a tight-fitting cover and
equipped with handles properly placed to facilitate handling.
      2.   Use Required: All refuse which is placed for collection service
outside any building or structure must be kept in standard refuse containers
unless another type of container is approved by the Director of Public Services
due to the unusual nature of the refuse produced by the business. (Ord. 0-62-
89, 12-18-89; amd. Ord. 0-06-94, 3-7-94)
   B.   Refuse Removal Required:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the occupant of every building, structure or
premises used or maintained in connection with any business or occupation to
cause to be removed at his own cost and expense, at least once each week, all
refuse produced therein.
      2.   Every person owning or controlling any hotel, restaurant, cafe,
retail food establishment or other business or occupation, where more than
thirty two (32) gallons of refuse is normally produced weekly shall cause all
substances deposited in such containers to be removed as often as shall be
necessary, including daily removal from his premises, to ensure the healthful
environment surrounding such establishment. Such removal shall be at his own
expense. (Ord. 0-62-89, 12-18-89)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section 4-3A-2 of this Code.
3-1-15: CONDITIONS FOR BUSINESSES OPEN TO PUBLIC:
All businesses or commercial establishments licensed under this Chapter which
invite the public generally into their establishments for the purpose of
conducting business, commercial activity or any other activity licensed under
this Chapter shall be subject to the following regulations in addition to all
other applicable provisions of this Code:
   A.   Sanitary Premises: All areas within the licensed premises where the
public may enter shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition.
   B.   Deceptive Practices Prohibited: All business or commercial
establishments subject to this Section shall refrain from all deceptive trade
practices as defined by State or Federal law or regulation and shall comply
with all applicable laws and regulations regarding consumer protection and
deceptive trade practices. In the event of any such violation, the business
license of the establishment may be revoked pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter.
   C.   Diseased Employees Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to employ in any
premises open to the public or engaged in the transportation, processing,
preparation or packaging of food or beverages any person whom the employer
knows or should have known, based upon reasonable observation, was afflicted
with or who is a carrier of any contagious or infectious disease, and it shall
be unlawful for any person who knows or should have known that he was afflicted
with or a carrier of any such disease to work in or about any such premises.
(Ord. 0-62-89, 12-18-89)
   D.   Required Parking Area Lighting: All parking areas surrounding or within
the legal boundaries of the licensed premises where the public or employees may
enter shall be illuminated with low sodium vapor lights. All existing
businesses shall have until May 1, 1996, to install low sodium vapor fixtures.
(Ord. 0-63-95, 11-20-95)
3-1-16: BUSINESS VEHICLES:
   A.   Vehicle Sticker To Be Posted: Whenever the number of vehicles used is
the basis, in whole or in part, for a license fee, the Clerk shall furnish the
licensee with a tag or sticker for each vehicle covered by the licensee, and
such tag or sticker shall be posted or affixed in a conspicuous place on each
such vehicle.
   B.   Insurance Requirements: Whenever any licensee under this Chapter shall
make use of one or more motor vehicles in the licensed activity, such licensee
shall carry at all times public liability insurance with a responsible insurer
qualified to do business in Illinois to secure payment of loss or damage
resulting from an occurrence arising out of or caused by the operation or use
of any such vehicles, but each vehicle shall be insured for the sum of at least
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage and the amount
of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries to or death
of any one person and for the sum of at least three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for injuries to or death of more than one person in any one
accident or a combined single limit of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. Every
insurance policy or contract for such insurance shall provide for the payment
and satisfaction of any final judgment rendered against the owner or any person
driving any insured vehicle and shall further provide that suit may be brought
in any court of competent jurisdiction upon such policy or contract by any
person having claims arising from the operation or use of such vehicles; it
shall contain a description of each vehicle insured, manufacturer's name and
serial number, the State license number and the Municipal license number. (Ord.
0-62-89, 12-18-89)
3-1-17: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE: PENALTY:
   A.   License Revocation Or Suspension; Penalty:
      1.   The Mayor shall be charged with the administration of this section.
The Mayor or the Mayor's designee may suspend or revoke any business license
issued by the City after a determination that the licensed business, its owner,
employees or agents, have violated any terms of the license or ordinances that
regulate the business or use in question or the minimum standards for property
maintenance, signs, building construction, electrical, plumbing, mechanical,
fire safety, noise, dust or other emissions established by ordinance, state
statute, federal law or applicable regulation.
      2.   In addition to the suspension or revocation of a license, the Mayor
may levy a fine on the licensee. The fine imposed shall not exceed five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each violation. Each day on which a violation
exists shall constitute a separate violation.
   B.   Hearing; Notice: No such license shall be suspended or revoked and no
licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the Mayor or the
Mayor's designee with a seven (7) day written notice to the licensee affording
the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained
in such notice. The seven (7) day notice provision shall begin to run the day
following the delivery of the notice by certified mail or by personal service.
   C.   Determination by Mayor: Issuance of Order: The Mayor or the Mayor's
designee withing fourteen (14) days after such hearing, shall cause a written
order to be issued setting forth the findings of the haring and the amount of a
fine, if any, the period of suspension, if any, or that the license has been
revoked. A copy of said order shall be served on licensee.
   D.   Notwithstanding subsection B if the Mayor or the Mayor's designee has
reason to believe that the continued operation of a particular licensed
business will immediately threaten the public health, safety and welfare, he
may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such
conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the licensed business closed
for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be
heard during that period.
   E.   Payment of Hearing Costs: Any licensee determined to have violated any
of the terms of the license or ordinances which deal with the license shall pay
to the City the costs of the hearing including attorney fees. The Mayor or the
Mayor's designee shall determine the costs incurred by the City for the hearing
and the licensee shall pay said costs to the City within thirty (30) days
following notification. Failure to pay said costs within thirty (30) days of
notification is a violation of this chapter and may be cause for license
suspension or revocation. (Ord. O-08-2020, 4-20-2020)
ARTICLE A. BUSINESS LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES
SECTION:
3-1A-1: Schedule Of Fees
3-1A-2: Fee Based On Square Footage
3-1A-1: SCHEDULE OF FEES:
The following license and permit fees shall be in force for each of the
designated occupations, services or businesses:
Classification Fee
Classification                       Fee
Adult uses                           $1,000.00  
Air conditioning and refrigeration              
contractor (see Contractors)
Ambulance                            75.00     per year
Amusements, carnival type            75.00     per year, per event
Animals:                                        
 Dealers - birds, dogs and          75.00     per year
  household pets
 Impoundment                        Actual cost
 Kennels, 3 dogs or more,           150.00    per year
  commercial zone only
 Salons                             75.00     per year
Antiques                             500.00    per year
Auto body and fender shop            75.00     per year
Auto parts retail, including machine See section
shop                                 3-1A-2 of this article
Auto repair:                                   
 Mobile service unit                $ 75.00   per year, per unit
 Service shop                       75.00     per year
Bakeries:                                      
 Retail                             75.00     per year
 Wholesale                          150.00    per year
Banks, commercial savings and loan   150.00    per year
Banquet halls                        See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Bicycle sales and service            $75.00    per year
Billboards and outdoor signs         See section
                                     8-6B-3 of this code
Bowling alley                        $15.00    per year, per alley
Building material sales              See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Building processing sales            See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Candy manufacturing                  See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Candy retail store                   $ 75.00   per year
Canteen service                      50.00     per year
Canvassers (see Solicitation)                  
Car start service (not including     75.00     per year
existing business)
Catch basin cleaning contractor (see           
Contractors)
Catering service:                              
 First truck - food truck sticker   50.00     per year
 Each additional truck              30.00     per year
Cattery                              100.00    per year
Charitable solicitation permit (see
Solicitation)
Cheese manufacturing                 See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Chemical shop (retail or wholesale)  See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Christmas tree sales                 $ 50.00   per year
Cigarette dealer                     75.00     per year
Coffee shop                          75.00     per year
Coin operated devices:                         
 1¢ - 25¢ and over                50.00     per year
 Amusement only device              75.00     per year
 Cigarette                          75.00     per year
 Electronic video games or combined 250.00    per year
  amusement only device and video
 Jukebox                            75.00     per year
 Nonprofit                          5.00      per year
Contractors:                                   
 Air conditioning and refrigeration 75.00     per year
 Carpenters                         75.00     per year
 Catch basin cleaning               75.00     per year
 Drain layers                       75.00     per year
 Electrical                         100.00    per year
 Equipment sales                    75.00     per year
 General                            75.00     per year
 House movers                       100.00    per year
 Roofers                            75.00     per year
 Sewer and water                    50.00     per year
 Sign erectors                      75.00     per year
 Structural steel erectors          See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
 Contractors - all others           $75.00    per year
Currency exchanges                   75.00     per year
Dairy plant                          See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Dancing, public                      $100.00   per year
Dancing school or studio             50.00     per year, 1 instructor
                                     5.00      per year, each additional
                                               instructor
                                     75.00     maximum
Day nursery                          75.00     per year
Dog or cat license (see Animals)               
Drain layer (see Contractors)                  
Dray or express service business     50.00     per year
vehicle
Drive-in eating place                75.00     per year
Driveway permit                      10.00      
Drugstores (including miscellaneous  75.00     per year
items)
Dry cleaners                         75.00     per year
Dry cleaning plant                   See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Electrical contractors (see                    
Contractors)
Electrical inspections               See section
                                     8-1C-6 of this code
Electrical sign shop                 $75.00    per year
Elevator inspection                  20.00     over actual cost of inspection
Engravers                            See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Federal firearm licensees            $500.00   per year
Firearms sales and service           250.00    per year
Florists:                                      
 Nursery                            See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
 Retail                             $75.00    per year
Food packaging                       See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Food processing                      See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Food takeout, cooked foods           $75.00    per year
Food truck sales route (all edibles  50.00     per year
including beverages)
Foreign fire insurance brokers       2 percent of gross receipts
Fuel oil dealers:                    $ 50.00   per year
 Additional vehicles                25.00     per vehicle
Furniture movers                     50.00     per year
Gas bottlers, dealers                500.00    per year
Gasoline stations:                             
 0 to 4,999 gallon storage tank     50.00     per year
 5,000 to 8,999 gallon tank         75.00     per year
 9,000 to 11,999 gallon tank        100.00    per year
 12,000 to 15,999 gallon tank       125.00    per year
 16,000 gallon tank and over        150.00    per year
Grocery and meat market              See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Hardware store                       $75.00    per year
Heavy industry                       See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Hospital                             $375.00   per year
Hotel and motel                      75.00     per year, plus $8.00 each
                                               individual room
House movers (see Contractors)                 
Ice cream manufacturing              See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Ice cream retail store               $75.00    per year
Improved real estate inspections     See subsection
                                     8-2-4D of this code
Jeweler                              $ 75.00   per year
Junk dealer                          500.00    per year
Kennels (see Animals)                          
Ladies' apparel shop                 75.00     per year
Laundromat:                                    
 Attended                           75.00     per year
 Unattended                         150.00    per year
Laundry (bleach manufacturing)       See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Laundry plant                        See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Laundry vehicle                      $50.00    per year
Lawn mower sales and service         75.00     per year
Liquor sales                         See section
                                     3-3-4-7 of this title
Lumberyard, including paint and      See section
hardware                             3-1A-2 of this article
Machine shop                         See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Manufacturing (light)                See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Meat market only                     $75.00    per year
Men's apparel shop                   75.00     per year
Milk sale store (drugstores and gas  75.00     per year
stations included)
Motor vehicles                       See section
                                     6-1-5 of this code
Motorcycle sales and service         $ 75.00   per year
Moving building permit               0.50      for each $100.00 value up to
                                               $5,000.00
                                     0.10      for each $100.00 and fraction
                                               thereof over $5,000.00
                                     100.00    minimum
Paint, hardware and wallpaper        75.00     per year
Parking lot                          100.00    per year
Pawnbroker                           1,000.00  per year
Peddlers (see Solicitation)                     
Pest control                         75.00     per year
Photographer, home solicitor         100.00    per year
Plats, final                         1.00      per lot
Plats, preliminary                   50.00     plus $1.00 per lot
                                     55.00     minimum
Plumbing permits                     See title 8, chapter 1, article B of this
                                     code
Pool and billiard tables             $ 20.00   per year, per table
Power equipment, sales, service and  150.00    per year
rental
Printing shop, other than news items 75.00     per year
Restaurants:                                    
 Seating 0 to 50                    75.00     per year
 51 to 99                           100.00    per year
 100 or more                        150.00    per year
Roofers (see Contractors)                      
Roofing and paving material sales,   See section
wholesale or plant                   3-1A-2 of this article
Scavenger service                    $500.00   per year
Secondhand shop                      500.00    per year
Sheet metal shop                     See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Shoe retail store                    $75.00    per year
Sidewalk construction or repair      10.00     per residence for which
permit                                         sidewalks shall be constructed
                                               per 500 cubic feet or fraction
Sidewalk space permit:               5.00      thereof included in the vault,
                                               room, space or structure used or
                                               maintained under the permit
 Permit transfer                    10.00      
Sign erectors (see Contractors)                 
Snow removal and plowing business    5.00      per year
Soft drinks:
 Distributors                       See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
 Manufacturers                      See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Solicitation                         See chapter 5 of this title
Sporting goods - retail (including   See section
shotguns only)                       3-1A-2 of this article
Stationery and office supplies,      See section
retail                               3-1A-2 of this article
Structural steel erectors (see                 
Contractors)
Swimming pools                       $ 25.00    
TV broadcasting apparatus, each      250.00    per year
antenna, tower or other structure
TV sales and service                 See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
TV studios and communications        $500.00   per year
businesses
Table game - non-coin operated; not  50.00     per year
otherwise classified
Tattoo parlors                       500.00     
Taxicabs:                                       
 Business license, expires December 50.00     per year
  31
 Driver's license                   10.00     per year
 Vehicle license, each additional   25.00     per year
 Vehicle sticker                    Current rate
Theater                              500.00    per year
Tobacco sales                        75.00     per year
Toys, retail sales                   75.00     per year
Travel agency                        75.00     per year
Undertaker                           150.00    per year
Variety store                        See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
Video gaming establishment:          $1,000.00 per year
 Video gaming terminal permit                  
  sticker:
  Licensed establishment           1,000.00  per terminal, per year
  Licensed veterans establishment  500.00    per terminal, per year
Water and sewage connections:                  
 Leyden Township                    1,000.00   
 Proviso Township                   1,000.00   
Welding store                        See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
All others                           See section
                                     3-1A-2 of this article
 
(Ord. O-10-76, 4-27-1976; amd. Ord. O-02-79, 1-23-1979; Ord. O-06-80, 4-8-1980;
Ord. O-18-80, 10-14-1980; Ord. O-62-89, 12-18-1989; 1992 Code; Ord. O-24-93, 7-
19-1993; Ord. O-32-93, 10-18-1993; Ord. O-11-98, 2-9-1998; Ord. O-13-98, 2-9-
1998; Ord. O-53-98, 12-21-1998; Ord. O-22-2004, 12-6-2004; Ord. O-09-2005, 3-
21-2005, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2005; Ord. O-23-2012, 11-5-2012; Ord. O-24-
2013, 11-18-2013; Ord. O-01-2015, 2-9-2015; Ord. O-06-2016, 3-21-2016; Ord. O-
10-2016, 5-2-2016)
3-1A-2: FEE BASED ON SQUARE FOOTAGE:
   A.   Applicable Fee Determined; Schedule:
      1.   Businesses Enumerated And Under Five Thousand Square Feet: Every
business enumerated in section
3-1A-1 of this article and having a floor area from zero to five thousand
(5,000) square feet shall pay the fee set out in said section
3-1A-1 of this article.
      2.   Businesses Not Enumerated: Every business not enumerated in section
3-1A-1 of this article shall pay a yearly license fee per square foot of floor
area as shall be determined by the license fee schedule hereinafter set forth.
      3.   Businesses Enumerated And Over Five Thousand Square Feet: Every
business having a floor area over five thousand (5,000) square feet and
enumerated in section
3-1A-1 of this article shall pay the greater of the enumerated license fee and
the yearly fee that is determined by the license fee schedule hereinafter set
forth. (1992 Code)
      4.   Schedule Of License Fees:
Square Footage  Fee
Square Footage        Fee
   0 to 3,000      $ 75.00
   3,001 to 5,000  150.00
   5,001 to 8,000  300.00
   8,001 to 10,000 450.00
   10,001 to 15,000600.00
   15,001 to 25,000750.00
   25,001 to 100,001,125.00
   100,001 and over1,500.00
 
   (Ord. O-22-2004, 12-6-2004)
   B.   Calculation Of Floor Area: Floor area shall be calculated as herein
defined: Total floor area applicable for the determination of the yearly
license fee shall include the sum total of all the floor area in use or
reserved for or retained for the use of the business including, but not
restricted to, principal and accessory floor area, cellars and basements, even
though any such floor area may be temporarily vacant or not in use. (Ord. O-62-
89, 12-18-1989; amd. 1992 Code)
CHAPTER 2
OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax
3-2-1-1: Home Rule Municipal Retailers' And Service Occupation Tax
3-2-2: Municipal Service Occupation Tax
3-2-3: Municipal Use Tax
3-2-4: Municipal Utility Tax
3-2-4-1: Municipal Utility Tax Relief
3-2-4-2: Municipal Utility Tax Exemption For Affected Political Subdivisions
3-2-4-3: Municipal Electric Utility Tax
3-2-5: Municipal Leasing Occupation Tax
3-2-6: Amusements Tax
3-2-7: Hotel/Motel Operator's Occupation Tax
3-2-8: Foreign Fire Insurance Brokers
3-2-9: Tax On Places For Eating (Rep. by Ord. O-02-2013, 2-11-2013)
3-2-10: Municipal Gas Use Tax
3-2-11: Parking Lot And Garage Occupation Tax
3-2-12:    Public Right Of Way License Fee
3-2-13:    Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
3-2-14:    Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax
3-2-15:    Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax
3-2-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property at retail in this city at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the
course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the
provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1, as amended.
   B.   Report Required: Every person engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the city shall file on or before the
last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue
required by section 3 of "an act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in
the business of selling tangible personal property to purchases for use or
consumption 1 ", approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
   C.   Payment Of Tax: At the time the report is filed, there shall be paid to
the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of
the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding
month. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
3-2-1-1: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property
titled or registered with an agency of this state's government, at retail in
Northlake at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales
made in the course of such business while this section is in effect; and a tax
is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the business
of making sales of service, at the rate of one percent (1%) of the selling
price of all tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen as an
incident to a sale of service. Such "home rule municipal retailers' occupation
tax" and the "home rule municipal service occupation tax" shall not be
applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed
off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks
and food which has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription
and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine
testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
The imposition of these home rule taxes is in accordance with the provisions of
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1 and 5/8-11-5. The provisions and
definitions of those sections are hereby incorporated into this section. (Ord.
O-44-95, 8-28-1995, eff. 10-1-1995)
3-2-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this
municipality in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one
percent (1%) of the cost price of all tangible personal property or in the form
of real estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the
provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-15, as amended.
   B.   Report Required: Every supplier or serviceman required to account for
municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of this municipality shall
file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state
department of revenue required by 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/1 and the
"service occupation tax act", approved July 10, 1961, as amended.
   C.   Payment Of Tax: At the time the report is filed, there shall be paid to
the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (Ord. O-23-
79, 11-20-1979)
3-2-3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions
of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6 upon the privilege of using in the
municipality any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside
Illinois at retail from a retailer and which is titled or registered with an
agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%)
of the selling price of such tangible property with selling price to have the
meaning as defined in the use tax act 1 , approved July 14, 1955.
   B.   Collection Of Tax: Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois
department of revenue for all municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid
before the title or certificate of registration for the personal property is
issued. (Ord. O-01-80, 1-8-1980)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.
3-2-4: MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply: (Ord. O-13-90, 3-5-1990)
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for the transmission of messages or
the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling
gas or electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may
be, and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, service and
property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith and
shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of
transmitting said messages, without any deduction on account of the cost of the
service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or
service cost or any other expenses whatsoever.
"Gross receipts" shall not include any charges added to customers' bills
pursuant to the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-221 or 5/9-222
of the "Illinois public utilities act" or any other separately stated charge
added to customers' bills in respect to any tax or other governmental
imposition and shall not include receipts from any sale to a customer if the
taxpayer is prohibited by federal or state constitution, treaty, convention,
statute or court decision from recovering the related tax liability from such
customer.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or
political subdivision of the state or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
TRANSMITTING MESSAGES: In addition to the usual and popular meaning of person
to person communication, includes the furnishing, for a consideration, of
services or facilities (whether owned or leased) or both to persons in
connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do not, in
turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith but shall not include
such furnishings of services or facilities to persons for the transmission of
messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for the
transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration by such persons to
other persons for the transmission of messages. (Ord. O-13-90, 3-5-1990; amd.
Ord. O-16-90, 3-19-1990; 1992 Code)
   B.   Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following
occupations or privileges: (Ord. O-04-98, 1-26-1998)
      1.   Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of
electricity, cellular airwaves or other similar transmitting methods at the
rate of six percent (6%) of the gross receipts from such business originating
within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. O-04-98, 1-26-1998; amd. Ord. O-
04-2004, 1-5-2004)
         a.   The rate of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax is
imposed under the provisions of sections 5025 and 5030 of the simplified
municipal telecommunications tax act, PA 92-0526. (Ord. O-04-2004, 1-5-2004)
      2.   Reserved. (Ord. O-36-2005, 12-19-2005)
      3.   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate
limits of the city and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the
gross receipts therefrom. (Ord. O-04-98, 1-26-1998)
   C.   Exemptions From Tax: No tax is imposed by this section with respect to
any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such
business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be
made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof,
nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling electricity or engaged in the business of transmitting
messages be subject to taxation under the provisions of this section for such
transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of
the municipal retailers' occupation tax act 1  authorized by section 5/8-11-
1 of the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. O-13-90, 3-5-1990; amd. Ord. O-36-2005,
12-19-2005)
   D.   Tax Returns: On or before May 31, 1990, each taxpayer shall make a
return to the city clerk for the month of April 1990, stating:
      1.   His name;
      2.   His principal place of business;
      3.   His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed;
      4.   Amount of tax;
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a
like return to the city collector for a corresponding one month period.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making
such return, pay to the city collector, the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided, that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billing of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of
any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based
upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
   E.   Credits For Overpayments: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has
been paid which was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as
the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously
paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be
so credited.
   F.   Delinquent Taxes; Limit On Collection: No action to recover any amount
of tax due under the provisions of this section shall be commenced more than
three (3) years after the due date of such amount. (Ord. O-13-90, 3-5-1990)
   G.   Penalty: Any taxpayer who fails to make a return or who makes a
fraudulent return or who wilfully violates any other provision of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and, in addition, shall be liable in a
civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. O-13-90, 3-5-1990; amd. 1992
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
3-2-4-1: MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX RELIEF:
   A.   Short Title: This section shall be known and may be cited as the CITY
OF NORTHLAKE UTILITY TAX RELIEF ORDINANCE.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide grants to senior
citizens, disabled persons and other residents of the city with limited income
to relieve those citizens from the burdens of utility taxes against their
restricted earning power.
   C.   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to
them as follows:
CITY: The city of Northlake, Cook County, Illinois.
CLAIMANT: An individual who has filed a claim under this section.
HOUSEHOLD: A claimant or a claimant and his spouse living together in the same
residence.
HOUSEHOLD INCOME: The combined income of the members of a household.
INCOME: Adjusted gross income, properly reportable for federal income tax
purposes under the provisions of the internal revenue code, modified by adding
thereto the sum of the following amounts to the extent deducted or excluded
from gross income in the computation of adjusted gross income:
      1.   An amount equal to all amounts paid or accrued as interest or
dividends during the taxable year;
      2.   An amount equal to all amounts received during the taxable year as
an annuity under an annuity, endowment or life insurance contract or under any
other contract or agreement;
      3.   An amount equal to the amount of benefits paid under the federal
social security act during the taxable year;
      4.   An amount equal to the amount of benefits paid under the railroad
retirement act during the taxable year;
      5.   An amount equal to the total amount of cash public assistance
payments received from any governmental agency during the taxable year.
INTERNAL REVENUE CODE: The United States internal revenue code of 1954, or any
successor law or laws relating to federal income taxes in effect for the year.
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX: The tax imposed and passed on to consumers of utilities
pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2.
RESIDENCE: The principal dwelling place occupied in this city by a household
and so much of the surrounding land as is reasonably necessary for use of the
dwelling as a home and includes rental property, mobile homes, single- family
dwellings and units in multi-family, multi- dwelling or multi-purpose
buildings. If the assessor has established a specific legal description for a
portion of a property constituting the residence, then that portion of property
shall be deemed "residence" for the purposes of this section.
TAXABLE YEAR: The calendar year during which municipal utility taxes became due
and payable by the consumer of the utility. (Ord. O-14-90, 3-5-1990)
   D.   Amount Of Grant:
      1.   Qualifications To Receive Grant: Any individual whose annual
household income is less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) and whose
household is liable for payment of municipal utility taxes and is domiciled in
this city at the time he files his claim is entitled to claim a grant under
this section.
      2.   Limitation: The amount of grant which a claimant is entitled to
claim for relief from municipal utility taxes which were paid or payable during
the last preceding tax year are as follows:
 
Income                  Amount Of Grant
Under $10,000.00        100 percent of municipal utility taxes
$10,001.00 – $14,000.0The greater of $25.00 or 75 percent of municipal
                        utility taxes
$14,001.00 – $17,000.0The greater of $25.00 or 50 percent of municipal
                        utility taxes
$17,001.00 – $20,000.0The greater of $25.00 or 25 percent of municipal
                        utility taxes
 
If a claimant has occupied more than one residence in the taxable year, he may
claim only one residence for any part of a month.
   E.   Procedures:
      1.   Filing Claims:
         a.   Claims for the taxable year must be filed between January 1 and
May 1 of the following year on forms prescribed by the city. (Ord. O-08-2001,
2-5-2001)
         b.   The right to file a claim under this section shall be personal to
the claimant and shall not survive his death, but such right may be exercised
on behalf of a claimant by his legal guardian or attorney-in-fact. If a
claimant dies after having filed a timely claim, the amount thereof shall be
disbursed to his surviving spouse or, if no spouse survives, to his surviving
dependent minor children in equal parts, provided the spouse or child, as the
case may be, resided with the claimant at the time he filed his claim. If, at
the time of disbursement, neither the claimant nor his spouse is surviving and
no dependent minor children of the claimant are surviving, the amount of the
claim shall escheat to the city.
         c.   Only one member of a household may file a claim under this
section in any calendar year; where both members of a household are otherwise
entitled to claim a grant under this section, they must agree as to which of
them will file a claim for that year. (Ord. O-14-90, 3-5-1990)
      2.   Approval Or Denial Of Claims:
         a.   Upon receipt of a timely filed claim, the finance director shall
determine whether the claimant is a person entitled to a grant under this
section and the amount of grant to which he is entitled hereunder. The city may
require the claimant to furnish reasonable proof of the statement of domicile,
household income, municipal utility taxes paid and other matters on which
entitlement is based and may withhold payment of a grant until such additional
proof is furnished. (Ord. O-14-90, 3-5-1990; amd. Ord. O-01-92, 1-20-1992; Ord.
O-20-99, 12-6-1999)
         b.   The finance director shall deny claims which have been
fraudulently prepared or when he finds that the claimant has acquired title to
his residence or has paid utilities for his residence primarily for the
purposes of receiving a grant under this section. All applicants shall provide
satisfactory proof of residency and occupancy. (Ord. O-08-2001, 2-5-2001)
         c.   The finance director shall order the payment from appropriations
made for that purpose of grants to claimants under this section in the amounts
to which the finance director has determined they are entitled. If a claim is
denied, the finance director shall cause written notice of that denial and the
reasons for that denial to be sent to the claimant. (Ord. O-14-90, 3-5-1990;
amd. Ord. O-01-92, 1-20-1992; Ord. O-20-99, 12-6-1999)
      3.   Appeals:
         a.   Any claimant aggrieved by the action of the finance director
under this section, whether in the reduction of the amount of grant claimed or
in the denial of the claim, may request, in writing, that the finance director
reconsider his prior determination, setting out the facts on which his request
is based. The finance director shall consider the request and either modify or
affirm his prior determination.
         b.   The decision of the finance director to affirm his prior
determination or the failure of the finance director to act on a request for
reconsideration within sixty (60) days may be appealed to the city council for
review. The city council shall consider the appeal and either modify or affirm
the finance director's prior recommendation. (Ord. O-14-90, 3-5-1990; amd. 1992
Code; Ord. O-20-99, 12-6-1999)
   F.   Records, Information And Compliance: Every claimant of a grant under
this section shall keep such records, render such statements, file such forms
and comply with such rules and regulations as the city may from time to time
prescribe.
All information received by the city from claims filed under this section or
from any investigation conducted under the provisions of this section shall be
confidential, except for official purposes within the city pursuant to the
"Freedom of Information Act", 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/7A and 7B.
Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from publishing or
making available reasonable statistics concerning the operation of the grant
programs contained herein wherein the contents of claims are grouped into
aggregates in such a way that information contained in any individual claim
shall not be disclosed.
   G.   Fraudulent Claims; Penalties: Any person who files a fraudulent claim
for a grant under this section or who, for compensation, prepares a claim for a
grant and knowingly enters false information on a claim form for any claimant
under this section or who fraudulently files multiple claim forms, upon a
finding of guilty, shall be imposed a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). In addition, a person convicted of such fraud shall be
permanently barred from the program of utility tax relief established under
this section. The city may recover from a claimant any amount paid under this
section on account of an erroneous or fraudulent claim, together with six
percent (6%) interest per year. A prosecution for a violation of this
subsection may be commenced at any time within three (3) years of the
commission of that violation. (Ord. O-14-90, 3-5-1990; amd. 1992 Code)
3-2-4-2: MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX EXEMPTION FOR AFFECTED POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   The local political subdivisions affected by the North/Railroad Avenue
commercial redevelopment area tax increment allocation finance program are
hereby exempted from paying the municipal utility tax imposed by the city as
set forth in ordinance O-13-90 and as amended in ordinance O-16-90 until
September 13, 2014, or until the costs of the project are retired.
The exemption shall take effect upon the allocation of the increased taxes, as
a result of the project, to retire the project costs.
   B.   The local political subdivisions affected by the North/Wolf tax
increment financing redevelopment plan and project are hereby exempted from
paying the municipal utility tax imposed by the city as set forth in ordinance
O-13-90 and as amended in ordinance O-16-90 until the year 2014, or until the
costs of the project are retired.
The exemption shall take effect upon the allocation of the increased taxes, as
a result of the project, to retire the project costs. (Ord. O-30-91, 9-13-1991)
   C.   The city, however, still recognizes the fiscal responsibility of each
political subdivision to its taxpayers as a taxing body. As such, any and all
said political subdivisions exempted from paying the municipal utility tax must
qualify for said exemption by maintaining a current tax levy not to exceed two
and one-half percent (2.5%) over the tax levy of the previous year for that
political subdivision.
   D.   Any local political subdivisions exempted from paying the municipal
utility tax shall submit to the city their annual tax levy for the years 1994
and 1995, no later than January 1, 1995, and subsequently submit their annual
tax levy no later than January 1 of each succeeding year. (Ord. O-01-95, 1-2-
1995)
3-2-4-3: MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX:
   A.   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CITY: The City of Northlake.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company,
Municipal corporation, the State or any of its political subdivisions, any
State university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or
maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other
representative operating within this State under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this State permanently
or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this State.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes
of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of
electricity by a public utility, as defined in section
8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code 1 , directly in the generation,
production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the
City, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
   B.   Municipal Electric Utility Tax Imposed:
      1.   Pursuant to section
8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code 2  and any and all other applicable
authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming
electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the
corporate limits of the City as the following rates, calculated on a monthly
basis for each purchaser:
         a.   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.576 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         b.   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.403 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         c.   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.317 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         d.   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.300 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         e.   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.281 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         f.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.280 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         g.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.041 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         h.   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.033 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         i.   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.025 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         j.   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt-hours in a month; 0.017 cents per kilowatt-hour.
      2.   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the City, the United States of America, the State or any other
political subdivision of the State.
      3.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the tax shall
not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax
would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the
constitution of the State of Illinois.
      4.   The tax provided for in this subsection B shall be imposed with
respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential customers
beginning with the first bill issued on or after September 1, 1998, and with
respect to the use or consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers
beginning with the first bill issued to such customers for delivery services in
accordance with section 16-104 of the Public Utilities Act 3 , or the first
bill issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever occurs
sooner.
   C.   Collection:
      1.   Subject to the provisions of subsection F of this Section, regarding
the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this Section
shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of
business in the State who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time
and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
      2.   Any tax required to be collected by this Section, and any tax in
fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the City by the person
delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity
shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the
charges for which are written off as uncollectible after reasonable charges are
thereafter collected, the person delivering the electricity shall be obligated
to remit such tax to the City.
      3.   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to
such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect
to reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data
to the City upon request. For purposes of this Section, any partial payment of
a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to
be the delivery of electricity. (Ord. O-40-98, 8-31-1998)
   D.   Tax Remittance And Return:
      1.   Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return in a
form prescribed by the Finance Director. The return and accompanying remittance
shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during
which the tax is collected or is required to be collected under this section.
      2.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from
the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under this section, then
the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the Finance Director
and pay the tax directly to the Finance Director on or before the last day of
the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
   E.   Resales Of Electricity:
      1.   Electricity that is delivered to a person in this City shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the Finance
Director and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity
and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially
nontaxable as a sale for resale.
      2.   If a person who receives electricity in the City claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the Finance
Director for a resale number. In such application, the applicant shall state
facts showing that it is not liable for the tax imposed by this section on any
purchases of electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the
Finance Director may reasonably require.
      3.   Upon approval of the application, the Finance Director shall assign
a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
      4.   The Finance Director may cancel the resale number of any person if
the person fails to pay any tax payable under this section for electricity used
or consumed by the person, or if the number: a) was obtained through
misrepresentation, or b) is no longer necessary because the person having
obtained the number has discontinued making resales.
      5.   If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption
and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this section
directly to the Finance Director pursuant to subsection D2 of this section on
the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes and shall collect
the tax pursuant to subsection C of this section, and remit the tax pursuant to
subsection D1 of this section, on the amount of electricity delivered by the
reseller to a purchaser.
      6.   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the Finance
Director the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller and such
other information that the Finance Director may reasonably require. (Ord. O-40-
98, 8-31-1998; amd. Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
   F.   Books And Records: Every tax collector and every taxpayer required to
pay the tax imposed by this section shall keep accurate books and records of
its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting
the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability
under this section. The books and records shall be subject to and available for
inspection by the City at all times during business hours of the day. (Ord. O-
40-98, 8-31-1998)
   G.   Credits And Refunds: Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code,
in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the City, no person
shall be entitled to a refund of, or a credit for, a tax imposed under this
section unless that person files a written claim for refund or credit no later
than one year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted to the
Finance Director. (Ord. O-40-98, 8-31-1998; amd. Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
3 1. 220 ILCS 5/16-104.
3-2-5: MUNICIPAL LEASING OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of renting or leasing tangible personal property to the users thereof
at the rate of one-half of one percent (1/2%) of the gross receipts from such
renting or leasing made in the course of such business while this section is in
effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-
10-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
   B.   Tax Returns: Every person engaged in the business of renting or leasing
tangible personal property in the City shall file with the State Department of
Revenue the return in the manner as required by law.
   C.   Payment Of Tax: At the time the return is filed, there shall be paid to
the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of
the receipts from renting or leasing tangible personal property during the
preceding month. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. 1992 Code)
3-2-6: AMUSEMENTS TAX 1 :
   A.   Definition: The word "amusement", as used in this section, means, but
is not limited to, any theatrical, dramatic, musical or spectacular
performance, motion picture show, animal act, circus, rodeo, dance, bingo game,
athletic event, craft show, exhibition, exposition, fair or other similar
event, excluding such functions put on or hosted by a charitable or educational
institution and conducted on the premises owned or controlled by that
educational or charitable institution. (Ord. O-19-2000, 5-1-2000)
   B.   Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed upon all amusements within the City,
except as excluded in subsection A of this section, at the rate of fifty cents
($0.50) for every person who pays a consideration for admission to participate
in such amusements. (Ord. O-01-86, 1-20-1986; amd. 1992 Code)
   C.   Collection And Payment Of Tax: It shall be the responsibility of the
owner, manager or operator of any building, arena, theater or other venue where
the amusement is held to collect the tax imposed by this section. The tax
herein imposed shall be due and payable, quarterly, on the tenth day of each
month to the City Collector. (Ord. O-07-2004, 4-5-2004)
   D.   Reports Required: On or before the tenth day of each month following
the quarter after the effective date hereof, each person liable for the tax
herein imposed shall make a report, in writing, and file it with the City
stating the total amount collected during the preceding quarter for admission
to participate in such amusement. (Ord. O-01-81, 1-13-1981; amd. 1992 Code)
   E.   Inspection Of Books And Records: The Mayor, either personally or
through his authorized agents, shall have the right at all reasonable times to
inspect and check the books and records of any "amusement" as herein defined or
person liable for such tax insofar as they pertain to admissions. (Ord. O-01-
81, 1-13-1981)
   F.   Violations And Penalties: It is unlawful for any person to produce,
present or conduct any amusement, for gain or profit, without the payment of
the tax herein set forth. Any person who shall produce, present or conduct any
amusements, for gain or profit, without payment of the tax or who shall violate
any other provisions of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day
such violation shall continue shall be regarded as a separate offense. (Ord. O-
01-86, 1-20-1986; amd. 1992 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 4 of this title.
3-2-7: HOTEL/MOTEL OPERATOR'S OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon all persons
engaged in the business of renting, leasing or letting any hotel or motel
accommodations within the City, at a rate of five and five-tenths percent
(5.5%) of the gross rental receipts from such renting, leasing or letting.
(Ord. O-28-2003, 11-17-2003)
   B.   Payment And Penalty For Nonpayment:
      1.   Every owner, manager, or operator of hotel or motel accommodations
within the City shall file a sworn tax return on a monthly basis with the
Finance Director showing tax receipts received with respect to hotel or motel
accommodation space rented or leased during the preceding monthly period, upon
forms prescribed by the Finance Director. At the time of filing the tax return,
the owner, manager, or operator of hotel or motel accommodations shall pay to
the Finance Director all taxes due for the period to which the tax return
applies.
      2.   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the
rate of two percent (2%) per month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid
shall be added and collected. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as
herein provided, upon the request of the Finance Director the corporation
counsel shall bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of
the tax in behalf of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction with cost
of such enforcement to be borne by the owner.
   C.   Records: Every owner, manager, or operator of hotel or motel
accommodations in the City shall keep books and records showing the prices,
rents, or charges made or charged, and occupancies taxable under this section.
The Finance Director, or his designate, shall at all times have full access to
those books and records. (Ord. O-28-2003, 11-17-2003; amd. Ord. O-24-2018, 11-
19-2018)
   D.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Licenses: If the President, after hearing
held by or for him, shall find that any person has wilfully avoided payment of
the tax imposed by this section, he may suspend or revoke all City licenses
held by that tax evader. The owner, manager, or operator of the hotel or motel
accommodations shall have an opportunity to be heard and such hearing shall not
be held less than five (5) days after notice of the time and place of the
hearing, addressed to the owner, manager, or operator at his last known place
of business. The suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or
discharge the owner, manager, or operator of hotel or motel accommodations from
his civil liability for the payment of the tax nor for prosecution of such
offense. (Ord. O-28-2003, 11-17-2003)
3-2-8: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BROKERS:
   A.   Tax Imposed 1 : Any foreign fire insurance broker who is engaged in
effecting fire insurance in the City shall pay to the Finance Director for the
maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department Pension Fund a sum of money
equal to two percent (2%) of the gross receipts received each year upon fire
insurance policies by all agents of such broker for any insurance effected or
agreed to be effected on property in the City by or with the broker during each
year. (1976 Code § 6-15-2; amd. Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
   B.   Report Required: Every person acting as representative in the City for
or on behalf of any foreign fire insurance broker shall, on or before July 15
of each year, render to the Finance Director a full, true and just account,
verified by his oath, of all premiums which have been received by him or on
behalf of the broker during the year ending the preceding July 1 on such fire
insurance policies. (1976 Code § 6-15-3; amd. Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
   C.   Payment Of Tax: All payments under the provisions of this section shall
be made on or before July 15 following the termination of the year for which
such payments are due. (1976 Code § 6-15-4)
   D.   Compliance With Provisions: No corporation or association not
incorporated under the laws of the State shall engage in effecting fire
insurance in the City or to transact any business of fire insurance in the City
without fully complying with the provisions of this section. (1976 Code § 6-15-
1)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  3-1A-1 of this title.
3-2-9: TAX ON PLACES FOR EATING:
(Rep. by Ord. O-02-2013, 2-11-2013)
3-2-10: MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX:
   A.   Short Title: The tax imposed by this section shall be known as the
MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by
the City of Northlake, the State of Illinois, or any other Municipal
corporation or political subdivision thereof.
   B.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this State, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT: The Public Utilities Act 1  as amended.
PUBLIC UTILITY: A public utility as defined in section 3-105 of the Public
Utilities Act.
RETAIL PURCHASER: Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.
SALE AT RETAIL: Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or
consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means
any person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas.
   C.   Tax:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided by this section a tax is imposed on the
privilege of using or consuming gas in the City that is purchased in a sale at
retail at the rate of five cents ($0.05) per therm.
      2.   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on
the retail purchaser, and nothing in this section shall be construed to impose
a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or
transporting gas. (Ord. O-26-2005, 11-7-2005)
      3.   The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas
delivered to the retail purchaser's premises, to the public utility designated
to collect the tax pursuant to subsection D of this section on or before the
payment due date of the public utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or
directly to the Finance Director on or before the fifteenth day of the second
month following the month in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser
if no public utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant to
subsection D of this section or if the gas is delivered by a person other than
a public utility so designated. (Ord. O-26-2005, 11-7-2005; amd. Ord. O-24-
2018, 11-19-2018)
      4.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
person, business or activity which, under the Constitutions of the United
States or State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the
City. (Ord. O-26-2005, 11-7-2005)
      5.   A person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the
tax imposed by this section with respect to the use or consumption of the gas,
but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax
directly to the Finance Director on or before the fifteenth day of the second
month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed. (Ord. O-26-
2005, 11-7-2005; amd. Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
      6.   The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail
purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after December 1, 2005.
      7.   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this section whether as a result of mistake of fact
or an error of law, then such amount shall be: a) credited against any tax due,
or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment or b) subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become due;
provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to
the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited or refunded.
      8.   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this section shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of
such amount.
   D.   Collection Of Tax By Public Utility: The Mayor and City Finance
Director are each authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the tax
imposed by this section with any public utility providing gas service in the
City. The contract shall include and substantially conform with the following
provisions:
      1.   The public utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as an
independent contractor; (Ord. O-26-2005, 11-7-2005)
      2.   The public utility will remit collected taxes to the Finance
Director no more often than once each month;
      3.   The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections
a service fee equal to three percent (3%) of the amounts collected and timely
remitted to the Finance Director; (Ord. O-26-2005, 11-7-2005; amd. Ord. O-24-
2018, 11-19-2018)
      4.   The public utility shall not be responsible to the City for any tax
not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and
      5.   Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon.
   E.   Books And Records: Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and
records, including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the
activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax
liability or exemption under this section. All such books and records shall, at
all times during business hours, be subject to and available for inspection by
the City. (Ord. O-26-2005, 11-7-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
3-2-11: PARKING LOT AND GARAGE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, whenever any of the
following words, terms or definitions are used, they shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this subsection:
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled including any trailer or
other device or apparatus designed to be towed by a motor vehicle.
OPERATOR: Any person conducting the operation of a "parking lot or garage", as
defined by this subsection, or receiving the consideration for parking or
storage of motor vehicles at such parking place.
PARKING LOT OR GARAGE: Any building, structure, premises, enclosure, or other
place, whether enclosed or not, except a public way, within the City of
Northlake, where two (2) or more motor vehicles are stored, housed, or parked
for hire, charge, fee, or other valuable consideration in a condition ready for
use, or where rent or compensation is paid to the owner, manager, or lessee of
the premises for the housing, storing, sheltering, keeping, or maintaining of
such motor vehicles; provided, however, that said terms shall not include
residential parking provided for single-family homes or multiple- family
dwelling units wherein an arrangement for such parking is provided on a rental
basis to meet the terms of the Northlake zoning ordinance for off street
parking, the consideration therefor being set forth in the house or apartment
lease or in a separate writing between the landlord and tenant, or if in a
condominium between the condominium association and the owner, occupant or
guest of a unit whether the parking charge is payable to the landlord,
condominium association, or to the operator of the parking lot or garage.
PERSON: Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate,
association, partnership, limited liability company, firm, club, company,
corporation, business trust, institution, agency, government corporation,
municipal corporation, district or other political subdivision, or any other
entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
   B.   Tax Imposed:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided by this subsection B, there is imposed
upon the use and privilege of parking a motor vehicle in or upon any parking
lot or garage in the City of Northlake a tax of one dollar ten cents ($1.10)
for each such motor vehicle parked in or upon each parking lot or garage for
every twenty four (24) hour period or fraction thereof; provided, however, that
if the charge for parking is made on a weekly or monthly basis, the tax shall
be calculated at the rate of six dollars twenty five cents ($6.25) per week or
twelve dollars fifty cents ($12.50) per month, respectively.
      2.   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on
the person who seeks the privilege of occupying space in or upon the parking
lot or garage (such person hereinafter referred to as recipient).
      3.   The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to residential off
street parking of house or apartment tenants or condominiums required by the
Northlake zoning ordinance, wherein an arrangement for such tenant parking is
provided in the house or apartment lease or in a separate writing between the
landlord and tenant, or if in a condominium between the condominium association
and the owner, occupant or guest of a unit, whether the parking charge is
payable to the landlord, condominium association, or to the operator of the
parking lot or garage.
      4.   The tax imposed by this section shall be paid in addition to any and
all other taxes. It shall be the duty of the operator of every parking lot or
garage to secure the tax from the recipient of the parking privilege and to
remit the tax to the City of Northlake under procedures prescribed by the
Finance Director or as otherwise provided in this section.
      5.   Every person required to collect the tax imposed by this section
shall secure the tax from the recipient at the time the price, charge or rent
to which it applies is collected. If the recipient is given any invoice,
receipt, or other statement of the price, charge or rent paid or payable, the
tax shall be stated, charged and shown separately on the document.
   C.   Rules And Regulations Authorized: The Finance Director is authorized to
adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this section.
   D.   Maintenance Of Records: It shall be the duty of every operator to keep
accurate and complete books and records to which the Finance Director shall at
all times have full access. These books and records shall include all cash
register receipts, all tickets and voided tags required by subsection E of this
section and a daily sheet showing: 1) the number of motor vehicles parked in or
on each lot or garage, segregated on a daily, weekly, monthly or other basis
and 2) the actual parking lot or garage tax receipts collected from all parking
transactions. All books and records required by this subsection shall be
retained for at least four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in
which they are created; provided, however, that an operator on an annual basis
may request approval from the Finance Director to discard tickets or tags that
were issued more than one year earlier and the Director shall grant such
approval if he or she determines that the operator's books and records satisfy
the requirements of this section.
   E.   Tickets And Tags:
      1.   It shall be the duty of every operator to issue to all persons
seeking the privilege of parking a motor vehicle on a daily basis a distinctive
ticket in the form and manner provided by this subsection E. Tickets shall be
issued by the operator in numerical sequence.
      2.   Each ticket issued by an operator shall indicate the name of the
operator and the address of the parking lot or garage upon or in which the
motor vehicle is parked. Unless the parking lot or garage is equipped with an
automated ticket dispenser which triggers the opening of a gate, tickets shall
consist of three (3) parts, one part shall be issued by the operator to the
recipient; one part shall be retained by the operator, who shall indicate on
the back thereof the time of arrival and departure of the motor vehicle; and
one part shall be attached to the parked motor vehicle for the purpose of
identification. All three (3) part tickets shall contain the same serial number
on each part of the ticket.
      3.   Every operator shall require a tag to be attached to each motor
vehicle that is permitted to park on a weekly or monthly basis, or other basis
longer than one day. Each tag shall show the name of the operator and address
of the parking lot or garage upon or in which the motor vehicle is parked; an
identification number; the number and issuing state of the license plate of the
parked motor vehicle; and whether the motor vehicle is parked on a weekly, or
monthly, or other basis longer than one day, indicating starting and ending
dates of the week, month or other period. Tags shall be issued by the operator
in numerical sequence.
      4.   The operator shall keep a book record of all tags issued, showing
each tag's date of issuance, identification number and the parking charge
imposed. The operator shall remove or cause to be removed and shall void each
tag at the end of the week, month, or other applicable period, and shall cause
a new tag to be attached to the motor vehicle at the beginning of each new
period.
      5.   In order to ensure the sound and efficient administration and
enforcement of the tax imposed by this section, the Finance Director by rule
may impose recordkeeping, ticket or tag requirements in addition to the
requirements contained in this section.
   F.   Tax Remittance And Returns:
      1.   On or before the last day of each calendar month, every operator
shall file with the City of Northlake a remittance return and remit all tax due
for the preceding calendar month. The return shall be filed on a form
prescribed by the Finance Director, containing such information as required by
the City of Northlake.
      2.   In addition to any other information required by the Finance
Director, every operator shall report on the remittance return the total amount
of charges collected from recipients during the preceding calendar month for
the privilege of parking a motor vehicle in or upon a parking lot or garage
located in the City of Northlake.
   G.   Violation; Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating any provisions
of this section upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per
violation. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. O-24-2009, 9-21-2009)
3-2-12: PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY LICENSE FEE:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply:
   FIBER OPTIC CABLE: A high speed transmission cable used to transmit digital
data via rapid pulses of light.
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of the state or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   RIGHT OF WAY: Any City street, alley, water or public right-of-way dedicated
or commonly used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic as well as utility
purposes, including utility easements wherein the City has acquired the right
and authority to locate or permit the location of utilities.
   RIGHT OF WAY shall not include any real or personal City property that is
not specifically described in the foregoing sentence and shall not include City
buildings or other structures or improvements, regardless of where they are
situated in the right-of-way.
   B.   A license fee is hereby imposed on all persons engaged in the
installation and/or maintenance of fiber optic cable in the right-of-way at the
rate of ten dollars ($10.00) for each foot of fiber optic cable installed and/
or maintained in the right-of-way.   
   C.   License Agreement/Payment of License Fee: No person shall install any
fiber optic cable in the right-of-way until that person has executed a license
agreement with the City and has paid the license fee imposed by this
section.   
   D.   Exemption: The license fee imposed by this section shall not apply to
any person paying the municipal utility tax pursuant to Section
3-2-4 of the Northlake City Code. (Ord. O-02-2020, 3-2-2020)
3-2-13: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: Rate:
      1.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the City at the rate of three
percent (3%) of the gross receipts from sales made in the course of that
business.
      2.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
Section
8-11-23 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-23).
   B.   Collection Of Tax By Retailers:
      1.   The tax imposed by this ordinance shall be remitted by such
retailers to the Illinois Department of Revenue ("Department"). Any tax
required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this ordinance and any
such tax collected by such retailers and required to be remitted to the
Department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailers to the State.
Retailers may reimburse themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder
by separately stating that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be
stated in combination, in a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are
required to collect.
      2.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department. The Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. O-07-2020, 4-20-2020)
3-2-14: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax Imposed. A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at retail
in the City at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the
course of such business while this ordinance is in effect.
   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24).
   B.   Illinois Department of Revenue to Administer Tax. The taxes hereby
imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto,
shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue. The
Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce
the provisions of this section.
(Ord. O-17-2025, 8-4-2025)
3-2-15: MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax. A tax is hereby imposed upon
all persons engaged in the City in the business of making sales of service,
who, as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer groceries as an
incident to a sale of service. The rate of this tax shall be the same rate
identified in Section 2, above. The imposition of this tax is in accordance
with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   B.   Illinois Department of Revenue to Administer Tax. The taxes hereby
imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto,
shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue. The
Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce
the provisions of this section.
(Ord. O-17-2025, 8-4-2025)
CHAPTER 3
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-3-1: General Provisions
3-3-1-1: Title
3-3-1-2: Application Of Other Ordinances And Laws
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
3-3-3-1: Local Liquor Control Commissioner Defined
3-3-3-2: Powers And Duties
3-3-4: Local Liquor Licenses
3-3-4-1: License Required
3-3-4-2: Application For License
3-3-4-3: Processing Of Applications
3-3-4-4: Persons Ineligible For License
3-3-4-5: Classification Of Licenses
3-3-4-6: Restriction On Number Of Licenses
3-3-4-7: License Fees
3-3-4-8: Duration Of License
3-3-4-9: Record Of Licenses Issued Or Revoked
3-3-4-10: Examination Of Applicant
3-3-4-11: Suspension And Revocation Of License
3-3-5: License Requirements And Restrictions
3-3-5-1: Insurance
3-3-5-2: Sampling Or Tasting
3-3-5-3: Hours Of Operation
3-3-5-4: Visibility Of Interior Of Premises
3-3-5-5: Transfer Of License
3-3-5-6: Change In Personnel
3-3-5-7: Change Of Location
3-3-5-8: Sanitary Conditions
3-3-5-9: Sale Of Single Cans And Bottles Prohibited
3-3-5-10: Employees
3-3-5-11: Location Restrictions
3-3-5-12: Responsibility For Agents And Employees
3-3-5-13: Gambling
3-3-5-14: Responsibility For Immediate Premises
3-3-5-15: Refilling Original Packages
3-3-5-16: Solicitation
3-3-5-17: Displaying License
3-3-5-18: Cessation Of Business
3-3-6: Minimum Age For Possession, Consumption Or Purchase Of Alcoholic Liquor
3-3-6-1: Unlawful Possession And Consumption By Persons Under Age
3-3-6-2: Parental Responsibility
3-3-6-3: Responsibility Of Owners Or Occupant Of Premises
3-3-6-4: Sale By Licensee To Underage And Certain Other Persons And
Consequences Of Facilitating The Use Of Alcoholic Beverages By Underage Persons
3-3-6-5: Evidence Of Age Of Person Attempting To Purchase Or Receive Alcoholic
Liquor; False Identification Not A Defense
3-3-6-6: Required Warning Signs
3-3-6-7: Additional Penalty For Sale To Underaged Persons
3-3-6-8: Employment Of Underaged Persons
3-3-6-9: Underaged Persons On Premises
3-3-6-10: Operation Of A Motor Vehicle While In A State Of Impairment
3-3-6-11: Operation Of A Motor Vehicle By Underage Persons With An Alcoholic
Beverage In Or On The Vehicle; Or When The Underage Person Is Impaired Due To
Alcohol
3-3-6-12: Reciprocal Enforcement Of Suspension Of Driving Privilege
3-3-7: Penalties
3-3-7-1: General Penalty
3-3-7-2: Severability
3-3-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
3-3-1-1: TITLE:
The provisions of this chapter may be referred to as the CITY OF NORTHLAKE
LIQUOR CONTROL CODE. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
3-3-1-2: APPLICATION OF OTHER ORDINANCES AND LAWS:
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the owners, proprietors or
persons in charge of any tavern or other place in the city where alcoholic
liquor is sold from the restrictions and requirements of any other ordinance of
the city or of any of the provisions of state law. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991,
eff. 5-1-1991)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases defined in an act entitled "an act relating to alcoholic
liquors", approved January 31, 1934, as amended from time to time, and as set
forth generally in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2 (hereinafter "liquor
control act") are hereby incorporated and made a part of this chapter. Unless
the context otherwise requires, the following as used in this chapter shall be
construed according to the definitions given herein:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES OR LIQUOR:
   A.   Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-
half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage
purposes.
   B.   Any beverage containing zero percent (0.00%) or more alcohol by volume
commonly known as "near beer", "nonalcoholic beer", or "nonalcoholic wine",
whose taste, color, odor and consistency are similar to the alcoholic beverages
known as beer and wine, except for the reduced alcohol content, is marketed as
being similar to beer or wine.
BANQUET HALL FACILITY: A for profit facility primarily utilized for the purpose
of serving of food and beverage, both alcoholic and nonalcoholic, to groups of
persons for special, common purpose events.
CATERER: A person who serves alcoholic liquor for consumption at the customer's
site as an incidental part of food service.
CONTROL OF PREMISES: To be in control of a premises or to have a premises under
one's control shall mean a legal or beneficial ownership, rental, lease or
license. Control may also exist where none of the aforesaid legal relationships
apply, but where an adult is otherwise clearly in charge of and controlling a
particular premises.
DELIVERY OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: The sale, gift or exchange of an alcoholic liquor
from one person to another. Delivery is meant to include providing of any
alcoholic liquor of whatever kind or nature from one person to another.
FALSE IDENTIFICATION: Any document used for identification or proof of age that
has been altered or defaced or that contains false or misleading information or
that contains a name that is not the actual name of the person using it.
HARD SELTZER: Any drink containing alcohol and carbonated water that has an ABV
of no more than eight and one-half percent (8½%) that is not a cocktail and is
contained in an original package from the manufacturer.
IMPAIRMENT: Any diminution or compromise of a person's physical, mental or
perceptual abilities due to the consumption of an alcoholic beverage.
Impairment does not require that the blood alcohol content be in excess of any
particular gram of alcohol to milliliters of blood or breath ratio.
OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE: Shall include physical control of the motor
vehicle. It shall mean the operation or control of a motor vehicle anywhere in
the city, whether on private or public property. To be in physical control, the
person need not be actually driving the motor vehicle and the vehicle need not
be running. If there is only one person inside of a motor vehicle that person
shall be presumed to be in physical control, regardless of the person's
location within the vehicle. If there is only one person in a front seat or
front passenger area of a motor vehicle, the person shall be presumed to be in
physical control regardless of the person's location in the front passenger
area. If there are persons in the vehicle, but not in the front passenger area,
the owner of the vehicle or the person to whom permission was given to operate
the vehicle, shall be presumed to be in physical control of the vehicle.
PACKAGE GOODS STORE: A permanent place of business for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor in packages or original containers for consumption outside the
premises where sold.
PARENT: A natural or adoptive parent or a court designated guardian.
PREMISES: The entire place of business or building described in a liquor
license where alcoholic liquor, or any associated item(s) used in connection
with the purchase, sale or storage of alcoholic liquor, is stored, displayed,
offered for sale or where drinks containing alcoholic liquor are mixed,
concocted, poured, or served for consumption.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where meals are cooked and prepared in an adequate and
sanitary kitchen located on the licensed premises using stoves, ovens, fryers
and related equipment located on the licensed premises and which are protected
by a fire protection system that conforms with city ordinances. The sale of
packaged foods such as potato chips, pretzels, popcorn, peanuts or other
similar snacks or frozen or premade foods such as pizzas, hamburgers or
sandwiches which can be prepared by heating or warming in an oven shall not be
considered food prepared and served on premises, as required herein.
RETAIL SALE: Not for resale.
RETIREMENT HOME: An institution whose primary and sole business is to provide
housing and related living accommodations for senior citizen residents.
SERVICE BAR: A work area from which alcoholic liquors are mixed or prepared for
human consumption and situated in a restaurant or bowling alley, from which
work area the alcoholic liquors are so mixed or prepared for the purpose only
of being taken by the employees of such establishment to tables or areas
occupied by patrons of such restaurant, for consumption in connection with and
as a part of the meals sold to the customers of such business or to bowlers in
a bowling alley.
TAVERN: A permanent place of business for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on the premises where sold.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any person under twenty one (21) years of age.
VICARIOUS LIABILITY: The liability that is implied as a matter of law even
though the person may not have directly caused an injury to another person.
(Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991; amd. Ord. O-41-93, 12-6-1993; Ord. O-
16-2001, 10-15-2001; Ord. O-24-2015, 12-7-2015; Ord. O-15-2016, 10-17-2016;
Ord. O-09-2022, 8-15-2022)
3-3-3: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
3-3-3-1: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER DEFINED:
The mayor is hereby designated to be the local liquor control commissioner as
defined in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-2 of the liquor control act and
shall be charged with the administration of the liquor control act and of such
ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted by
the city council. The salary of the local liquor control commissioner shall be
eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00). The mayor is hereby authorized to appoint
the chief of police as deputy local liquor control commissioner. (Ord. O-05-91,
2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991; amd. 1992 Code)
3-3-3-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The local liquor control commissioner shall have the following powers and
duties with respect to local liquor licenses and any other powers and duties
which may be granted from time to time by law:
   A.   To grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke
for cause, all local licenses issued to persons or entities for premises within
the city. In lieu of suspension or revocation, the local liquor commissioner
may instead levy a fine on the licensee, not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each violation, subject to limitations on such fine as may be
imposed by section 149 of the liquor control act and by section
3-3-4-11 of this chapter.
   B.   To enter or authorize any law enforcing officer to enter, at any time,
upon the premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions
of the state law or city ordinance or any rules or regulations adopted by the
city or by the Illinois liquor control commission have been or are being
violated, and at such time to examine the premises of the licensee in
connection therewith.
   C.   To receive complaint(s) from any citizen that any provision of the
state law or of this chapter have been or are being violated and to act upon
such complaint(s) in the manner provided by law.
   D.   To receive local license fees and deposit same to the credit of the
city.
   E.   To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a
local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of
revocation or suspension has been served, or any licensee against whom a
citation proceeding has been instituted by the state of Illinois liquor control
commission; to examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of any
such applicant or licensee; and to hear testimony and take evidence for his
information in the performance of his duties, and for such purpose to issue
subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose
of obtaining any of the information desired by the local liquor control
commissioner and making recommendations to the local liquor control
commissioner under this section, the local liquor control commissioner may
appoint a liquor control board consisting of the deputy local liquor control
commissioner, the city attorney or his designee, and one member at large who
shall be a resident of the city. The local liquor control commissioner shall be
an ex officio member of the liquor control board.
   F.   To order, by issuance of a written order, any licensed premises closed
for not more than seven (7) days giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard
during that period, if the local liquor control commissioner has reason to
believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will
immediately threaten the public health, safety and welfare, except if such
licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses
on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other
business or businesses. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
3-3-4: LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSES:
3-3-4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away
or to keep with intention of selling at retail or giving away, alcoholic liquor
without having a local retail liquor dealer's license. Further, it shall be
unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail or to give away, alcoholic liquors
in violation of the terms of a local retail liquor dealer's license issued by
the city; provided, however, nothing herein contained shall prevent the
possession and transportation of alcoholic liquor for lawful, personal use of
the possessor, his family and his guests, over the age of twenty one (21) years
or the service of beer and wine to residents of a retirement home in
conjunction with the service of meals.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or be in possession of
any open alcohol beverages while on the premises of any licensed business other
than a business licensed by the city to sell alcohol for consumption on the
licensed premises.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any licensed business or any owner, partner,
employee or agent of any licensed business to allow any person to consume or be
in possession of any open alcohol beverages while on the premises of any
licensed business other than a business licensed by the city to sell alcohol
for consumption on the licensed premises. (Ord. O-11-2012, 3-5-2012)
3-3-4-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
As a condition of receiving a local retailer liquor dealer's license, the
applicant for and owner(s) of the business and premises for which this
application is sought shall consent to inspections of a premises conducted by
any city of Northlake employee, officer or official at the direction of the
local liquor control commissioner. (Ord. O-16-2001, 10-15-2001)
Applications for local retail liquor dealer's license shall be made to the
local liquor control commissioner, in writing, signed by the applicant if an
individual, signed by each individual partner if a partnership, or signed by a
duly authorized agent thereof if a club or corporation, verified by oath or
affidavit, and shall contain the following statements and information:
   A.   The applicant's name, mailing address and telephone number.
   B.   The name and address of the applicant's business.
   C.   If applicable, the date of the filing of the "assumed name" of the
business with the county clerk of Cook County.
   D.   In case the applicant is a partnership, the date of the formation of
the partnership, the full name, age, address and telephone numbers of all
persons with an ownership interest in the partnership, or who have a right to
receive a direct or indirect benefit from the profits of the partnership.
   E.   In the case of a corporation, if an Illinois corporation, the date of
its incorporation, or if a foreign corporation, the state where it was
incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Illinois business
corporation act 1  to transact business in the state of Illinois, and in either
case, a statement of the objects for which the corporation was organized, the
full name, age, address and telephone number of all shareholders with an
aggregate of more than five percent (5%) of the capital stock of the
corporation or of any person(s) receiving a direct or indirect benefit from the
profits of the sale of alcoholic liquors in the city.
   F.   The name, age, address and telephone number of the person(s) who will
manage the business of the applicant in the city.
   G.   The citizenship of all persons required herein to be identified in the
application, their date and place of birth, and if a naturalized citizen or
lawfully admitted alien, the date and place of their naturalization.
   H.   The character of the business of the applicant.
   I.   The length of time that applicant has been in business of that
character.
   J.   The location and description of the premises or place of business which
is to be operated under such license and the following information:
      1.   If a leased premises, a copy of the lease shall be provided and the
lease shall be for a term of sufficient length to encompass the term of the
license sought; and
      2.   The name and address of the owner or owners of the premises and the
names and addresses of all the owners of the beneficial interest of any trust
if said premises is held in trust.
   K.   A statement whether the applicant has made similar application for a
similar license on premises other than described in this application, and the
description of such application.
   L.   A statement signed by or on behalf of the applicant and by all
individuals required to be identified therein, that each of them has never been
convicted of a felony or class A misdemeanor, and is not disqualified to
receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in the laws of the
state of Illinois or the provisions of this chapter.
   M.   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by
the federal government, has been issued, and if so, where and when, and if such
license has been revoked, state the reasons therefor.
   N.   A statement that the applicant and all individuals required to be
identified in the application have not in the past and will not in the future
violate any of the laws of the state of Illinois, or of the United States, or
any ordinances of the city controlling the retail sale of alcoholic liquors in
the conduct of his business.
   O.   The applicant's retailers' occupation tax (ROT) registration number and
a statement whether the applicant is delinquent in the payment of the
retailers' occupation tax (sales tax), and if so, the reasons therefor.
   P.   A statement whether applicant is delinquent under the thirty (30) day
credit law, and if so, the reasons therefor.
   Q.   Whether the applicant possesses a current federal wagering and gaming
device stamp, and if so, the reasons therefor.
   R.   Whether the applicant, any individual identified in the application, or
any other person, directly or indirectly interested in his place of business,
is a public official and if so, the particulars thereof.
   S.   A statement that applicant and all individuals required to be
identified in the application have not sold, delivered or given away any
alcoholic liquor in violation of any state law or city ordinance to a person
under the minimum age requirement to purchase or possess alcoholic liquor.
   T.   Such additional information or identification as the local liquor
control commissioner may deem necessary in order to establish the character of
the applicant. Such information may include a requirement that the applicant,
if an individual, shall submit his fingerprints to the local liquor control
commissioner. In the case of a partnership, the partners, or in the case of a
corporation, the officers, manager or directors thereof or any stockholder(s)
owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the capital stock of
said corporation may be required to furnish such additional information
including fingerprints. An applicant, whether an individual, partnership,
association or corporation, shall also furnish or cause to be furnished upon
request such additional information and fingerprints concerning the manager or
agent who is to conduct the business for which the application is sought.
Further, such additional information may include proof that the applicant and
the premises to be licensed comply with all other laws and ordinances,
including licensing provisions, which apply to the applicant, to the premises
or to applicant's other business conducted on the premises. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-
19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
 
Notes
1 1. 805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.
3-3-4-3: PROCESSING OF APPLICATIONS:
Any application received by the city clerk shall be forthwith forwarded to the
local liquor control commissioner, and the commissioner shall issue a written
acceptance or rejection of such application within sixty (60) days of its
receipt by the local liquor control commissioner, providing all information
requested by this chapter or by the commissioner has been furnished. (Ord. O-
05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
3-3-4-4: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
No local liquor dealer's license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who is not a resident of the city.
   B.   A person who is not of fit character and reputation in the community in
which he resides and in the city.
   C.   A person who has not attained the age of twenty one (21) years.
   D.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States or lawfully admitted
alien.
   E.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law, if determined by the local liquor control commissioner that such person
has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant public trust.
   F.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame.
   G.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   H.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause.
   I.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   J.   A partnership, unless all of the members of such partnership shall be
qualified to obtain a license.
   K.   A corporation or association, if any officer, manager or director
thereof, or any stockholder(s) or member(s) owning in the aggregate more than
five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation or association, would not be
eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship
or residence in the city.
   L.   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois or unless it is a
foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois business corporation
act to transact business in Illinois.
   M.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager possesses the same qualification required of the licensee.
   N.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who
shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation.
   O.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license
is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued.
   P.   Any local law enforcing public official, including the mayor or members
of the city council.
   Q.   Any person not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license.
   R.   Any applicant who fails to obtain a state liquor license.
   S.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   T.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1(a)(3) through (a)(10) and 5/28-3, as
heretofore or hereafter amended, or as proscribed by a statute replacing any of
the aforesaid statutory provisions; or any person who has been convicted of a
gambling offense proscribed by an ordinance of the city.
   U.   Federal gaming devices or wagering stamps:
      1.   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period.
      2.   A partnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period, or, of which any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming
device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the
current tax period.
      3.   A corporation or association, if any officer, manager or director
thereof, or any stockholder or member owning in the aggregate more than twenty
percent (20%) of the stock of such corporation has been issued a federal gaming
device stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the current tax period.
      4.   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
   V.   Any person who owns the business or premises for which the license is
sought and refuses to consent to an inspection. (Ord. O-16-2001, 10-15-2001)
3-3-4-5: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
There shall be the following classes of licenses:
   A.   Class A License And Class AL License, Tavern: This license shall
authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the
premises specified. The fee for such a license shall be as provided in section
3-3-4-7 of this chapter.
   B.   Class B License, Package Store: This license shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor, but not for consumption on the premises where sold.
The fee for such a license shall be as provided in section
3-3-4-7 of this chapter.
   C.   Class C License, Club: This license shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor in private clubs organized not for profit, under the laws of
the state. The fee for such license shall be as provided in section
3-3-4-7 of this chapter. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
   D.   Class D License, Restricted: This license shall only authorize the sale
of alcoholic liquor mixed or prepared at a service bar in a restaurant by
employees thereof, and taken by them to tables in such establishment occupied
by patrons of such restaurant, for consumption, in conjunction with the sale
and service of food prepared at the restaurant. The fee for such license shall
be as provided in section
3-3-4-7 of this chapter. (Ord. O-06-2017, 3-20-2017)
   E.   Class E, Restaurant/Bar: This license shall authorize the retail sale
of beer, wine and hard seltzer for consumption only on the premises of a
restaurant. This license shall be issued subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Not less than seventy five percent (75%) of the floor area open to
the public shall be dedicated to a restaurant in which beer and wine may only
be served in conjunction with the sale and service of food prepared and served
at the restaurant.
      2.   Beer, wine and hard seltzer may only be served at times when food
prepared on the licensed premises is available for sale and service at the
licensed premises. (Ord. O-24-2015, 12-7-2015; amd. Ord. O-09-2022, 8-15-2022)
   F.   Class G License, Banquet Hall: This license shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises of a banquet hall
as defined in this chapter. The fee for such license shall be as provided in
section 3-3-4-7 of this chapter. (Ord. O-15-2016, 10-17-2016)
   G.   Class RH License, Retirement Home: (Rep. by Ord. O-07-2011, 3-7-2011)
   H.   Class S License, Special Event: This license shall authorize the retail
sale or giving away of beer, wine or hard seltzer for consumption only on the
specified premises at any specific event by any church or not for profit
organization, provided such event is organized for a purpose other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor. Such class S license shall be in
effect for up to five (5) days as specified in the license.
In addition there shall be available, in the discretion of the local liquor
control commissioner, permits for club, church or not for profit organization
use only. A permit shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption only, and may only be issued to a club, church, or not for profit
organization as defined in this chapter, and shall cover only the area wherein
the club, church or not for profit organization is located and no such permit
shall issue more than four (4) times a year to any one club, church or not for
profit organization during the license year. Such permit shall expire within
twenty four (24) hours from the date it was issued. The number of such permits
shall be determined solely in the discretion of the local liquor control
commissioner. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991; amd. Ord. O-09-2022, 8-
15-2022)
   I.   Class B-1, Grocery Store/Drugstore:
      1.   Class B-1A, Grocery Store/Drugstore: This license shall authorize
the retail sale of beer, wine and hard seltzer only, but not for consumption on
the premises where sold. This license shall be subject to the following
conditions:
         a.   The licensed premises shall be primarily engaged in the sale of
groceries or the sale of pharmaceuticals and general merchandise.
         b.   No more than ten percent (10%) of the retail floor area open to
the public shall be allocated for the display and/or sale of beer and/or wine.
         c.   Beer, wine and hard seltzer shall not be sold at any time that
groceries are not available for sale to the public or, in the case of
drugstores, when the pharmacy is closed.
      2.   Class B-1B, Grocery Store/Drugstore: This license shall authorize
the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, but not for consumption on the premises
where sold. This license shall be subject to the following conditions:
         a.   The licensed premises shall be primarily engaged in the sale of
groceries or the sale of pharmaceuticals and general merchandise.
         b.   No more than ten percent (10%) of the retail floor area open to
the public shall be allocated for the display and/or sale of alcoholic liquor.
         c.   Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold at any time that groceries are
not available for sale to the public or, in the case of drugstores, when the
pharmacy is closed.
         d.   The total square footage of the licensed premises open to the
public shall exceed thirteen thousand (13,000) square feet. (Ord. O-09-2012, 3-
5-2012; amd. Ord. O-09-2022, 8-15-2022)
   J.   Class B-2, Gas Station: This license shall authorize the retail sale of
beer and wine only, but not for consumption on the premises where sold. This
license shall be issued subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The licensed premises shall be primarily engaged in the sale of
gasoline and petroleum products.
      2.   The licensed premises must have at least one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet of retail floor space open to the public. No more than ten
percent (10%) of the retail floor area open to the public shall be allocated
for the display and/or sale of beer and/or wine.
      3.   Beer and/or wine shall not be sold at any time that gasoline is not
available for sale to the public.
      4.   No license shall be issued for any premises located less than two
hundred fifty feet (250') from any church or school. This prohibition shall not
apply to any premises licensed before the establishment of a church or school
within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the premises or to any premises
licensed prior to the effective date hereof. (Ord. O-37-2005, 12-19-2005)
   K.   Class K License, Catering: This license shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption at the customer’s site as an incidental part
of food service. (Ord. O-15-2016, 10-17-2016)
   L.   Class L, Bring Your Own Bottle/Restaurant: A Class L license shall
entitle the licensee, a restaurant that does not sell alcoholic liquor, to
permit consumption of beer, wine or hard seltzer only brought into the
restaurant by patrons twenty one (21) years of age or older for personal
consumption by the patrons while the patrons are being served a complete meal
prepared in the restaurant, subject to the conditions in this subsection. The
licensee may charge a corkage fee to the patrons. No more than one (1) 750-
milliliter container of wine per patron (unopened) or no more than thirty six
(36) ounces of beer per patron (unopened) shall be permitted to be brought into
the restaurant. The sale of beer, wine, spirits and all other types of
alcoholic liquor to patrons of the restaurant is prohibited. Patrons are
prohibited from taking any opened alcoholic liquor containers outside of the
restaurant, except for a re-corked wine bottle that has been sealed in a carry-
out bag in accordance with State Statute. The licensee, on-site manager(s) or
its BASSET-trained wait staff shall be responsible for opening the beer, wine
or hard seltzer containers brought into the restaurant by the patrons and may
provide glasses to the patrons as part of the service of beer, wine or hard
seltzer to the patrons. A Class L license is subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   Not less than seventy five percent (75%) of the floor area open to
the public shall be dedicated to a restaurant in which beer, wine and hard
seltzer may only be served in conjunction with the sale and service of food
prepared and served at the restaurant.
      2.   Beer, wine and hard seltzer may only be served at times when food
prepared at the restaurant is available for sale and service at the restaurant.
      3.   Patrons may only consume commercially manufactured beer or wine as
defined by State Statute. Patrons are prohibited from bringing their own
alcoholic beverages other than beer and wine into the restaurant.
      4.   Any patron who brings beer, wine or hard seltzer into the restaurant
for consumption must give the beer, wine or hard seltzer to a BASSET qualified
employee of the licensee who shall inspect the beer, wine or hard seltzer to
ensure that it is commercially manufactured as provided herein, and in its
original, sealed container. After such inspection, the BASSET qualified
employee shall open the beer, wine or hard seltzer for consumption by patrons
at their table. Patrons are not allowed to open their own beer, wine or hard
seltzer containers.
      5.   Patrons shall not be allowed to leave the restaurant with open
partially-filled wine bottles. However, if patrons wish to cork their wine
bottles, the corking must comply with State Statute and the licensee must place
the bottle of wine in a securely sealed, transparent one-time use tamper-proof
bag.
      6.   Any wine not consumed by the patron and not corked as required
herein and all opened beer containers shall be destroyed by the licensee.
      7.   The licensee may charge a corkage fee or comparable fee for
uncorking or opening wine and beer containers. (Ord. O-09-2022, 8-15-2022)
   M.    Class E-1, Restaurant/Bar: This license shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises of a restaurant.
This license shall be issued subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Not less than seventy five percent (75%) of the floor area open to
the public shall be dedicated to a restaurant in which alcoholic liquor may
only be served in conjunction with the sale and service of food prepared and
served at the restaurant.
      2.   Alcoholic liquor may only be served at times when food prepared on
the licensed premises is available for sale and service at the licensed
premises. (Ord. O-01-2019, 1-14-2019; amd. Ord. O-01-2022, 1-10-2022)
3-3-4-6: RESTRICTION ON NUMBER OF LICENSES:
   A.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall not issue more than the
number of licenses set forth hereinbelow for each class:
License Number
License    Number
Class A    0
Class AL   2
Class B    1
Class B-1A 2
Class B-1B 3
Class B-2  5
Class CL   1
Class D    6
Class E    4
Class E-1  2
Class G/RH 1
Class K    0
Class L    0
Class S    0
 
   B.   No Class B license created after January 1, 2007, shall be issued in
connection with any premises containing less than ten thousand (10,000) square
feet of floor area open to the public.
   C.   No additional Class A or AL licenses shall be created after April 20,
2009. (Ord. O-15-2009, 4-20-2009; amd. Ord. O-05-2019, 4-1-2019; Ord. O-14-
2020, 10-5-2020; Ord. O-19-2020, 12-7-2020; Ord. O-8-2021, 3-15-2021; Ord. O-1-
2022, 1-10-2022; Ord. O-03-2022, 3-21-2022; Ord. O-03-2023, 2-13-2023; Ord. O-
04-2023, 2-13-2023; O-14-2023, 8-14-2023; Ord. O-15-2023, 8-14-2023; Ord. O-02-
2024, 3-4-2024; Ord. O-07-2024, 4-1-2024; Ord. O-01-2025, 1-13-2025)
3-3-4-7: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fees Enumerated: The fee for the various classes of licenses authorized
herein for the administration hereof shall be as follows:
License Fee
License    Fee
Class A    $2,500.00 per year
Class AL   3,500.00 per year
Class B    2,500.00 per year
Class B-1A 2,500.00 per year
Class B-1B 2,500.00 per year
Class B-2  2,500.00 per year
Class C    600.00 per year
Class D    2,000.00 per year
Class E    2,000.00 per year
Class E-1  $2,000.00
Class G    1,500.00 per year
Class K    750.00 per year
Class L    500.00 per year
Class S    1.00 per day
 
(Ord. O-01-2016, 1-11-2016; amd. Ord. O-15-2016, 10-17-2016; Ord. O-01-2019, 1-
14-2019; Ord. O-1-2022, 1-10-2022)
   B.   License Denial; Return Portion Of Fee: At the time application is made
to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner for the issuance of a license of any
class, the applicant shall pay to the City the fee provided for the class of
license for which the application is filed. In the event the license applied
for is issued, the fee shall be applied to the license; however, in the event
the license applied for is denied, or the license applied for is withdrawn by
the applicant, the fee, except for a processing charge of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00), shall be returned to the applicant. The processing charge
does not apply to Class C and S licenses.
   C.   License Revocation; Forfeiture Of Fee: Whenever any license hereunder
has been revoked as provided for in this chapter, the licensee shall incur a
forfeiture of all monies that have been paid for said license. (Ord. O-05-91,
2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
   D.   Proration Of License Fees: The license fee for a new applicant shall be
prorated when said applicant files an application following the expiration of
the first quarter of the license year. The license fee shall be prorated by
quarters. Such prorations shall not apply to special event licenses. (Ord. O-
37-97, 8-18-1997)
   E.   Renewal Applications: All renewal applications for liquor licenses
shall be filed by November 30. Except for class S licenses the license fees set
forth in subsection A of this section shall be reduced by five hundred dollars
($500.00) for any renewal application filed by November 30. (Ord. O-01-2016, 1-
11-2016)
3-3-4-8: DURATION OF LICENSE:
Every city retailer's license for the sale of alcoholic liquor, except for
class S licenses, shall be issued for annual periods to begin on January 1 and
end December 31 of the same year. (Ord. O-16-2001, 10-15-2001)
3-3-4-9: RECORD OF LICENSES ISSUED OR REVOKED:
The local liquor control commissioner shall keep a complete record of all local
retail liquor dealers' licenses issued pursuant to this chapter and shall
immediately give written notice to the chief of police of the issuance,
renewal, revocation or suspension of any such license. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-
1991, eff. 5-1-1991; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
3-3-4-10: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT:
At any time during the pendency of an application for issuance, the local
liquor control commissioner shall have the right to compel the applicant to
submit to any examination and to produce any books and records which, in the
judgment of the local liquor control commissioner, are material to the
determination of whether the applicant is qualified to receive a license under
the provisions of this chapter, or whether the premises sought to be licensed
are suitable for such purposes. The local liquor control commissioner shall
have the right to require the applicant to answer any objection to the issuance
or renewal of the license or any charges made by an alderman of the city, the
chief of police, the chief building official, the city attorney, the city
prosecutor, or by the sheriff or the state's attorney for the county. The
failure of any applicant to appear at the time and place fixed by the local
liquor control commissioner for his examination or to produce books and records
requested, unless for good cause shown, shall be deemed to be an admission that
the objections or charges are true and that the applicant is not qualified to
receive a license. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991; amd. Ord. O-36-97,
8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
3-3-4-11: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Authority Of Local Liquor Control Commissioner: The local liquor
control commissioner may, in accordance with the liquor control act, revoke or
suspend any license issued under the provisions of this chapter, if he
determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the liquor
control act, this chapter or any other ordinance or resolution enacted by the
corporate authorities of the city, or any applicable rules or regulations
established by the local liquor control commissioner or the Illinois liquor
control commission or any state and/or federal statute which is not
inconsistent with the law. In lieu of suspension or revocation, the local
liquor control commissioner may instead levy a fine on the licensee for such
violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each violation; each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. Not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in fines
under this section may be imposed against any licensee during the period of his
license. However, no such license shall be revoked or suspended nor shall any
licensee be fined except after a public hearing by the local liquor control
commissioner after a three (3) day written notice to the licensee, and, if the
licensee leases the premises, to the lessor under the lease at the address for
notice provided in the lease, affording the licensee and lessor an opportunity
to appear and defend the charges contained in such notice.
If the local liquor control commissioner has reason to believe that any
continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten
the welfare of the community, he may, upon the issuance of a written order
stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the
licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee
and the lessor, if any, an opportunity to be heard during that period; except
that if the licensee is also engaged in another business on the licensed
premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business.
The local liquor control commissioner shall, within five (5) days after such
hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked
or suspended, or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason for such
determination in a written order of revocation, suspension or fine and serve a
copy of such order within five (5) days upon the licensee and lessor, if any.
235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-7, 5/7-9, 5/7-12 and 5/7-13 of the liquor
control act are incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this
chapter.
All review or any appeal of the actions or orders of the local liquor control
commissioner shall be made to the Illinois liquor control commission on the
official record made before the local liquor control commissioner as provided
for in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-9 of the liquor control act.
   B.   Revocation Upon Conviction Of Violation: Whenever any licensee shall
have been convicted by any court of a violation of any of the provisions of the
liquor control act, or of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city
controlling or regulating the sale of alcoholic liquor, the licensee may, in
addition to all other penalties for such offense, incur a forfeiture of any
local retail dealer's license issued pursuant to this chapter and all monies
that may have been paid therefor.
   C.   Use Of Premises After Revocation: When any license shall have been
revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person for the period
of one year thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling alcoholic
liquor at retail in the premises described in such revoked license. (Ord. O-05-
91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
3-3-5: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
3-3-5-1: INSURANCE:
No license shall be granted to any applicant until such applicant shall furnish
evidence satisfactory to the local liquor control commissioner that such
applicant is covered by a policy of dramshop insurance issued by a responsible
insurance company authorized and licensed to do business in the state insuring
such applicant against liability which applicant may incur under the provisions
of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-21 of the liquor control act.
The provisions of said statute shall be liberally construed and each applicant
and license holder shall have the burden of providing the local liquor control
commissioner with satisfactory evidence that said insurance is in full force
and effect at any particular time during the term of any such license. Failure
to do so after the issuance of any local liquor license shall render said
license void ab initio. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
3-3-5-2: SAMPLING OR TASTING:
It shall be unlawful for any license holder to permit the tasting or sampling
of alcoholic liquor on the premises, unless said tasting or sampling is a part
of a promotion or sales device to encourage the sale of packaged liquor and no
charge of any kind or character is made for such sampling or tasting. (Ord. O-
05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
3-3-5-3: HOURS OF OPERATION:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person licensed hereunder shall
sell, permit to be sold, or give away any alcoholic liquor between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on Monday through
Saturday and between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. on Sundays. (Ord. O-25-2009, 10-5-2009)
   B.   Closing hours for the operation of a class AL license issued a late
closing permit shall be three o'clock (3:00) A.M. on Saturday and Sunday and
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on all other days.
   C.   Closing hours for the operation of a class A license facility shall be
three o'clock (3:00) A.M. on Saturday and Sunday and twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight on all other days. (Ord. O-3-99, 4-5-1999)
   D.   The closing hours for persons holding a class C license shall be two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. on Saturday and Sunday. (Ord. O-21-98, 4-20-1998)
   E.   Closing hours for the operation of a class D license shall be two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. on Saturday and Sunday and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
on all other days. (Ord. O-15-2009, 4-20-2009)
   F.   Closing hours for the operation of a class E and class E-1 license
shall be one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Saturday and Sunday and twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight on all other nights. (Ord. O-35-2008, 12-15-2008; amd. Ord. O-01-
2022, 1-10-2022)
   G.   Closing hours for the operation of a class G licensed facility shall be
one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Saturday and Sunday and twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight on all other days. (Ord. O-08-2003, 4-7-2003; amd. Ord. O-26-2007, 8-
6-2007; Ord. O-24-2008, 8-4-2008; Ord. O-35-2008, 12-15-2008)
   H.   During such prohibited hours of sale, every location, place or premises
where alcoholic liquor may be sold at retail shall be kept closed, and no
person other than the licensee shall be permitted to remain therein. All doors
directly opening into or out of such location, place or premises for ingress
thereto or egress therefrom shall be securely locked during the prohibited
hours of sale. The provisions of this section relating to the closing of the
premises and the locking of the doors shall not apply to bowling alleys,
restaurants and hotels licensed as food dispensers nor to clubs, drugstores and
delicatessen stores or holders of class B licenses who are also engaged in
businesses other than the sale of alcoholic liquor.
   I.   All patrons and customers shall leave the premises not later than ten
(10) minutes following the closing hours stipulated above, except in
establishments which are full service restaurants in which the service of
alcoholic beverages is incidental and complementary to the service of meals. In
such establishments all alcoholic beverages must be removed from all service
areas, tables, counters, bars, and the like within ten (10) minutes following
the closing hours stipulated. (Ord. O-21-98, 4-20-1998; amd. Ord. O-26-2007, 8-
6-2007; Ord. O-24-2008, 8-4-2008; Ord. O-35-2008, 12-15-2008)
   J.   Closing hours for class A, AL, C, D, E, and G licenses shall be
extended to two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the following days: New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
(Ord. O-25-2015, 12-21-2015)
3-3-5-4: VISIBILITY OF INTERIOR OF PREMISES:
No premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the
premises is licensed (other than as a restaurant, hotel or club where the sale
of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on) shall be
permitted to have any obstruction inside such premises, which shall prevent a
clear view into the interior of such licensed premises at all times, and no
booth, screen, partition or other construction nor any arrangement of lights or
lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such licensed premises
which shall prevent a full view of the interior of such premises, and such
premises must be so located that there shall be a full view of where liquor is
sold for consumption upon the premises. The premises shall be continuously
lighted during business hours by natural light or artificial white light so
that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In
case the view into any such licensed premises required by this section shall be
wilfully obscured by the licensee or in any manner obstructed, then such
license shall be subject to revocation. In order to enforce the provisions of
this section, the local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to
require the filing of plans, drawings and photographs showing the clearance of
the view as required by this section. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
3-3-5-5: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed twelve
(12) months after issuance unless sooner revoked and shall not constitute
property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor
shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily or subject
to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of
the licensee, and shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate
devolution, provided, that executors or administrators of the estate of any
deceased licensee, and the trustee of an insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when
such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor may continue the business of
sale of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may
exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after
the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the
expiration of such license, but not longer than six (6) months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-
1991)
3-3-5-6: CHANGE IN PERSONNEL:
   A.   Any changes in partners or in officers, directors, persons holding
directly or beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the stock or ownership
interests of corporations, or managers of establishments licensed under this
chapter, shall be reported in writing to the local liquor control commissioner
within ten (10) days of the change. All new personnel shall meet all the
standards of this chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a liquor license.
All such changes in personnel shall be subject to review by the local liquor
control commissioner within thirty (30) days of the change.
   B.   When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of
ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible
to hold a liquor license, said license shall terminate.
   C.   When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes
place in officers, directors, managers or shareholders of more than five
percent (5%) of the stock, resulting in the holding of office or such shares of
stock by one who is not eligible for a license, said license shall terminate.
   D.   When a license has been issued to an individual who is no longer
eligible for a license, said license shall terminate. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991,
eff. 5-1-1991)
3-3-5-7: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall apply only to the premises
described in the application and in the license issued thereon, and only one
location shall be so described in each license. After a license has been
granted for a particular premises, the local liquor control commissioner, upon
proper showing, may endorse upon the license permission to abandon the premises
therein described and remove therefrom to other premises approved by him but in
order to obtain such approval the licensee shall file with the local liquor
control commissioner a request in writing and a statement under oath which
shall show that the premises to which removal is to be made complies in all
respects with the requirements of this chapter. The fee for such transfer shall
be one hundred dollars ($100.00), payable to the city upon application for a
change of location. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
3-3-5-8: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
   A.   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the
storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in full compliance with the
ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of
food for human consumption.
   B.   Every person licensed hereunder who shall sell any alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises of such licensee shall keep and maintain the
licensed premises equipped with running hot and cold water and adequate
sanitary washing facilities for the cleansing of glasses and service utensils,
shall provide adequate toilet facilities for both males and females, and shall
otherwise comply with all health and sanitary requirements of the ordinances of
the city applicable to the licensed business. All employees shall be clean in
person and in clothing, and no person afflicted with any contagious or
infectious diseases in communicable form shall be employed in or about the
serving of liquor or in the washing of glasses or other utensils. (Ord. O-05-
91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
3-3-5-9: SALE OF SINGLE CANS AND BOTTLES PROHIBITED:
Effective January 1, 2007, it is hereby prohibited for any person holding a
class B, B-1, or B-2 license to sell single servings of beer or malt liquor in
containers containing one quart or less. (Ord. O-32-2006, 10-2-2006)
3-3-5-10: EMPLOYEES:
It shall be unlawful to employ in premises used for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor any person who is affiliated with, or who is a carrier of, any
contagious, infectious or venereal diseases; and it shall be unlawful for any
person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of such diseases to work in or
about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or
distribution of such liquor. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991; amd. Ord.
O-32-2006, 10-2-2006)
   A.   All original or renewal applications for liquor licenses shall be
accompanied with proof of completion of a state certified beverage alcohol
sellers and servers education and training (BASSET) program for all persons who
sell or serve alcoholic beverages, all management personnel working on
premises, and anyone whose job description entails the checking of
identification for the purchase of alcoholic beverages, pursuant to that
license.
   B.   A state certified "BASSET" training program shall be defined as a
BASSET program licensed by the state of Illinois liquor control commission
(ILCC) as required by 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-12 (11.1) and 6027 and
title 77 of Illinois administrative code, chapter XVI, section 3500. All
licensed BASSET providers shall be required to have on file all licenses and
certificates to prove current qualifications and provide a certificate of
course completion and a card (a picture type ID is optional), to participants
as proof of completion.
   C.   Any new owner, manager, employee, or agent requiring BASSET training,
shall, within ninety (90) days from the beginning of their employment with that
licensee, complete an ILCC BASSET approved seller/server training program and
shall until completion of the BASSET program work under the supervision of a
person who has completed BASSET training.
   D.   A photocopy of certificate of completion for all owners, managers,
employees, or agents required by this section to have BASSET training shall be
maintained, by the establishment, in a manner that will allow inspection, upon
demand, by any designee of both the state or local liquor control authorities.
(Ord. O-12-2002, 10-7-2002; amd. Ord. O-32-2006, 10-2-2006)
   E.   Any licensee who fails to comply with the requirements of this section
shall be fined in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. O-01-2016, 1-11-2016)
3-3-5-11: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
within one hundred feet (100') of any church, public park, school other than an
institution of higher learning, hospital, game room, homes for aged or indigent
persons or for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval
station. In determining the distance provided for in this section, the
boundaries of the lot or parcel of land upon which a school, hospital, home or
military station is located shall be used as the point from which measurement
shall be taken. In the case of a church, the distance of one hundred feet
(100') shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship
services or educational programs and not to property boundaries. In the case of
a game room the closest point of said game room shall be used as a point from
which measurement shall be taken. Measurement shall be made to the nearest
point of the premises for which a license hereunder has been issued and, if
said licensed premises are within a larger structure, then measurement shall be
made to the nearest wall of the licensed premises within said structure. (Ord.
O-01-93, 1-18-1993; amd. Ord. O-32-2006, 10-2-2006)
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or
private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales are limited
to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion
of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors.
(Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991; amd. Ord. O-32-2006, 10-2-2006)
3-3-5-12: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by an officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee, if such act is committed or omission is made
within the scope of such agency or employment or with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act
of such employer or licensee and such employer and licensee shall be punishable
in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by him
personally. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991; amd. Ord. O-32-2006, 10-2-
2006)
3-3-5-13: GAMBLING:
It shall be unlawful to permit any gambling on any premises licensed to sell
alcoholic liquor. For the purpose of this section, gambling shall be defined in
accordance with the definition ascribed thereto, from time to time, in 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1 et seq. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-
1991; amd. Ord. O-32-2006, 10-2-2006)
3-3-5-14: RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMMEDIATE PREMISES:
The licensee shall be charged with the responsibility of having control of the
immediate premises surrounding the establishment. For purposes of this section,
"immediate premises" is that area used by patrons, employees and agents of the
licensee for parking and entering and exiting the establishment, including, but
not limited to, parking lots, driveways and sidewalks. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-
1991, eff. 5-1-1991; amd. Ord. O-32-2006, 10-2-2006)
3-3-5-15: REFILLING ORIGINAL PACKAGES:
No person licensed under this chapter shall fill or refill, in whole or in
part, any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any other kind
or quality of alcoholic liquor; and it shall be unlawful for any person to have
in his possession for sale at retail any bottles, casks or other container of
alcoholic liquor, except in original packages. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff.
5-1-1991; amd. Ord. O-32-2006, 10-2-2006)
3-3-5-16: SOLICITATION:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his manager or other person in charge of
any licensed premises where alcoholic liquor is sold or offered for consumption
thereon to engage, employ or permit the engagement or employment of any person
nor shall any person be permitted to remain on said premises, who shall solicit
any patron or customer thereof to purchase alcoholic or nonalcoholic liquor for
said person, or any other person therein; nor shall any person, whether an
employee, entertainer or otherwise, solicit any patron or customer therein to
purchase alcoholic or nonalcoholic liquor for herself or himself or any other
person therein; provided however, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit
any adult manager, bartender or waitress who shall be regularly employed
therein from accepting and serving the order of a patron or customer in the
regular course of employment as such manager, bartender or waitress. (Ord. O-
05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991; amd. Ord. O-32-2006, 10-2-2006)
3-3-5-17: DISPLAYING LICENSE:
Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses to be framed and posted in
plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-
19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991; amd. Ord. O-32-2006, 10-2-2006)
3-3-5-18: CESSATION OF BUSINESS:
Any licensee who ceases to do business or closes his place of business for a
period of more than thirty (30) successive days shall be subject to having his
license declared forfeited and lapsed by order of the local liquor
commissioner. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991; amd. Ord. O-32-2006, 10-
2-2006)
3-3-6: MINIMUM AGE FOR POSSESSION, CONSUMPTION OR PURCHASE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR:
3-3-6-1: UNLAWFUL POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION BY PERSONS UNDER AGE:
   A.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall consume,
purchase or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor in his or her possession within
the City, except as provided by 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-16, or the
possession and delivery of alcoholic liquors in pursuance of a person's
employment by a licensee under this Chapter as allowed in Section
3-3-6-8 of this Chapter.
   B.   No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor,
shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the
age of twenty one (21) years, except as allowed hereunder in subsection A
above. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-91, eff. 5-1-91)
3-3-6-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly suffer or permit
any minor child of which he or she may be the parent or guardian to violate any
provision of this Chapter. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-91, eff. 5-1-91)
3-3-6-3: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS OR OCCUPANT OF PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises located within
the City to knowingly allow any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years
to remain on such premises while in the possession of alcoholic liquor or while
consuming alcoholic liquors in violation of Section
3-3-6-1 of this Chapter. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-91, eff. 5-1-91)
3-3-6-4: SALE BY LICENSEE TO UNDERAGE AND CERTAIN OTHER PERSONS AND
CONSEQUENCES OF FACILITATING THE USE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY UNDERAGE
PERSONS:
   A.   Sale and Delivery Restrictions: No licensee or officer, associate
member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or
deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years,
or to any intoxicated person, or to any person known by him to be an habitual
drunkard, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental
treatment.
   B.   Adequate Evidence of Identity and Age: For the purpose of preventing
the violating of this Section, any licensee, or his agent or employee, may
refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to
produce adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is
over the age of twenty one (21) years, as required by this Chapter.
   C.   Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages by Underage Person; Exceptions: It
shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or negligently permit, on
premises under his or her control, the consumption of an alcoholic beverage by
an underage person. This Section shall apply to both residential and commercial
premises.
This subsection C shall not apply in the following circumstances:
      1.   The performance of a bona fide religious service;
      2.   The delivery of an alcoholic beverage to an underage person, by that
person's parent, within the home and under the direct supervision of the
parent. However, the following rules shall be applied to this subsection
(Exception):
         a.   In any prosecution of an underage person for the commission of
any State or local offense, the prosecutor, upon reasonable grounds, may
request a ruling and the court shall rule as to whether the consumption of an
alcoholic beverage as permitted by the parent was a contributing factor in the
commission of the offense. If it is so determined in the affirmative, then the
penalty set forth in subsection D of this Section shall apply.
         b.   The parent shall remain vicariously liable as set forth in
subsection E of this Section.
   D.   Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating subsection A, B or C of
this Section shall be fined in the mandatory amount of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
   E.   Vicarious Liability of a Parent or Other Person Facilitating the Use or
Abuse of Alcoholic Beverages: The following persons shall be liable to any
individual who has been injured by an alcohol impaired underage person when the
impairment is a contributing cause of the injury:
      1.   Any person who delivered to the underage person any alcoholic
beverage which contributed to the impairment. The person making the initial
delivery to an underage person remains liable to anyone injured by the same or
different underage person regardless of how many times the alcoholic beverage
changed hands.
      2.   Any person in control of a premises, who knowingly or negligently
fails to maintain supervision to such an extent that an alcoholic beverage is
consumed on the premises by an underage person.
      3.   Any person who knowingly or negligently permits the operation of a
motor vehicle under his or her control by an underage person, when the person
knew or in the exercise of ordinary judgment should have known that the
underage person was either impaired or had consumed any amount of alcohol
within two (2) hours prior to when the permission was granted.
The vicarious liability established by this Section shall not be subject to the
limitations on damages as set forth in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-21.
(Ord. O-41-93, 12-6-93)
3-3-6-5: EVIDENCE OF AGE OF PERSON ATTEMPTING TO PURCHASE OR RECEIVE ALCOHOLIC
LIQUOR; FALSE IDENTIFICATION NOT A DEFENSE:
   A.   If a licensee or his agent or employee believes, has reason to believe
or should have reason to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because the prospective recipient is underage, then he shall, before
making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of at least two (2) separate
forms of positive identification each containing proof of age, each issued by a
public officer in the performance of his official duties and one of those forms
of identification must contain a picture of the holder thereof. A traffic
citation shall not be accepted as identification or evidence of age.
   B.   No person shall transfer, alter or deface an identification card issued
by a federal, state, county or municipal government or subdivision or agency
thereof, use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged
identification card, or obtain an identification card by means of false
identification.
   C.   No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of
alcoholic liquor by the use of an altered, forged or defaced identification
card or by the use of an identification card of another person.
   D.   No person shall misrepresent his age for the purpose of purchasing or
obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in the city where alcoholic liquor is
sold or delivered.
   E.   It shall not be a defense to any action brought criminally, civilly or
administratively against any liquor licensee or any other person charged with
the delivery of any alcoholic beverage to an underage person that such a person
produced false identification or proof of age. The person or persons hearing
and deciding the charges may consider such a claim when determining the penalty
to be assessed or the apportionment of damages.
   F.   Any underage person found guilty of attempting to obtain delivery of an
alcoholic beverage by use of false proof of age shall be subject to a mandatory
fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). If the false proof of age was an
improperly used driver's license, the person so using it shall be subject to a
mandatory loss of driving privileges for six (6) months within the city of
Northlake and any other Illinois municipality or municipalities which have by
appropriate action recognized loss of driving privilege reciprocity for such
violations. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991; amd. Ord. O-41-93, 12-6-
1993)
3-3-6-6: REQUIRED WARNING SIGNS:
In every place in the city where alcoholic liquor is sold there shall be
displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed card which shall be
supplied by the local liquor control commissioner and which shall read
substantially as follows:
WARNING: If you are under twenty one years of age, you are subject to a fine up
to $500.00 under the City of Northlake Liquor Control Code, if you PURCHASE
alcoholic liquor or MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE for the purpose of purchasing or
obtaining alcoholic liquor. OFFICIAL PHOTO IDENTIFICATION will be required to
prove age before purchase.
(Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
3-3-6-7: ADDITIONAL PENALTY FOR SALE TO UNDERAGED PERSONS:
   A.   In addition to all other fines and penalties the local liquor control
commissioner may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license of a licensee
who violates the provisions of section
3-3-6-4 of this chapter. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991; amd. Ord. O-
41-93, 12-6-1993)
3-3-6-8: EMPLOYMENT OF UNDERAGED PERSONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any officer, associated
member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ
or permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to tend bar and/or
to draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed premises. (Ord. O-05-
91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associates,
member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ
or permit any person under twenty one (21) years to sell or serve any alcoholic
liquor in any licensed premises, provided, however, that during the period of
October 15 through December 31 of each year, persons age nineteen (19) years of
age and older may sell packaged and sealed alcoholic beverages in general
merchandise retail establishments of eighty thousand (80,000) square feet or
larger. (Ord. O-09-2004, 5-17-2004)
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associates,
member, representative, agent or employee of any licensee to engage, employ or
permit any person under twenty one (21) years to act as a manager, doorkeeper
or bouncer in any licensed premises. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
3-3-6-9: UNDERAGED PERSONS ON PREMISES:
No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall be permitted to be on
the premises of any licensed liquor establishment (other than in a restaurant,
hotel or club where the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business
carried on) between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or in the
course of their employment. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
3-3-6-10: OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE IN A STATE OF IMPAIRMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any underage person to operate a motor vehicle on a
street or highway of the city while in a state of impairment due to the
consumption of an alcoholic beverage. For purposes of this section only,
operation of a motor vehicle shall have the definition ascribed to it under the
Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. O-41-93, 12-6-1993)
3-3-6-11: OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE BY UNDERAGE PERSONS WITH AN ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGE IN OR ON THE VEHICLE; OR WHEN THE UNDERAGE PERSON IS IMPAIRED DUE TO
ALCOHOL:
The following shall apply when any underage person is found in the city
operating any motor vehicle in which or on which is found any alcoholic
beverage of any kind or nature, or when the underage person is in a state of
impairment due to the consumption of alcohol: (Ord. O-41-93, 12-6-1993)
   A.   The motor vehicle shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the city
police department. (Ord. O-41-93, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
   B.   The motor vehicle may be released only to another person showing proof
of ownership or lease rights to the motor vehicle:
      1.   If the underage operator is the owner or lessor of the vehicle, then
the vehicle may be released only to a parent or legal guardian of the underage
owner.
   C.   The motor vehicle may not be released to any person who was a passenger
in the motor vehicle at the time the alcoholic beverage was found unless at
least twenty four (24) hours have passed from the time of the finding. (Ord. O-
41-93, 12-6-1993)
   D.   The vehicle shall not be released until the person seeking the release
has paid an administrative fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to the
city police department, plus any towing or storage costs. (Ord. O-41-93, 12-6-
1993; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
   E.   If the operator is subsequently found guilty of driving with open
alcohol in a motor vehicle or possession of alcohol by a minor or of operating
a motor vehicle while impaired pursuant to section
3-3-6-10 of this chapter, that person shall be subject to a mandatory loss of
driving privileges for six (6) months within the city and any other Illinois
municipality or municipalities which have, by appropriate action, recognized
loss of driving privilege reciprocity for such violations.
   F.   The following factors shall not be considerations in determining
whether or not to impound the motor vehicle:
      1.   Whether the alcoholic beverage is in an opened or an unopened
container;
      2.   Whether the operator is the owner of the alcoholic beverage or the
vehicle;
      3.   Whether the operator had knowledge of the existence of the alcoholic
beverage within the motor vehicle.
   G.   The above obligations and penalties shall be in addition to the
penalties that may be assessed in a court of law for any charges incident to
the stop. (Ord. O-41-93, 12-6-1993)
   H.   Any law enforcement officer, the city police department and any of its
officers or agents shall be absolutely immune from any liability or exposure to
liability of any kind or nature for the enforcement or implementation of this
section. (Ord. O-41-93, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
3-3-6-12: RECIPROCAL ENFORCEMENT OF SUSPENSION OF DRIVING PRIVILEGE:
   A.   Prohibition: No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the
corporate limits of the city whose driving privileges have been suspended in
the city or any other Illinois municipality for the operation of a motor
vehicle by underage persons with an alcoholic beverage in or on the vehicle; or
when the underage person is impaired due to alcohol.
   B.   Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be
fined in the mandatory amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. O-41-93,
12-6-1993)
3-3-7: PENALTIES:
3-3-7-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is set forth in this chapter, every person found guilty
of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed to
have been committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. Such fines shall be limited to not more than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) against any licensee during a license period. Any fines set forth
in this chapter shall be deemed to have been committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues. Any fines set forth in this chapter
shall be assessed regardless of whether the violator is convicted or placed on
supervision by the court. If the court is of the opinion that the ends of
justice would be better served by requiring community service of the violator
or a combination of a fine and community service, the fine may be mitigated at
a rate of one hour of community service for every ten dollars ($10.00) of the
mandatory fine. In addition to any other penalty, a licensee convicted of
violating any provision of this chapter may be subject to having his/her
license revoked, suspended or not renewed by the liquor control commissioner.
(Ord. O-41-93, 12-6-1993)
3-3-7-2: SEVERABILITY:
The repeal of the ordinance or parts of ordinances effectuated by the enactment
of this chapter shall not be construed as abating any actions now pending under
or by virtue of such ordinance or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or
altering any penalty accruing or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any
person, firm or corporation or as waiving any right of the municipality under
any section or provision existing at the time of the passage of this chapter.
It is the intention of the city council that this chapter, and every provision
thereof, shall be considered separable; and that the provisions thereof shall
be considered applicable, and that the invalidity of any section, clause,
provision or part or portion of any section, clause or provision of this
chapter shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this chapter. If
any part or provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstances shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined by its operation to the
controversy in which it was mentioned and shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of this chapter or the application thereof to any other person or
circumstances and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared
severable. (Ord. O-05-91, 2-19-1991, eff. 5-1-1991)
CHAPTER 4
AMUSEMENTS 1
SECTION:
3-4-1: Application Of Provisions
3-4-2: Licenses And Permits Required; Applications
3-4-3: Street Shows
3-4-4: Conditions Of License
3-4-5: Safety Requirements
3-4-6: Inspections
3-4-7: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-2-6 of this title for amusement tax.
3-4-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter, except as to licensing and fees, shall apply to
all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements in the city,
whether specifically licensed in other sections in this chapter or not. (Ord.
O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
3-4-2: LICENSES AND PERMITS REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS:
No person shall conduct or operate any amusement which is open to the public
and for which a fee is charged for admission thereto without having first
secured a license or permit therefor; provided, that this section shall not be
held to apply to those amusements which are specifically licensed by any other
provisions of this code.
Applications for such licenses or permits shall be made to the clerk and shall
comply with all of the general provisions of this code relating to applications
for licenses and permits 1 . (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
 
Notes
1 2. See section
  3-1-3 of this title.
3-4-3: STREET SHOWS:
No permit shall be granted for any carnival, exhibition, show or other
amusement to be given on any public street or sidewalk or in such place that
the only main accommodation for the public or audience will be in a public
place except on order of the council. (1976 Code §
3-1-3)
3-4-4: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Slot Machines Prohibited: No person shall maintain or expose for public
use any slot machine operated with a slug or coin. As used in this subsection,
the term "slot machine" shall mean and include any device, operated by means of
slugs or coins, which shows pictures, numbers or symbols, singly or in
combinations as a result of operation. (1976 Code §
3-1-10)
   B.   Exhibition Of Criminals: No person shall exhibit any criminal or the
body of any criminal or any person who shall have become notorious because of
the commission of a crime in any theatrical exhibit, carnival or other public
place. (1976 Code §
3-1-13)
   C.   Crowd Control, Traffic Control Or Security: The city may require, from
time to time, as a condition to granting a license or permit that the applicant
shall provide crowd control, traffic control or security. (1992 Code)
3-4-5: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Order; Crowding:
      1.   The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical must be orderly
and quiet at all times, and no person attending such amusement, show or
theatrical shall create a disturbance in the audience.
      2.   No person shall permit or gather a crowd or witness any amusement or
show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or other risks. (1976
Code §
3-1-11)
   B.   Riots: No person shall present any public amusement or any show of any
kind which tends to or is calculated to cause or promote a riot or disturbance.
(1976 Code §
3-1-14)
   C.   Smoking 1 : (Rep. by Ord. O-02-2008, 2-4-2008)
   D.   Exit Lights: The owner or occupant in charge of any building or hall
used as an assembly hall with accommodations for one hundred (100) persons or
more in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures and other entertainment
is offered, operated or presented shall provide and place a sign, on which the
word "EXIT" shall appear in letters at least six inches (6") high, over every
door or other opening from such hall to every means of egress therefrom, and a
light shall be provided with a red globe and placed at or over such sign, which
light shall be kept burning during the entire period that the hall is open to
the public and until the audience has left the hall. (1976 Code §
3-1-17)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 5 of this code.
3-4-6: INSPECTIONS:
The chief of police and the fire marshal shall see that every exhibition,
amusement, theatrical or other public show or amusement is inspected by a
member of the police and of the fire department to ensure conformance with the
applicable provisions of ordinances, rules and regulations concerning such
amusements. (1976 Code §
3-1-12)
3-4-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (1992 Code)
ARTICLE A. BOWLING ALLEYS AND POOL HALLS 1
SECTION:
3-4A-1: License Required
3-4A-2: Application For License; Qualifications
3-4A-3: License Fee And Bond
3-4A-4: Hours Of Operation; Conduct Of Business
3-4A-5: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also article G of this chapter for coin operated amusement devices and
  table games.
3-4A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall maintain or conduct a public bowling alley, pool hall or
billiard parlor without first obtaining a license therefor. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-
20-1979)
3-4A-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; QUALIFICATIONS:
An application for a bowling alley, pool hall or billiard parlor shall be made
in conformity with the general requirements of this code relating to
applications for licenses 1 .
All applications for such a license shall state thereon the intended location
of the place of business and the number of alleys or tables to be used therein.
No application shall be granted unless the applicant shall furnish satisfactory
evidence that he is a person of good character or, if the applicant is a
corporation, that the principal officers thereof are persons of good character.
(Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
 
Notes
1 2. See section
  3-1-3 of this title.
3-4A-3: LICENSE FEE AND BOND:
   A.   License Fee: The annual fee for a license to conduct a public bowling
alley, billiard parlor or pool hall shall be as provided in section
3-1A-1 of this title.
   B.   Bond: The applicant shall execute a corporate surety bond in the penal
sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), to be approved by the mayor and the city
council, conditioned that the licensee shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this code. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
3-4A-4: HOURS OF OPERATION; CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:
Operation of bowling alleys, billiard parlors or pool halls shall be permitted
at any time; provided, that the operation of such bowling alleys, billiard
parlors or pool halls shall at all times be conducted in such a manner as not
to cause a nuisance or disturbance. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
3-4A-5: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be fined not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and upon a second
offense, the license shall be revoked. 1  (1976 Code §
3-3-5; 1992 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Sections
  3-1-17 et seq. of this Title.
ARTICLE B. CARNIVALS AND AMUSEMENT RIDES
SECTION:
3-4B-1: Carnivals
3-4B-1-1: Definition
3-4B-1-2: Permit Required; Restrictions on Issuance
3-4B-1-3: Investigation of Applicant; Insurance; Powers of Police
3-4B-1-4: Permit Issued in Duplicate; Availability for Inspection
3-4B-1-5: Violations
3-4B-2: Amusement Rides
3-4B-2-1: Compliance with State Law
3-4B-2-2: Permit Required
3-4B-2-3: Insurance or Bond
3-4B-1: CARNIVALS:
3-4B-1-1: DEFINITION:
"Carnival" means and includes an aggregation of attractions, whether shows,
acts, games, vending devices or amusement devices, whether conducted under one
or more managements or independently, which are temporarily set up or conducted
in a public place or upon any private premises accessible to the public, with
or without admission fee, 1  and which, from the nature of the aggregation,
attracts attendance and causes promiscuous intermingling of persons in the
spirit of merrymaking and revelry. (Ord. 0-27-90, 6-4-90)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-2-6 of this Title for amusements tax.
3-4B-1-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE: 1
No carnival shall be set up, run, operated or conducted within the limits of
the City unless a written permit from the City Council has been issued, setting
forth the conditions under which such carnival shall be operated. The permit
shall be granted upon the condition that there shall not be set up or operated
any gambling device, lottery, number or paddle wheel, number board, punchboard
or other game of chance, except as permitted pursuant to Illinois Revised
Statutes, chapter 38, paragraph 28-1(b), or any lewd, lascivious or indecent
show or attraction making an indecent exposure of the person or suggesting
lewdness or immorality.
Carnivals may be held and conducted by not-for-profit organizations; provided,
however, that all of such not-for-profit organizations shall operate and
supervise a carnival in the City not more than once in each calendar year, and
provided further, however, that such not-for-profit organizations shall be
jointly and severally accountable for the maintenance, operation and
supervision of such carnival, and further provided, that such carnival shall
receive authority and permission from the City Council and shall conform to all
of the ordinances in effect at that time. (Ord. 0-27-90, 6-4-90)
 
Notes
1 2. See Section 3-1A-1 of this Title for permit fee.
3-4B-1-3: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; INSURANCE; POWERS OF POLICE:
No permit shall be granted by the City Council until it shall have investigated
the carnival and is satisfied that, if permitted, it will be operated in
accordance with the permit and the provisions of this Section
3-4B-1 and the carnival has filed with the City Clerk proof of insurance naming
the City as an additional insured in such limits as shall be determined by the
City Council. The City Council may issue the permit and collect fees necessary
to pay the expenses of the investigation and to aid in policing the grounds and
otherwise to compensate the City in such amount as the City Council may
determine. The permit shall contain the proviso that police officers shall have
free access to the grounds and all booths, shows and concessions on such
grounds at all times, and it shall be the duty of all officers present at such
carnival to enforce all the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 0-27-90, 6-4-90)
3-4B-1-4: PERMIT ISSUED IN DUPLICATE; AVAILABILITY FOR INSPECTION:
The permit as provided for in this Section
3-4B-1 shall be made in duplicate, one copy thereof being retained by the City
Clerk. The other copy shall be kept in the possession of the manager of the
carnival and shall be produced and shown to any sheriff, police officer or
citizen upon request. (Ord. 0-27-90, 6-4-90)
3-4B-1-5: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section
3-4B-1 is guilty of a petty offense pursuant to Illinois Revised Statutes,
chapter 24, division 54.1. (Ord. 0-27-90, 6-4-90)
3-4B-2: AMUSEMENT RIDES:
3-4B-2-1: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
No amusement ride or amusement attraction shall be licensed by the City at any
carnival in the City unless the operator of the amusement ride or amusement
attraction has first complied with the Carnival and Amusement Rides Safety Act,
Illinois Revised Statutes, chapter 1111/2, paragraphs 4051-4069. (Ord. 0-27-90,
6-4-90)
3-4B-2-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to operate any amusement ride or amusement attraction at a
carnival or fair in this City without the owner or operator of such equipment
first having obtained from the Director of Health and Inspectional Services,
upon the approval of the City Council, a permit for the operation of such
equipment. (Ord. 0-27-90, 6-4-90)
3-4B-2-3: INSURANCE OR BOND:
No person shall be issued a permit under this Section
3-4B-2 unless at the time of application there is in force:
   A.   Insurance: A liability insurance policy or policies in an aggregate
amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily
injury to or death of one person in any one accident and, subject to the limit
for one person, in an amount of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury to or death of two (2) or more persons in any
one accident and in an amount of not less than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) for injury to or destruction of property of others in any one
accident, insuring the operator against liability for injury or death suffered
by a person attending a carnival; or
   B.   Bond: A bond in like amount, the aggregate liability of the surety of
which shall not exceed the face amount thereof. (Ord. 0-27-90, 6-4-90)
ARTICLE C. RAFFLES
SECTION:
3-4C-1: Definitions
3-4C-2: Classification Of Licenses
3-4C-3: License Required
3-4C-4: Application For License
3-4C-5: Issuance Of License; Restrictions
3-4C-6: License Fee; Term; Revocation
3-4C-7: Conduct Of Raffles
3-4C-8: Raffles Manager; Bond
3-4C-9: Raffle Tickets And Prizes
3-4C-10: Records And Reports
3-4C-11: Rules And Regulations
3-4C-12: Penalty
3-4C-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BUSINESS: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who
have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and civic
interests of a community.
CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an
indefinite number of the public. The services rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefits on the public.
EDUCATION: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide
systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to
schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and
intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective operations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable
sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable operating
expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-
profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
ORGANIZATION: Includes an auxiliary or affiliate of a licensee.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-2
(b) conducted by an organization licensed under this article, in which:
   A.   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance;
   B.   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except, that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the
purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit. (Ord. O-27-90, 6-4-1990; amd. Ord. O-03-2018, 2-12-
2018; Ord. O-08-2018, 4-16-2018)
3-4C-2: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
   A.   Class A; General Raffle License: A general raffle license shall permit
an organization the ability to conduct a raffle that may include multiple
drawings to award prizes, but all drawings must occur on the same day and at
the same location and within the confines of the same raffle event.
   B.   Class B; Financial Hardship Raffle License: A financial hardship raffle
license allows a not-for-profit fund-raising organization or group, organized
for the sole purpose of providing financial hardship assistance to an
identified individual or group of individuals suffering severe financial
hardship as a result of an injury, disability, accident or disaster, to conduct
one raffle event for that purpose.
   C.   Class C; Annual Raffle License: An annual raffle license permits an
organization to regularly conduct raffles as defined herein within twelve (12)
consecutive calendar months. Such license shall permit no more than fifty two
(52) raffle events per year. (Ord. O-08-2018, 4-16-2018)
3-4C-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct a raffle without first having obtained a license
pursuant to this article. (Ord. O-27-90, 6-4-1990)
3-4C-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a license shall be made, in writing, at the Office of the City
Clerk, no fewer than thirty (30) days before the intended sale of raffle
chances, on forms provided by the City Clerk's Office.
Each license and application for license shall contain the following
information:
   A.   The name and address of the applicant;
   B.   The area within the City in which the raffle chances will be sold or
issued;
   C.   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
   D.   The date, time and location(s) of determining the winning chances;
   E.   A sworn statement attesting to the nonprofit character of the
prospective licensee organization, signed by its presiding officer and the
secretary of that organization;
   F.   A copy of the applicant's articles of incorporation and/or charter; and
   G.   Such other information as the City Council requires. (Ord. O-27-90, 6-
4-1990)
3-4C-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The City Council shall have the authority to issue licenses for raffles
subject to the following limitations:
Licenses for raffles shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable,
labor, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations that operate without
profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a
period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license
and have had, during that entire five (5) year period, bona fide membership
engaged in carrying out their objectives or to a nonprofit fund-raising
organization that the licensing authority determines is organized for the sole
purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group
of individuals suffering extreme hardship as the result of an illness,
disability, accident or disaster.
A license issued by the City shall authorize the sale of raffle chances only
within the borders of the City.
   B.   No raffle license shall be issued to:
      1.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
      2.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
      3.   Any person who is not of good moral character;
      4.   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection B1,
B2 or B3 of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in
which such person is active or employed;
Any organization in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or B3 of this
section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not;
Any organization in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or B3 of this
section is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined
in this article.
   C.   The City Council shall act on a license application within thirty (30)
days from the date of application. (Ord. O-27-90, 6-4-1990)
3-4C-6: LICENSE FEE; TERM; REVOCATION:
No fee shall be required for issuance of a license under this article.
Licenses issued under this article shall be valid for one raffle or for a
specified number of raffles to be conducted during a specified period not to
exceed one year and may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this Code.
(Ord. O-27-90, 6-4-1990)
3-4C-7: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles in the City is subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
   B.   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   C.   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle.
   D.   The maximum fee which may be charged for each raffle chance sold or
issued shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). All such fees shall be
paid in currency or by check.
   E.   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance
or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under
this article.
   F.   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on
the license, and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
   G.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years
may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his parent or guardian. (Ord. O-27-90, 6-4-1990)
3-4C-8: RAFFLES MANAGER; BOND:
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a
single raffles manager designated by the organization. The manager shall give a
fidelity bond in the sum of an amount determined by the City in favor of the
organization conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of his duties.
Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the
City not less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation. The City Council
may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the license;
provided, that a request for such waiver has been made by unanimous vote of the
members of the licensed organization. (Ord. O-27-90, 6-4-1990)
3-4C-9: RAFFLE TICKETS AND PRIZES:
   A.   Raffle Tickets:
      1.   Each raffle ticket, chance or other raffle token shall state on its
face the name and address of the licensee, the date or dates of the drawings
and the prize or prizes to be awarded; provided, however, that this requirement
shall not apply to any raffle in which prizes in aggregate value under fifty
dollars ($50.00) are awarded or to any raffle in which raffle chances are sold
only on the date of the drawing during the event at which the drawing is to be
conducted. No such ticket, chance or token shall be sold or issued more than
two hundred forty (240) days before the determination of the winning chance or
chances.
      2.   If any raffle for which a license is issued under this article is
canceled or if any such raffle is not conducted on the date contained in the
application for license, the licensee shall refund all money paid for any
raffle chances issued or sold to the persons to whom such raffle chances were
sold or issued within forty five (45) days after cancellation of the raffle,
whichever is sooner. (Ord. O-27-90, 6-4-1990)
   B.   Prizes: The maximum cash prize awarded in any raffle shall be two
million five hundred thousand dollars ($2,500,000.00); the maximum retail value
of a noncash prize awarded in any raffle shall be one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00). The aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle shall
not exceed two million six hundred thousand dollars ($2,600,000.00). (Ord. O-
08-2018, 4-16-2018)
   C.   Motor Vehicles: Any motor vehicle being offered as a raffle prize by a
not for profit organization is exempt from the City's license registration
requirements during the time that the motor vehicle is being offered as a
raffle prize provided that no such motor vehicle may be operated on a public
street or right-of-way without all required licenses and registrations. (Ord.
O-04-2008, 3-3-2008)
3-4C-10: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
   A.   Records Kept:
      1.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to the payee, purpose,
amount and date of payment.
      2.   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the State
of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
      3.   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
   B.   Reports Required: Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall
report promptly after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership and the
City its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles and the
distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section. Such reports
shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than forty five (45) days after
each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined.
(Ord. O-27-90, 6-4-1990)
3-4C-11: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The City or its designated agent may publish rules and regulations consistent
with this article or Illinois law governing the conduct of raffles licensed
hereunder. (Ord. O-27-90, 6-4-1990)
3-4C-12: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be
punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day
that a violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord.
O-08-2018, 4-16-2018)
ARTICLE D. ADULT USES OF PROPERTY
SECTION:
3-4D-1: Findings
3-4D-2: Purpose Of Regulations
3-4D-3: Definitions
3-4D-4: Location
3-4D-5: Registration
3-4D-6: Exterior Display
3-4D-7: License Required; Fees
3-4D-1: FINDINGS:
The Mayor and City Council make the following findings:
   A.   It is uncontested that the City may regulate, through its zoning power,
the location of sexually explicit businesses;
   B.   Zoning, when used to preserve the character of the residential and
commercial areas of the City, is perhaps the most essential function performed
by the City;
   C.   The City is predominately a single-family residential community with
approximately seventy percent (70%) of the total land area of the City zoned
and used for residential, school, park, cemetery and governmental purposes;
   D.   The Board of Appeals-Plan Commission held a public hearing, reviewed
the experiences of other municipalities, counties and units of local government
relative to adult uses;
   E.   The City is only about three (3) square miles in size and there are
many locations available for adult uses in the larger, immediately surrounding
communities, such as the City of Chicago, unincorporated Cook County and in
other municipalities;
   F.   The proposed regulation of adult uses serves a substantial governmental
interest, while allowing for reasonable alternative avenues of communication;
   G.   The Illinois Supreme Court has judicially confirmed that the regulation
of adult uses serves a valid governmental interest;
   H.   The proposed regulations are not aimed at the content of adult
entertainment, but at the secondary effects associated with it including, but
not limited to:
      1.   An increase in crime rates, particularly those that are sex-related;
      2.   A negative impact on the real estate market where adult
entertainment is offered; and
      3.   Urban blight as a result of the decrease in property values.
In particular, the Mayor and City Council have taken notice of the blighted,
dangerous and crime-producing conditions which have existed on nearby Mannheim
Road, on which a number of adult-oriented businesses have located.
In attempting to curb these secondary effects, the regulations serve the City's
substantial interest in the health, safety and welfare of the people of the
City; and
   I.   The detailed findings summarized in the U.S. Supreme Court opinion in
City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41, 106 S.Ct. 925 (1986),
the Illinois Supreme Court opinion in County of Cook v. Renaissance Arcade and
Bookstore, 122 III.2d 123 (1988), and the United States District Court, Eastern
Division of Michigan opinion in S&G News, Inc. v. City of Southgate, 638
F.Supp. 1060 (E.D. Mich. 1986) aff'd 819 F.2d 1142 (6th Cir. 1987), were before
the Board of Appeals- Plan Commission when it recommended the adoption of these
regulations. (Ord. O-11-98, 2-9-1998)
3-4D-2: PURPOSE OF REGULATIONS:
These regulations are aimed at the secondary effects of adult uses, and not at
the content of the activities performed at such uses. In addition, these
regulations are based on the City's substantial interest in preventing crime,
protecting retail trade, maintaining property values, and generally to protect
and preserve the quality of the City's neighborhoods, commercial districts, and
the quality of urban life. Furthermore, it is not the purpose of these
regulations to deny anyone a reasonable opportunity to open and operate adult
uses within the City. The predominate purpose of these regulations is the
amelioration of socially adverse secondary effects of adult uses. Finally, the
Illinois Supreme Court has judicially confirmed that the purpose of these
regulations as hereinafter provided serves a valid governmental interest. (Ord.
O-11-98, 2-9-1998)
3-4D-3: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having, as a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for rent, sale
or for viewing on-premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin-operated
means, and periodicals, which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities, or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a
substantial or significant segment or section devoted to the sale or display of
such materials; or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a
purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays,
actual sales, presence of video preview or coin-operated booths, exclusion of
minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors showing the
establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such materials.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which:
   A.   Features topless dancers, strippers, or male or female impersonators;
or
   B.   Not infrequently features entertainers who display specified anatomical
areas; or
   C.   Features entertainers who by reason of their appearance or conduct
perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient
interest of the patron; or
   D.   Features entertainers who engage in or are engaged in explicit
simulation of specified sexual activities.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A building or area used for presenting materials
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to specified activities or specified anatomical areas for
observation by patrons therein.
ADULT USE: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult entertainment
cabarets, and/or other similar uses.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; and/or
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
   B.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and/or
   C.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breasts. (Ord. O-11-98, 2-9-1998)
3-4D-4: LOCATION:
Adult uses are permitted uses only on lots which are more than one thousand
feet (1,000') from a lot on which an elementary or secondary school is located
and which are in the I-3 Industrial District. For the purpose of this Section,
the one thousand feet (1,000') is measured from the points on the boundaries of
the respective zoning lots which are closest to each other. (Ord. O-11-98, 2-9-
1998)
3-4D-5: REGISTRATION:
The owner of any building or premises, said owner's agent for the purposes of
managing, controlling or collecting rents, or any other person managing or
controlling any building or premises used in whole or in part for an adult use,
shall register the following information with the City Clerk:
   A.   The address of the premises;
   B.   The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the premises and the
beneficial owner(s) if the property is in a land trust;
   C.   The name of the business or establishment;
   D.   The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s), beneficial owner(s) and/or
the major stockholder(s) of the business or establishment;
   E.   The date of the initiation of the adult use;
   F.   The nature of the adult use;
   G.   If the premises or building is leased, a copy of said lease must be
attached to the registration form. (Ord. O-11-98, 2-9-1998)
3-4D-6: EXTERIOR DISPLAY:
No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of
any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any property not
registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply to any display,
decoration, sign, show window or other opening. (Ord. O-11-98, 2-9-1998)
3-4D-7: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES:
No person shall operate adult uses within the City without first applying for
an adult uses license therefor. The fee for an adult uses license and related
procedures governing the licenses shall be as set forth in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. An adult use license shall be nontransferable and shall
be issued only for one specific business location. (Ord. O-11-98, 2-9-1998)
ARTICLE E. MOTION PICTURES AND THEATRICALS
SECTION:
3-4E-1: License Required
3-4E-2: Application for License
3-4E-3: License Fees
3-4E-4: Conditions of License
3-4E-5: Building Requirements
3-4E-6: Order; Crowding
3-4E-7: Penalty
3-4E-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall give, present or conduct any motion pictures or theatricals,
for admission to which a fee is charged 1 , without first having obtained a
license therefor as is herein provided. (1976 Code §
3-4-1)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-2-6 of this Title for amusements tax.
3-4E-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for theater licenses shall be made in conformity with the general
provisions of this Code relating to applications for licenses 1  and shall
state, in addition to the other information required, the place of the intended
performance and the seating capacity thereof. (1976 Code §
3-4-2)
 
Notes
1 2. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-4E-3: LICENSE FEE:
   A.   Licensed Premises: Any person securing any annual license for motion
pictures or theatricals, naming a specific place or building where the
performances are to be presented, may present therein any number of
performances, including theatricals, during the year for which the license was
obtained without having to pay any additional fee. (1976 Code §
3-4-3)
   B.   Unlicensed Premises: For motion pictures and theatricals which are to
be presented in premises which are not covered by the theater license fees, the
licensee shall pay a fee as provided in Chapter 1, Article A of this Title;
provided, that no such motion picture or theatrical shall be presented in or on
any premises or building which does not fully comply with the requirements of
the ordinances for the construction or maintenance of buildings for this
purpose. (1976 Code §
3-4-4)
3-4E-4: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Sunday Operations: No person shall present any motion picture or
theatrical or allow any premises to remain open for the purpose of presenting
any motion picture or theatrical before one thirty o'clock (1:30) P.M. on
Sunday. (1976 Code §
3-4-5)
   B.   Prohibited Motion Pictures: No licensee shall offer or permit any
person to offer or present any motion picture which has a tendency to cause a
riot or public disturbance of the peace. (1976 Code §
3-4-6)
3-4E-5: BUILDING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Generally: No person shall present any public motion picture in any
building or structure which does not contain the number of exits required by
the provisions of the City or by the statutes of the State concerning buildings
or places intended for motion picture performances or in premises in which the
electric wiring does not fully comply with the provisions of the City. All
places used for the exhibition of theatricals must be kept adequately
ventilated during the performance and for so long a time as the audience
remains therein. (1976 Code §3-4-9)
   B.   Scenery: No person shall use any scenery in any theater other than
nonflammable scenery or such as shall have been rendered nonflammable by the
application of fire-preventive coatings. (1976 Code §3-4-8)
3-4E-6: ORDER; CROWDING:
   A.   No person shall permit any person, except ushers or other theater
employees, to remain standing in a hall or room in which a motion picture is
presented during the time of such performance or admit to any such hall more
persons than can be accommodated by the seating arrangements for the premises.
(1976 Code §
3-4-7)
   B.   Obstructing Exits Prohibited: No person shall obstruct or permit the
obstruction of any aisles, corridors or exits leading from the room or
enclosure in which a motion picture performance or theatrical is being given or
in which an audience for such performance is gathered. (1976 Code §3-4-10)
3-4E-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be fined not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (1992 Code)
ARTICLE F. PUBLIC DANCES
SECTION:
3-4F-1: License Required
3-4F-2: Application for License; Fee
3-4F-3: Qualifications of Applicant; Investigation
3-4F-4: Exits Required
3-4F-5: Improper Conduct Prohibited
3-4F-6: Penalty
3-4F-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or conduct a public dance without having first obtained
a license therefor as provided in this Article. (1976 Code §
3-5-1)
3-4F-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
Application for a public dance license shall be made in conformance with the
provisions of the ordinances relating to licenses 1 , and shall specify the
location of the proposed dance and the person or organization sponsoring it.
(1976 Code §
3-5-2)
The annual fee for a public dance license shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §
3-5-3)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-4F-3: QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT; INVESTIGATION:
No public dance license shall be issued to any person who is not a person of
good moral character nor to a corporation or organization which is not
represented in the City by a person of good moral character.
The Chief of Police shall make or cause to be made an investigation into the
character of each applicant and report the results of such investigation to the
City Clerk. (1976 Code §
3-5-2)
3-4F-4: EXITS REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct a public dance or operate a dance hall in any hall or
place which is not equipped with sufficient and adequate exits. Any hall or
building which is not provided with at least two (2) exits of four feet (4') or
more in width shall not be used for such purpose. (1976 Code §
3-5-4)
3-4F-5: IMPROPER CONDUCT PROHIBITED:
No person shall indulge in or permit any improper or immoral conduct at any
public dance. (1976 Code §
3-5-5)
3-4F-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be fined not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (1992 Code)
ARTICLE G. COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES; TABLE GAMES 1
SECTION:
3-4G-1: Table Games; Amusement Devices
3-4G-2: Coin-Operated Amusement Devices
3-4G-3: Restrictions in Businesses and Public Places
 
Notes
1 1. See also Article A of this Chapter for pool halls.
3-4G-1: TABLE GAMES; AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
   A.   License Required; Definition: No person shall maintain or expose for
public use any table game or amusement device operated with a slug or coin or
for the use of which a fee is charged without having first obtained a license
therefor.
As used in this subsection, the term "table game" shall mean and include any
device, whether controlled by skill or chance, for the operation of a game,
pastime or contest by the manipulation of a marble sphere or of objects or
figures or by controlling the movements of the same or setting them in motion
by mechanical means. (1976 Code §
3-1-4)
   B.   License Fee: The annual fee for a table game or amusement device
license shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §
3-1-5)
3-4G-2: COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
   A.   License Required: No person shall maintain or expose for public use any
coin-operated amusement device other than table games without first having
obtained a license therefor. (1976 Code §
3-1-6)
   B.   License Fee: The annual fee for a coin-operated amusement device shall
be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §
3-1-7)
3-4G-3: RESTRICTIONS IN BUSINESSES AND PUBLIC PLACES:
   A.   Definitions: When used in this Section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
    INCIDENTAL TO THE PRIMARY PURPOSE, USE OR FUNCTION OF SAID PLACE: Where
such use either:
   A.   Constitutes not more than five percent (5%) of the floor space of such
place; or
   B.   Where the revenue therefrom comprises not more than ten percent (10%)
of the gross revenues of such place.
   JUKE BOX: Any phonograph, music box, combination motion picture and sound
machine or other instrument or device capable of producing or reproducing any
vocal or instrumental sound which is governed by the deposit of a coin or
token.
   PLACE OF PUBLIC RESORT: Any premises wherein any service or merchandise is
offered for sale to the public or any premises used as clubhouse or clubrooms.
   B.   Devices Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person to set up, keep
or maintain, or permit to be set up, kept or maintained, in any place of
business or place of public resort any coin-operated amusement devices, pinball
machines, table games or other implements, excepting therefrom juke boxes as
herein defined, kept for a similar purpose where such devices constitute the
primary purpose or use in such place and are not incidental to the primary
purpose, use or function of said place. (Ord. 0-38-75, 10-28-75)
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be
fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each
day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. 0-38-75, 10-28-75; 1992 Code)
ARTICLE H. SIMULATED VIDEO GAMING DEVICES
SECTION:
3-4H-1: Definitions
3-4H-2: Video Gaming Permitted
3-4H-3: Video Gaming Establishment License
3-4H-4: Video Gaming Terminal Permit Sticker
3-4H-5: Regulations Governing Licensed Establishments Operating Video Gaming
Terminals
3-4H-6: Inspection Of Premises
3-4H-7: Revocation/Suspension Of License And Permit Sticker
3-4H-8: Seizure Of Unlawful Video Gaming Terminals
3-4H-9: Push Tax
3-4H-10: Tax Additional
3-4H-11: Registration
3-4H-12: Collection, Payment, and Accounting
3-4H-13: Violation; Penalties
3-4H-99: Penalty
3-4H-1: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   For the purpose of this article the definitions contained in section 5
of the Video Gaming Act ("Act"), 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/5, are
incorporated herein by reference as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. O-23-
2012, 11-5-2012)
   B.   Play: Each individual push of the video gaming terminal which initiates
the simulation provided by the video gaming terminal. Play shall not include
the push of individual wager amounts, selection of types of games on the video
gaming terminal or entry of any information or printing of winning receipts.
(Ord. O-16-2021, 10-31-2021)
3-4H-2: VIDEO GAMING PERMITTED:
Subject to the conditions set forth in this article and the Act, video gaming
is permitted at licensed establishments and at licensed veterans establishments
in accordance with the Act. (Ord. O-24-2013, 11-18-2013)
3-4H-3: VIDEO GAMING ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE:
In order for an establishment to operate video gaming terminals, the
establishment is required to obtain an annual video gaming establishment
license from the City by submitting a written application, on a form provided
by the City. The burden is upon each establishment to demonstrate its
suitability for licensure. All video gaming establishment licenses issued by
the City shall expire on April 30, following the date of issuance, with an
annual license fee as established in section
3-1A-1 of this title payable in full at the time the application is filed with
the City. A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for a time
period not to exceed one year after issuance, unless sooner revoked as provided
by law, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered.
(Ord. O-24-2013, 11-18-2013)
3-4H-4: VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL PERMIT STICKER:
   A.   In order for a video gaming terminal to be operated at a licensed
veterans establishment, the licensed veterans establishment is required to
obtain an annual video gaming terminal permit sticker from the City for each
video gaming terminal located on its premises by submitting a written
application, on a form provided by the City. Each video gaming terminal permit
sticker issued by the City shall expire on April 30, following the date of
issuance, with an annual fee as established in section
3-1A-1 of this title per video gaming terminal payable in full at the time the
application is filed with the City.
   B.   In order for a video gaming terminal to be operated at a licensed
establishment, the licensed establishment is required to obtain an annual video
gaming terminal permit sticker from the City for each video gaming terminal
located on its premises by submitting a written application, on a form provided
by the City. Each video gaming terminal permit sticker issued by the City shall
expire on April 30, following the date of issuance, with an annual fee as
established in section
3-1A-1 of this title per video gaming terminal payable in full at the time the
application is filed with the City. (Ord. O-24-2013, 11-18-2013)
3-4H-5: REGULATIONS GOVERNING LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS OPERATING VIDEO GAMING
TERMINALS:
The following regulations apply to all licensed establishments and licensed
veterans establishments operating a video gaming terminal on its premises with
a valid gaming establishment license and valid video gaming terminal permit
stickers for each video gaming terminal:
   A.   A valid City video gaming establishment license must be clearly
displayed at all times.
   B.   A valid City video gaming terminal permit sticker shall be clearly
displayed at all times on each video gaming terminal. (Ord. O-24-2013, 11-18-
2013)
   C.   No more than six (6) video gaming terminals may be located on the
premises of a licensed establishment or a licensed veterans establishment.
(Ord. O-10-2019, 7-15-2019)
   D.   Other than having up to six (6) video gaming terminals with valid video
gaming terminal permit stickers, a licensed establishment or licensed veterans
establishment is prohibited from having, anywhere on its premises, an
electronic video gaming machine that may be available to play or simulate the
play of poker, line up, blackjack, faro, roulette, craps, slots, or any other
card or dice game or other game of chance, or that is otherwise akin to a
gambling or gaming device, even if solely for amusement purposes. (Ord. O-24-
2013, 11-18-2013; amd. Ord. O-10-2019, 7-15-2019)
   E.   All video gaming terminals must be located in an area restricted to
persons twenty one (21) years of age or older. The entrance to such area must,
at all times, be within the view of at least one employee who is at least
twenty one (21) years of age.
   F.   No licensed establishment or licensed veterans establishment may cause
or permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to use, play or
operate a video gaming terminal.
   G.   No video gaming terminal may be played except during the legal hours of
operation allowed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the licensed
establishment or licensed veterans establishment pursuant to the applicable
provisions of this Code.
   H.   Licensed establishments and licensed veterans establishments shall
fully comply with the Act and all rules, regulations and restrictions imposed
by the Illinois Gaming Board. (Ord. O-24-2013, 11-18-2013)
3-4H-6: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
Every licensed establishment and licensed veterans establishment where a video
gaming terminal is kept shall be subject to inspection by the City, at any
time, to ensure compliance with this Code. This includes licensed
establishments and licensed veterans establishments applying for a video gaming
establishment license and/or video gaming terminal permit stickers. It shall be
unlawful for any person to hinder, resist, oppose or attempt to hinder, resist
or oppose the City in the course of an inspection. (Ord. O-24-2013, 11-18-2013)
3-4H-7: REVOCATION/SUSPENSION OF LICENSE AND PERMIT STICKER:
The City may revoke or suspend any video gaming license and any video gaming
terminal permit sticker issued by the City if it determines that a licensed
establishment or licensed veterans establishment has violated any of the
provisions of this article. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any licensed
establishment or licensed veterans establishment that has its liquor license
revoked or suspended by the City or by the Illinois State Liquor Commission, or
has its video gaming license revoked or suspended by the Illinois Gaming Board,
shall automatically and without a hearing by the City, have its City video
gaming establishment license and all City video gaming terminal permit stickers
revoked or suspended for the same time frame as its liquor and/or Illinois
Gaming Board gaming license is suspended, whichever the case may be. (Ord. O-
24-2013, 11-18-2013)
3-4H-8: SEIZURE OF UNLAWFUL VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS:
Every video gaming terminal that does not have a valid video gaming terminal
permit sticker or is otherwise unlawful shall be considered a gambling device
subject to seizure and shall be turned over to the Illinois Gaming Board, in
accordance with board regulations and applicable law, unless otherwise ordered
by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. O-23-2012, 11-5-2012)
3-4H-9: PUSH TAX:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, an amusement tax is
imposed upon any person who participates in the play of a video gaming terminal
that takes place within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City. The rate of
tax shall be equal to one cent ($0.01) per play on a video gaming terminal.
   B.   The terminal operator of a video gaming terminal may separately itemize
and charge each person who plays a video gaming terminal. (O-16-2021, 10-31-
2021)
3-4H-10: TAX ADDITIONAL:
The tax imposed by this chapter is in addition to all other taxes imposed by
the State of Illinois or the city or any other unit of government. (O-16-2021,
10-31-2021)
3-4H-11: REGISTRATION:
Every terminal operator of a video gaming terminal located in the city shall
apply for registration as a tax collector with the city no later than thirty
(30) days after commencing such business or thirty (30) days after the
effective date of the ordinance imposing the push tax, whichever occurs later.
The application shall be submitted to the city on forms provided by the city
and shall contain such information as reasonably required by the city to
impose, collect, and audit all amounts related to the push tax. (O-16-2021, 10-
31-2021)
3-4H-12: COLLECTION, PAYMENT, AND ACCOUNTING:
   A.   It shall be the joint and several duty of every terminal operator of a
video gaming terminal to secure from each person participating in the play of a
video gaming terminal the push tax imposed by this chapter. For purposes of
this chapter, it shall be presumed that the amount of the push tax imposed on
each person, unless the taxpayer or tax collector proves otherwise with books,
records, or other documentary evidence, has been collected from the person by
the terminal operator. Push tax payments accompanied by tax returns prescribed
by the city shall be remitted to the city on or before the 20th day of the
month following the month in which payment of the push tax is made.
   B.   Every terminal operator of a video gaming terminal who is required to
collect the push tax by this chapter shall be considered a tax collector for
the city. All push tax amounts collected shall be held by the terminal operator
as trustee for and on behalf of the city. The failure of the terminal operator
to collect the tax shall not excuse or release the person from the obligation
to pay the tax. The ultimate incidence of the push tax shall remain on the
person and shall never be shifted to the terminal operator.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, in order to permit
sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the city, no person shall be entitled to
a refund of, or credit for, the push tax imposed by this chapter unless the
person files a claim for a refund or credit within one (1) year after the date
on which the push tax was remitted to the city.
   D.   The terminal operator of any video gaming terminal shall be subject to
the audit, inspection, and record keeping provisions of this code. It shall be
unlawful for any terminal operator and/or person to prevent, hinder, or
interfere with the city's officials, employees, and/or agents designated to
discharge their respective duties in the performance of their duties and the
enforcement of this chapter. (O-16-2021, 10-31-2021)
3-4H-13: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a terminal operator to fail
to file a tax return described in Section
3-4H-12 within the time prescribed in this chapter.
   B.   A terminal operator who falsely reports or fails to report the amount
of push tax due required by this chapter shall be in violation of chapter and
is subject to suspension and/or revocation of their terminal operator license.
All payments not remitted when due shall be paid together with a penalty
assessment on the unpaid balance at a rate of one and one-half percent (1.5%)
per month.
   C.   Suspension Or Revocation of License: The Mayor or his or her designee
shall have the power to suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke
any video gaming license issued under the provisions of this chapter, or if he/
she determines that a terminal operator shall have violated any of the
provisions of this chapter, any of the statutes of the State or any other valid
ordinance or resolution enacted by the city. However, no such license shall be
revoked or suspended except after the holding of a hearing by the Mayor or his
or her designee. Ten (10) days' notice of the hearing shall be given to the
terminal operator. Alternatively, the terminal operator shall have the
opportunity to engage in a prehearing conference and agree to negotiated
penalties rather than proceed to a hearing. (O-16-2021, 10-31-2021)
3-4H-99: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day any violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. This monetary penalty shall be
in addition to any and all other remedies which may be available to the City.
(Ord. O-23-2012, 11-5-2012; O-16-2021, 10-31-2021)
ARTICLE I. BINGO
SECTION:
3-4I-1:    Definitions
3-4I-2: License Required
3-4I-3: Application For License
3-4I-4: Issuance Of License; Restrictions
3-4I-5: License Fee; Term; Revocation
3-4I-6: Restrictions On Conduct Of Bingo
 
3-4I-7: Penalties
 
3-4I-1: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions contained in Section 1.1 of the Bingo License and Tax Act
("Act") (230 ILCS 25/1.1) are incorporated herein as though fully set forth
herein. (Ord. O-11-2024, 5-6-2024)
3-4I-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct a bingo event without first having obtained licenses
from the State of Illinois and the City. (Ord. O-11-2024, 5-6-2024)
3-4I-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a license shall be made, in writing, at the Office of the City
Clerk, not less than thirty (30) days before the intended bingo event on forms
provided by the City Clerk's Office.
Each license and application for license shall contain the following
information:
   A.   The name and address of the applicant;
   B.   A copy of the applicant's articles of incorporation and/or charter;
   C.   The license issued by the State of Illinois; and
   D.   Such other information as the City Council requires. (Ord. O-11-2024,
5-6-2024)
3-4I-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Licenses for bingo events are subject to the limitations that licenses
shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor, fraternal,
educational or vet-erans' organizations that operate without profit to their
members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5)
years immediately before making application for a license and have had, during
that entire five (5) year period, bona fide membership engaged in carrying out
the organization's objectives or to a nonprofit fund-raising organization that
the City determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial
assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering
extreme hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster.
   B.   No license shall be issued to:
      1.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
      2.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
      3.   Any person who is not of good moral character. (Ord. O-11-2024, 5-6-
2024)
3-4I-5: LICENSE FEE; TERM; REVOCATION:
Licenses issued under this Article shall be valid for one year and may be
suspended or revoked for any violation of this Code. The annual license fee
shall be Five Dollars ($5.00). All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each
year. (Ord. O-11-2024, 5-6-2024)
3-4I-6: RESTRICTIONS ON CONDUCT OF BINGO:
The conduct of a bingo event is subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   The entire net proceeds from the bingo event must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that
game.
   B.   No person except a bona fide member or employee of the sponsoring
organization may participate in the management or operation of a bingo event.
   C.   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the bingo event.
   D.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded in any
single day of bingo may not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00). The prize awarded for any one game shall not exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) cash or its equivalent.
   E.   The number of games, including regular and special games, may not
exceed twenty-five (25) in any one day.
   F.   The price paid for a single bingo card under the license may not exceed
One Dollar ($1.00) and such card is valid for regular games on that day of
bingo.
   G.   The number of bingo days conducted by a licensee is limited to one (1)
per week.
   H.   A licensee may rent premises on which to conduct a bingo event only
from an organization which is also licensed as a provider of premises or exempt
from licensing requirements under the Act.
   I.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may play or participate
in the conducting of a bingo event. Any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years may be within the area where bingo is being played only when accompanied
by a parent or guardian.
   J.   The promoter of the bingo event may not have a proprietary interest in
the bingo event. (Ord. O-11-2024, 5-6-2024)
3-4I-7: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00).
Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. O-11-2024, 5-6-2024)
CHAPTER 5
SOLICITATION
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: Permit Required
3-5-3: Prohibition Of Solicitation At Certain Times And In Certain Places
3-5-4: Soliciting From Occupants Of Vehicles
3-5-5: Commercial Solicitation Permit
3-5-6: Appeal
3-5-7: Violation
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
APPLICANT: Any person or entity that has filed an application for a commercial
solicitation permit as hereinafter provided.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: As that same term is defined in 225 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 460/1, or a not for profit organization incorporated pursuant to 805
Illinois Compiled Statutes 110/0.01 and 110/35, or any other organization that
has been granted tax exempt status from the state of Illinois or the internal
revenue service.
CHARITABLE PURPOSE: Charitable purposes as that same term is defined in 225
Illinois Compiled Statutes 460/1, and as that term is construed by the Illinois
courts under such statute. For the purpose of this chapter, solicitation for a
charitable purpose shall include solicitation for or on behalf of a "charitable
organization", as that term is defined herein.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the city of Northlake or his designee.
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION: Seeking to sell, offer for sale, sell and deliver,
barter, exchange, or obtain, for profit or any kind of consideration whatever;
gifts; contributions of money; and orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description,
insurance, books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers, and every other type of
publication or subscriptions therefor; or distribution to the public, by
leaving the same at stores, offices, residences or on public property in the
city any paper, document or article of a commercial nature including, but not
limited to, cards, circulars, handbills, samples, merchandise or any
advertising matter whatsoever; except when the same is conducted for any
charitable purpose, religious purpose, or political purpose, or on behalf of
any charitable organization.
NONRESIDENTIAL PREMISES: Means and includes all buildings, structures, and
units in the city occupied for nonresidential purposes.
POLITICAL PURPOSE: Any activity in support of bona fide candidates for public
office, or any matter related to the election, nomination, or performance of
public officials, or issues presented to the electorate of any election.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Means and includes any person who has obtained a valid
commercial solicitation permit as hereinafter provided.
RESIDENCE: Means and includes every separate living unit in the city occupied
for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of
building or structure.
SOLICITATION: Includes any one or more of the following activities:
   A.   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise,
foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description whatever, for any
kind of consideration whatever.
   B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of
insurance of any type, kind or character.
   C.   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication.
   D.   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any commercial, charitable,
nonprofit or political purpose.
   E.   Distributing pamphlets, handouts or any other material or seeking
signatures in support of any commercial, charitable, nonprofit or political
purpose.
"Solicitation" does not include the actions of any federal, state, local
government employee or public utility employee performing duties for his or her
employer. (Ord. O-21-2009, 7-6-2009)
3-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct commercial solicitation within
the city without having first applied for, obtained and maintained a commercial
solicitation permit as hereinafter provided. While conducting commercial
solicitation within the city, a person must carry the permit and display it
upon the request of any law enforcement officer or any individual being
solicited. (Ord. O-21-2009, 7-6-2009)
3-5-3: PROHIBITION OF SOLICITATION AT CERTAIN TIMES AND IN CERTAIN PLACES:
The following guidelines shall apply to all solicitation within the city,
whether or not the solicitation is for commercial purposes:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to go in or upon any residence or
nonresidential premises for the purpose of conducting solicitation if such
residence or nonresidential premises is posted with a sign bearing the words
"No Trespassing", "No Peddlers", "No Solicitors", or any other similar notice
indicating in any manner that the occupants of such residence or nonresidential
premises desire not to be molested or to have their rights of privacy
disturbed, unless such occupant has specifically requested such solicitation.
   B.   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance
for any person, whether licensed pursuant to this chapter or not, to go upon
any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located
thereon or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner
calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence for the
purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in
soliciting prior to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
of any day or on a state or national holiday.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person conducting solicitation at any
residence or nonresidential premises to fail to leave, and to fail to cease
conducting solicitation at, such residence or nonresidential premises
immediately upon receiving, from any person present at such residence or
nonresidential premises, a request to leave or cease conducting solicitation.
   D.   It shall be unlawful to use or attempt to use any entrance other than
the front or main entrance to a residence, except by the express invitation of
the resident or occupant of the property.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct solicitation in or on
any sidewalk or other public property, way or place in a manner that completely
or substantially impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic in, on or
around such sidewalk or public property, way or place. No person conducting
solicitation shall have the exclusive right to any sidewalk or other public
property, way or place.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to
conduct solicitation within the city without supervision of someone twenty one
(21) years of age or older. Said supervisor must remain in the immediate
vicinity of the minor at all times the minor is engaging in solicitation
activity.
   G.   No person shall perpetrate a fraud or a misrepresentation of any kind
while engaged in solicitation within the city. (Ord. O-21-2009, 7-6-2009)
3-5-4: SOLICITING FROM OCCUPANTS OF VEHICLES:
   No person may conduct any type of solicitation from any operator or occupant
of any vehicle traveler upon any street or highway located in the City. (Ord.
O-21-2009, 7-6-2009; amd. Ord. O-04-2025, 3-3-2025)
3-5-5: COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMIT:
   A.   Application: An applicant for a commercial solicitation permit shall
file with the city an application upon the form provided by the city,
accompanied by an application fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per person for the
applicant and for anyone acting on his behalf who will engage in solicitation
activity within the city. The applicant shall verify under oath all statements
made by the applicant upon or in connection with the application. The
application shall be submitted twenty (20) business days prior to the first
date for which the applicant seeks a permit to solicit and shall contain the
following information:
      1.   Name, address and telephone number of person, company or
organization applying for permit.
      2.   Type of soliciting to be employed.
      3.   Solicitation period or dates requested.
      4.   Name, address, telephone number, social security number and driver's
license number of applicant.
      5.   Name, address, telephone number, social security number and driver's
license number of the person or persons supervising the solicitation activity.
      6.   Name, address, telephone number, social security number and driver's
license number of each person to be engaged in solicitation.
      7.   Year, make, and license plate number of any vehicle used in
soliciting activity.
      8.   State whether or not the applicant, or any person soliciting on
applicant's behalf pursuant to the permit applied for hereunder, has ever been
convicted of a violation of any ordinance or any municipality regulating
soliciting; if the answer is affirmative, identify such person, municipality
and furnish all details relating to such conviction.
      9.   State whether or not the applicant, or any person soliciting on
applicant's behalf pursuant to the permit applied for hereunder has ever been
convicted of a felony; if answer is affirmative, identify such person and
furnish a certified copy of the judgment of conviction.
      10.   For applicant and each person soliciting on applicant's behalf,
state a physical description, including sex, height, weight, hair color and eye
color, and submit two (2) copies of a photograph showing the person's full
facial features.
      11.   The undersigned being first duly sworn on oath states that the
answers and statements in the aforesaid application for permit to solicit are
true.
(Signature of Applicant)
(Position of person signing application)
Subscribed and sworn to before me this          day of              ,
20        .
Notary Public
   B.   Background Investigation: A criminal background investigation,
including a check of fingerprints, shall be conducted upon all applicants and
on those supervising and/or soliciting on the applicant's behalf. The city may
deny any application based upon the results of the background investigation. No
permit shall be issued until the results of the background investigation are
received by the Northlake police department.
   C.   Change In Information: If, during the pendency of any application for,
or during the term of, any commercial solicitation permit, there is any change
in any material information given in the application for such permit, the
applicant shall promptly notify the police chief in writing of such change.
   D.   Issuance Or Denial: The police chief may deny an application for a
commercial solicitation permit:
      1.   Pursuant to information obtained from the application pursuant to
subsection A8 or A9 of this section, or information obtained from the
background investigation conducted pursuant to subsection B of this section;
      2.   If any portion of the application contains false information;
      3.   If the applicant or anyone soliciting on his behalf has had a
previously issued commercial solicitation permit revoked by the city within
three (3) years of the date of the application; or
      4.   If the applicant or anyone soliciting on his behalf has been
convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter within three (3) years of
the date of the application.
If the application for a permit is denied, the police chief shall give written
notification of such denial to the applicant. Such notice shall be delivered in
person or by certified U.S. mail addressed to the applicant's current residence
address set forth in the application.
If the police chief determines and finds that the application should be
approved, the police chief shall issue the permit within ten (10) business days
of receiving the application results of the background investigation of the
applicant or anyone soliciting on behalf of the applicant. The solicitation
permit is nontransferable, and duplication of the solicitation permit is
prohibited.
   E.   Photo IDs: If the application is approved, the city police department
or the city will issue photo IDs for the applicant and those listed on the
application who are soliciting on his behalf. Such identification must be worn
at all times the individual is conducting solicitation within the city. Upon
completion of solicitation activity within the city, the photo IDs must be
immediately returned to the city police department. Failure to return a photo
ID shall result in a fifty dollar ($50.00) fine.
   F.   Application Record: The police chief shall cause to be kept in his
office an accurate record of every commercial solicitation permit application
received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining
thereto, including commercial solicitation permits issued or denied under the
provisions of this section.
   G.   Revocation: The police chief may revoke any commercial solicitation
permit if, after the issuance of such permit, he determines and finds that:
      1.   The registered solicitor made a false material statement in the
application for such commercial solicitation permit; or
      2.   The registered solicitor, or anyone soliciting on his behalf, has
violated any other provisions of this chapter; or
      3.   The registered solicitor, or anyone soliciting on his behalf, has
violated any local ordinance or state or federal law while engaging in
solicitation activity within the city.
The police chief shall give a registered solicitor written notice immediately
upon such revocation of the registered solicitor's commercial solicitation
permit. Such notice shall be delivered in person or by certified U.S. mail
addressed to the registered solicitor's current residence address set forth in
the application. Revocation shall be effective immediately upon delivery of
such notice.
   H.   Effective Period: A commercial solicitation permit shall be valid for a
consecutive period of time not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days. The
expiration date shall be expressly stated on the face of each commercial
solicitation permit. Upon completion of solicitation activity within the city,
the solicitation permit must be immediately returned to the city police
department. Failure to return a solicitation permit shall result in a fifty
dollar ($50.00) fine. (Ord. O-21-2009, 7-6-2009)
3-5-6: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the police chief's denial or revocation of a
solicitation permit shall have a right to appeal such decision to the mayor of
the city of Northlake as provided in this section. Within ten (10) days after
receipt of the police chief's notice of denial or revocation, the applicant or
permit holder may make a written request for a hearing regarding the denial or
revocation. After receipt of such written request, the mayor shall set a date
and time for the hearing within ten (10) days of receipt of the request. The
mayor shall give written notice of such hearing to the applicant or permit
holder postmarked or delivered at least five (5) days in advance of the hearing
date. At the hearing, the applicant or permit holder may present and submit
evidence and witnesses to rebut the reasons cited by the police chief for
revoking or denying the permit. Within five (5) days after the close of the
hearing, the mayor shall issue a written decision. The mayor may reinstate a
revoked permit, grant the requested permit or a renewal thereof, or affirm the
police chief's decision. The decision of the mayor is final. Any challenge or
appeal of the decision of the mayor shall be governed by the Illinois
administrative review act, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. (Ord.
O-21-2009, 7-6-2009)
3-5-7: VIOLATION:
Any person in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day such violation
occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense subject to fine.
Additionally, a violation may also be prosecuted as a public nuisance or as any
other applicable statutory violation. (Ord. O-21-2009, 7-6-2009)
CHAPTER 6
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Rules And Regulations Adopted
3-6-2: Inspection Fees
3-6-3: Posting
3-6-4: Violation; Penalties
3-6-1: RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The issuance, suspension and revocation of permits to operate retail food
establishments, the prohibiting of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or
drink and the enforcement of this chapter shall be regulated in accordance with
chapter 10, compliance procedures, of the 1976 and subsequent editions of the
food and drug administration "Food Service Sanitation Ordinance", except
sections 10-601 and 10-602, and defining regulatory authority to mean the Cook
County department of public health as the authorized agent of the city
department of health and inspectional services.
The inspection of food service establishments shall be regulated in accordance
with the current and subsequent Illinois department of public health "Food
Service Sanitation Rules And Regulations" on file with the Illinois secretary
of state; the inspection of retail food stores shall be regulated in accordance
with the current and subsequent Illinois department of public health's "Retail
Food Store Sanitation Rules And Regulations" on file with the Illinois
secretary of state.
Three (3) certified copies of the food and drug administration "Food Service
Sanitation Ordinance" and the Illinois department of public health's "Food
Service Sanitation Rules And Regulations" and "Retail Food Store Sanitation
Rules And Regulations" shall be on file at the office of the city clerk. (Ord.
O-32-89, 8-21-1989; amd. 1992 Code)
3-6-2: INSPECTION FEES:
Each food service establishment and retail food store which is inspected or
reinspected by the department pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement for
the provision of environmental health inspection service shall pay a fee of
seventy dollars ($70.00) to the city at the time of said inspection and
reinspection. (Ord. O-24-2001, 12-17-2001)
3-6-3: POSTING:
All licensees shall be required to post on or near the entrances to the
licensed premises a decal or placard to be provided by the city stating the
licensee's health department scores. (Ord. O-16-2013, 8-5-2013)
3-6-4: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a class C misdemeanor as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). In addition thereto, such persons may be enjoined from
continuing such violations. Each day upon which such a violation occurs
constitutes a separate violation. (Ord. O-32-89, 8-21-1989; amd. Ord. O-01-
2005, 2-7-2005, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2005)
CHAPTER 7
MOTOR VEHICLES – RELATED BUSINESSES
ARTICLE A. TAXICABS
SECTION:
3-7A-1: Definitions
3-7A-2: Taxicab Business License Provisions
3-7A-3: Taximeters
3-7A-4: Taxicab Fares
3-7A-5: Taxicab Drivers
3-7A-6: Operation Of Taxicabs
3-7A-7: Parking In, Use Of Taxicab Stands
3-7A-8: Vehicle Requirements
3-7A-9: Disposition Of Material Left In Taxicabs
3-7A-10: Enforcement
3-7A-11: Penalties
3-7A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings and are hereby defined
as follows:
OWNER: Every person having the use or control of one or more taxicabs as
defined in this section.
TAXICAB: All public vehicles driven by mechanical power and used for the
carriage of persons for hire, except those vehicles commonly known as buses.
TAXIMETER: An instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is
calculated either for distance traveled or for waiting time or for both and
upon which such charge shall be indicated by means of figures. (Ord. O-61-89,
12-18-1989; amd. 1992 Code)
3-7A-2: TAXICAB BUSINESS LICENSE PROVISIONS:
   A.   License Required; Term: No taxicab shall pick up passengers in the city
unless there shall first have been obtained therefor a taxicab license from the
city clerk. Such taxicab license shall be issued annually, May 1 in each and
every year, and should be valid to and including April 30 next succeeding and
shall be effective for such period of time unless sooner suspended or revoked.
   B.   Application For License; Issuance: Applications for taxicab licenses
shall be made to the city clerk by the owner thereof upon blank forms to be
furnished by the city clerk, and such application shall contain the full name
and address of the owner or operator, a list containing the class of the
vehicles for which the license is desired, the length of time the vehicles have
been in use, the number of persons each vehicle is capable of carrying and the
motor power thereof. Such application shall thereupon be referred by the City
Clerk to the Director of Health and Inspectional Services. Upon approval of the
application by the Director of Health and Inspectional Services, he shall so
endorse such application and file the same with the City Clerk who shall, upon
payment of the fee prescribed by this Code, 1  issue the license, complying
with subsection F of this Section.
   C.   Determination of Necessity of Taxicab Service; Hearing:
      1.   No taxicab license shall be issued under this Chapter unless the
City Council, after a hearing, shall, by resolution, declare and determine that
public convenience and necessity require the proposed taxicab service for which
application for a license is made; provided, that such declaration of public
convenience and necessity shall not be necessary:
         a.   For the licensing of the same number of taxicabs licensed for
operation and operated by the applicant under the same name and colors for
which a license was issued previously or the renewal of the license annually
thereafter; or
         b.   For the renewal of a license to the applicant for the number of
taxicabs of the applicant for which the City Council shall have at any time
prior to the date of application for such renewal made a declaration of public
convenience and necessity.
      2.   In determining whether public convenience and necessity require the
licensing of such taxicabs for which application may be made, the City Council
shall take into consideration:
         a.   Whether the demands of public convenience and necessity require
such proposed or such additional taxicab service within the City;
         b.   The financial responsibility of the applicant;
         c.   The number, kind and type of equipment;
         d.   The schedule of maximum rates proposed to be charged;
         e.   The color scheme to be used by the applicant;
         f.   The increased traffic congestion and demand for increased parking
spaces on the streets of the City which may result;
         g.   Whether the safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular
and pedestrian, will be preserved by the granting of such additional license;
and
         h.   Such other relevant facts as the City Council may deem advisable
or necessary.
      3.   If the City Council finds from the investigation and hearing that
the public convenience and necessity justify the operation of the taxicab for
which license is desired, it shall notify the applicant of its finding. Within
sixty (60) days thereafter, the applicant shall furnish to the City Council any
and all additional information which may be required, and if the City Council
then finds that the applicant is the owner and bona fide operator of the
vehicle for which the license is desired and that such vehicle complies with
all of the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the City, the
license shall thereupon be issued to the applicant upon the payment of the
proper license fee. 2
If the City Council finds from such investigation and hearing that the public
convenience and necessity do not justify the operation of the vehicle for which
the license is desired, it shall forthwith notify the applicant of such
finding.
   D.   Bond or Insurance Required: No owner shall be licensed to operate a
taxicab until he has complied with the State law pertaining to a surety bond or
liability insurance coverage and filed a copy of such surety bond or liability
insurance with the City Clerk.
   E.   Certification Decals: All taxicabs licensed by the City as provided in
subsection B of this Section shall be issued quarterly decals which shall
contain a number assigned to the taxicab, together with the date of the most
recent inspection. Such decal shall contain a space upon which an entry shall
be made of the date of inspection of the taxicab by the Director of Health and
Inspectional Services or an inspector appointed by him. Certification decals
shall be of a distinctly different color each quarter and shall be affixed to
the lower right-hand corner of the windshield of each taxicab.
   F.   Register of Licenses: The City Clerk shall keep a register of the name
and address of each person owning or operating a taxicab licensed under this
Chapter, together with the decal number and the description, make and necessary
dimensions of such taxicab, with the date and complete record of inspections
made of it. Such records shall be open to the inspection of the public at all
reasonable times, and shall be public records, extracts of which may be
certified for use as evidence by the City Clerk.
   G.   Revocation or Suspension of License: Any taxicab license shall be
subject to suspension or revocation upon conviction of the holder thereof for
any violation of this Chapter. The City Council may, at its discretion, suspend
or revoke a license granted upon any provision of this Chapter pending or in
advance of the criminal prosecution of the licensee, after notice and hearing.
(Ord. 0-61-89, 12-18-89)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1A-1 of this Title.
2 1. See Section
  3-1A-1 of this Title.
3-7A-3: TAXIMETERS:
   A.   Taximeter Required: Each taxicab must have a taximeter affixed thereto
and in good working order.
   B.   Inspections and Tests:
      1.   No taxicab license shall be issued for any taxicab until the
taximeter attached thereto shall have been inspected as provided by this
Section and found to be accurate, and no person shall drive a taxicab to which
is attached a taximeter that has not been duly inspected and approved.
      2.   Authority to Make Inspections: Before any license shall be issued to
a taxicab, it shall be the duty of the Director of Health and Inspectional
Services to examine and inspect the taximeter attached thereto and report its
condition to the City Clerk. At least once, annually, said Director of Health
and Inspectional Services shall in like manner examine, inspect and seal all
taximeters used in vehicles licensed in the City; provided, however, that in
the event complaint is made to the Director of Health and Inspectional Services
that any taximeter registers improperly or inaccurately, then it shall be the
duty of the Director to examine and inspect such taximeter complained of. If
such taximeter does not comply with the requirements of subsection C of this
Section then, and in that event, it shall be unlawful for the owner or person
in charge of such taxicab to permit its use until such taxicab is equipped with
a taximeter approved by the Director.
      3.   Tests:
         a.   Every taximeter shall be tested by running the taxicab to which
it is attached over a course of a standard mile in length or by a mechanical
test to prove the accuracy of the register thereof. Either of the foregoing
tests may be made in the discretion of the Director of Health and Inspectional
Services.
         b.   In order to determine whether such taximeter correctly registers
"waiting time", it shall be the duty of the Director of Health and Inspectional
Services to test such taximeter by comparing the time recorded as shown by the
fare computed on the dial thereof with the standard time.
         c.   It shall be the duty of any person owning, controlling or
operating a taxicab to deliver either the taxicab, together with the taximeter,
or the taximeter detached therefrom, to the Director of Health and Inspectional
Services or any of his deputies for the purpose of making the aforesaid test
upon demand; provided, however, such person may, if desired, be present at the
time such test is made.
      4.   Sealing Taximeters; Records Kept: It shall be the duty of the
Director of Health and Inspectional Services to seal all taximeters found
accurate and correct and to keep a record of the numbers of each taximeter and
the date of the inspection thereof in the books of his office.
      5.   Inspection Fees: The fee to be charged for the annual inspection of
each taximeter is hereby fixed at the sum of five dollars ($5.00). No charge
shall be made for additional inspections unless the taximeter registers
incorrectly or inaccurately, in which case an additional inspection fee of five
dollars ($5.00) shall be charged.
   C.   General Requirements:
      1.   The dial of every taximeter with which every taxicab shall be
equipped shall show but one tariff. Such taximeter shall also properly and
accurately register, indicate and display the distance traveled and the amount
of fare to be determined and charged therefor.
      2.   Each taximeter shall be equipped with a flag at least three inches
by two inches (3" x 2") in size, either painted red or bearing thereon in
letters at least one inch (1") in height, the word "Vacant" or the words "For
Hire". The flag post of such flag shall be kept up or towards a vertical
position when the taxicab is for hire, and when such taxicab is engaged in the
service of a passenger or passengers, such flag post shall be kept down or in a
horizontal position.
      3.   Each taxicab shall, during the period between sunset and sunrise, be
equipped with a light which shall be so reflected upon the dial of the
taximeter as to enable the passenger engaging and using such taxicab to read
the figures indicated thereon.
      4.   Every taximeter placed on a taxicab shall be so arranged that the
dial thereof is in plain view of the passenger while riding in such taxicab or
upon alighting from the same.
   D.   Transferring Taximeters: No person shall detach any certified or
inspected taximeter from any taxicab and attach the same to any other taxicab,
the front wheels of which are of different diameter from those with reference
to which the taximeter was originally tested unless a new inspection or
certification is had on such taximeter.
   E.   False Signals: No driver of a taxicab equipped with a taximeter, while
carrying a passenger or under employment, shall display the signal affixed to
such taximeter or other similar device in such a position as to denote that he
is employed at a rate of fare different from that to which he is entitled under
the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-61-89, 12-18-89)
3-7A-4: TAXICAB FARES:
   A.   Rates of Fares; Rate Card Required: No person owning, operating or
controlling any taxicab within the limits of the City shall charge to exceed
the following rates to be determined by the taximeter:
 
For the first 1/6 mile or fraction thereof, for one person:            $1.00
For each succeeding 1/6 mile or fraction thereof:                      .20
For each additional person over 12 years of age for the whole journey: .50
For each minute of waiting time or fraction thereof:                   .20
 
Waiting time shall include the time when the taxicab is not in motion,
beginning with the arrival at the place to which it had been called, or the
time consumed while standing at the direction of the passenger or time consumed
while standing because of conditions beyond control of the operator, but no
charge shall be made for time lost for inefficiency of the taxicab or its
operator or time consumed by premature response to a call.
   B.   Rate Card Displayed: Every taxicab operated under this Chapter shall
have a rate card setting forth the authorized rates of fare displayed in such a
place as to be in view of all passengers.
   C.   Multiple Passengers: A licensed taxicab company may provide for
multiple passengers and shared rides; provided, that the passengers are advised
when ordering a cab that the ride will be shared. Group rates for shared rides
will be established by the taxi company; provided, the rate for the group does
not exceed the rate that would have been applicable under subsection A of this
Section to one passenger multiplied by the number of persons in the group.
   D.   Receipt for Fare Paid: If demanded by the passenger, the driver in
charge of a taxicab shall deliver to the person paying for the hiring of the
same, at the time of such payment, a receipt therefor in legible type or
writing containing the name of the owner or operator, the City decal number or
the driver's City license number or the taximeter number and any items for
which a charge is made, the total amount paid and the date of payment.
   E.   Prepayment of Fare; Duty of Drivers to Convey Orderly Persons: Every
driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand payment of the legal fare in
advance and may refuse employment unless so prepaid, but no driver of a taxicab
shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon request
anywhere in the City unless previously engaged or unable to do so.
   F.   Overcharging Prohibited: No driver of any taxicab shall charge or
attempt to charge any passenger a greater fare than that to which such driver
is entitled under the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-61-89, 12-18-89)
3-7A-5: TAXICAB DRIVERS:
   A.   License Required; Qualifications: Every person driving a taxicab must
be licensed by the City as a taxicab driver.
   B.   Application of License; Affidavit; Photographs Generally: Any person
desiring to secure a City taxicab driver's license shall make application in
writing therefor to the City Clerk upon a form to be provided by the City
Clerk. Such application shall set forth the name of the applicant, his
residence and occupation and shall be endorsed by at least two (2) responsible
citizens who shall certify that the applicant is a person of good habits,
honest, sober and industrious and a fit person to drive or operate a taxicab.
Along with such application, the applicant shall file an affidavit stating the
applicant's full name, residence, places of residence during the previous five
(5) years, age, sex, race, height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth,
whether a citizen of the United States, places of previous employment, whether
he has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, whether he has
previously been licensed as a driver or chauffeur and if so, whether his
license has ever been revoked and for what cause, which affidavit shall be
filed with the City Clerk as a permanent record.
Such applicant shall also file with the application to the City Clerk two (2)
recent photographs of himself of a size which may be easily attached to the
license, one of which shall be attached to the license when issued and the
other shall be filed with the application in the office of the City Clerk.
Each applicant for a taxicab drivers license must:
      1.   Be of the age of eighteen (18) years or over;
      2.   Be of sound physique with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which might
render such applicant unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab;
      3.   Be able to read, write and speak the English language;
      4.   Be clean in dress and person and not be addicted to the use of
narcotics or intoxicating liquors.
   C.   Investigation and Examination of Applicant; Issuance or Refusal of
License:
      1.   The application, affidavit and photographs referred to in subsection
B of this Section shall be referred to the Director of Inspectional Services
who shall investigate the qualifications and the physical and mental condition
of the applicant.
      2.   Each applicant for a City taxicab driver's license under the
provisions of this Chapter shall be examined by the Director of Health and
Inspectional Services or some person by him designated as to the applicant's
knowledge of the provisions of this Chapter, the traffic regulations and the
geography of the City.
      3.   If the results of the examinations be unsatisfactory, the applicant
shall be refused a license. If the Director of Health and Inspectional Services
shall approve the application he shall endorse thereon such approval and return
the same together with the affidavit and photographs to the City Clerk, who
shall forthwith issue such license.
   D.   Date of Issuance; Expiration: Taxicab drivers' licenses shall be issued
as of May 1 or as of the date of initial application in each and every year and
shall be valid to and including April 30 next succeeding.
   E.   Contents of License:
      1.   Taxicab drivers' licenses shall be in such form as to contain the
signature of the licensee and blank spaces upon which a record may be made of
any arrest of or serious complaint against him.
      2.   All taxicab drivers' licenses shall be numbered when issued.
      3.   The taxicab drivers' license issued by the City Clerk shall have
attached thereto one of the photographs of the driver previously deposited with
that office, as provided in subsection B of this Section, in such manner that
it cannot be removed and another photograph substituted without detection.
   F.   Renewal of License: The City Clerk may renew a taxicab driver's license
from year to year by appropriate endorsement thereon. A taxicab driver, in
applying for a renewal of his taxicab driver's license, shall make an
application upon a form to be furnished by the City Clerk entitled "Application
for Renewal of License" which shall be filled out with the full name and
address of the applicant, together with a statement of the date upon which his
original license was granted and the number thereof.
   G.   Conditions of License:
      1.   License to be Posted: Each licensed driver shall, while operating a
taxicab, display this license in a prominent place.
      2.   Defacing Licenses Prohibited: No holder of a taxicab driver's City
license shall deface, remove or obliterate any official entry made upon said
license.
      3.   Drivers to Report Changes of Residence: If any person licensed as a
taxicab driver under this Chapter shall change residence at any time while his
license is in force, the driver shall forthwith notify the City Clerk.
   H.   Suspension and Revocation of License: A taxicab driver's license may be
suspended or revoked at any time for violation of the provisions of this
Chapter or other cause after notice and hearing as provided in this Code. The
Director of Health and Inspectional Services may suspend such license for ten
(10) days pending final action by the City Council. Any such suspension shall
be noted on the license, together with a statement of the reasons therefor, and
the driver shall be deprived of his license by the officer suspending or
revoking such license. No driver whose license has been revoked shall again be
licensed as a taxicab driver in the City unless upon presentation of reasons
satisfactory to the City Council. The City Clerk shall notify the Police
Department when any such license is revoked.
   I.   License Records: There shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk a
complete record of each taxicab driver's City license issued and of all
renewals, suspensions or revocations thereof. The City Clerk's record shall be
kept on file with the original application by the driver for a license. (Ord.
0-61-89, 12-18-89)
3-7A-6: OPERATION OF TAXICABS:
   A.   Duty of Owners to Furnish Service; Abandonment of Service: The
applicant shall operate his licensed vehicle or vehicles during each day of the
licensed year to the extent reasonably necessary to meet the public demand of
such service.
Upon complete abandonment of such service for the period of ten (10)
consecutive days by the owner or operator of such service, the Director of
Health and Inspectional Services, upon hearing, after five (5) days' notice to
such owner or operator, shall thereupon recommend to the City Council that the
license of such owner or operator shall be revoked, covering all licensed
vehicles of such owner or operator.
   B.   Carrying Additional Passengers: No driver of a taxicab licensed under
this Chapter shall carry any person other than the first passenger first
employing the taxicab without the consent of the first passenger.
   C.   Cruising Streets Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the driver of any
taxicab to seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his taxicab
about the streets of the City or otherwise interfering with the proper and
orderly access to or egress from any theater, hall, hotel, public resort,
railway station or other place of public gathering. (Ord. 0-61-89, 12-18-89)
3-7A-7: PARKING IN, USE OF TAXICAB STANDS: 1
   A.   Taxicabs:
      1.   Only taxicabs in such numbers and of such kinds as are set forth on
the required metal sign may remain at the stand while waiting for employment
and only in single file pointed in accordance with the traffic regulations. No
taxicab standing at the head of any such line shall refuse to carry any orderly
person applying for a taxicab who agrees to pay the proper fare, but this shall
not prevent any person from electing any taxicab he may desire on the stand,
whether it be at the head of the line or not. As the taxicabs leave the line
with passenger, those behind shall move up, and any taxicab seeking a space on
the stand shall approach the same only from the rear of the stand and shall
stop as near as possible to the last cab already on the line.
      2.   No taxicab shall stand at the curb within fifteen feet (15') of the
entrance of any building adjacent to a taxicab stand located and designed by
the City Council, which distance shall be determined by measuring fifteen feet
(15') on each side of the point of the curb opposite the middle of the entrance
to the adjacent building.
   B.   Private Vehicles: No private vehicle shall be permitted to stand or use
the space in a public stand except to receive or to discharge passengers or
merchandise. (Ord. 0-61-89, 12-18-89)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  6-3-4 of this Code.
3-7A-8:VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Age and Condition of Vehicles; Inspections:
      1.   No vehicle shall be licensed as a taxicab, whether upon new
application or renewal, unless it is less than four (4) years old or until it
has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and examined and found to be in a
thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of passengers, clean, fit, of
good appearance and well painted.
      2.   It shall be the duty of the owner of each taxicab to submit to the
Director of Health and Inspectional Services each taxicab for inspection prior
to the issuance of the license and at least once every three (3) months
thereafter, or at any time upon complaint.
The Director of Health and Inspectional Services shall make or have made by his
inspectors or a qualified automobile mechanic such examination and inspection
before a license shall be issued.
   B.   Taxicab Colors and Name: No taxicab license shall be issued under the
provisions of this Chapter to any person having the name or colors of his
taxicab similar to that of any other person having a taxicab license within the
corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 0-61-89, 12-18-89)
3-7A-9: DISPOSITION OF MATERIAL LEFT IN TAXICABS:
Whenever any package or article of baggage or goods of any kind shall be left
in or on any taxicab or shall be left in the custody of the driver thereof, the
driver of the taxicab shall, upon the discovery of such package or article,
forthwith deliver the same to the police station of the City, unless such
package or article shall be sooner delivered to the owner thereof or upon the
order of such owner. (Ord. 0-61-89, 12-18-89)
3-7A-10: ENFORCEMENT:
The licensing and inspecting of taxicabs, the examining of applicants for
licenses to drive such taxicabs, the licensing of drivers and enforcing of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be under the control of the Director of Health
and Inspectional Services.
The Director of Health and Inspectional Services shall require that all
taxicabs are kept in a condition of continued fitness for public use. (Ord. 0-
61-89, 12-18-89; 1992 Code)
3-7A-11: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). In addition to such fine, any
license issued pursuant to this Chapter may be suspended or revoked as provided
in this Code. (Ord. 0-61-89, 12-18-89; 1992 Code)
ARTICLE B. GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS
SECTION:
3-7B-1: Definition
3-7B-2: License Required
3-7B-3: Application for License; Fee
3-7B-4: Nontransferability of License
3-7B-5: Change of Location
3-7B-6: Fire Prevention Regulations; Inspections
3-7B-7: Exemptions from Provisions
3-7B-1: DEFINITION:
As used herein, "gasoline service station" shall mean any building, structure,
premises, enclosure or other place within the City where a container or
containers, tank or tanks, either portable or stationary, and containing either
carbon bisulfate, gasoline, naphtha, benzol, hydrocarbon (gas drips), liquefied
petroleum gas, kerosene, turpentine or other flammable liquids, having a flash
point below one hundred eighty seven degrees (187°) Fahrenheit, are kept or
located for the purpose of selling, offering for sale or distributing any such
liquids from containers, tank or tanks. (1976 Code §6-12-1)
3-7B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of a gasoline
service station without first having obtained a license therefor. (1976 Code
§6-12-2)
3-7B-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
An application for a license for the business of managing, conducting,
operating or carrying on a gasoline service station shall conform to the
general provisions of this Code relating to applications for license 1  and
shall specify the location of the building, structure, premises, enclosure or
other place in which it is proposed to keep such filling station and the
capacity or capacities, in gallons, of the container or containers, tank or
tanks. Every such application shall be approved by the Chief of Police and the
Fire Marshal before a license shall be issued. (1976 Code §6-12-3)
The annual license fee for a gasoline service station shall be as provided in
Section
3-1A-2 of this Title. (1976 Code §6-12-4)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-7B-4: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
No license granted under the provisions of this Article shall be assigned or
transferred to any person other than the licensee named therein to do business
or act under such license. (1976 Code §6-12-6)
3-7B-5: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
If any person licensed under the provisions of this Article shall, before the
expiration of such license, desire to change the location of the business
conducted thereunder, the licensee shall notify the City Clerk and shall
furnish all of the information which is required to be furnished on an original
application for license. Every such application for a change of location shall
be approved by the Chief of Police and the Fire Marshal before a change of
location shall be authorized. (1976 Code §6-12-8)
3-7B-6: FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS; INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Generally: All gasoline service stations shall be conducted and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Code with regard to fire
prevention and storage of flammable liquids 1  and shall be inspected by the
Fire Marshal or his duly authorized representative at least once every year.
(1976 Code §6-12-7)
   B.   Smoking Prohibited: No person shall permit smoking in any gasoline
service station. (1976 Code §6-12-9)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  8-1D-2A of this Code.
3-7B-7: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any place where flammable
liquids are kept or sold for medicinal purposes only. (1976 Code §6-12-10)
ARTICLE C. PUBLIC PARKING LOTS AND GARAGES
SECTION:
3-7C-1: Definitions
3-7C-2: License Required
3-7C-3: Application for License
3-7C-4: License Fee
3-7C-5: Bond or Insurance Required
3-7C-6: Rates and Charges
3-7C-7: Signs
3-7C-8: Building and Premises Requirements
3-7C-9: Operation of Parking Lots and Garages
3-7C-10: Notice of Lost, Damaged or Unclaimed Property
3-7C-11: Prohibited Acts and Conditions
3-7C-12: Inspections
3-7C-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
PARKING LOT: Means and includes any premises, enclosures or other places (other
than a licensed public garage) where four (4) or more automobiles may be stored
or parked and where rent or compensation is paid to the owner, manager or
lessee of such premises for the storing or parking of such vehicles.
PUBLIC GARAGE: Any premises used for housing or caring of more than four (4)
motor-driven vehicles or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation,
repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale, not including exhibition or
showrooms for model cars. (1976 Code §6-28-1)
3-7C-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No per son shall operate or maintain a parking lot or public garage in the City
without first having obtained a license therefor. (1976 Code §6-28-2)
3-7C-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a parking lot or public garage license shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications
for licenses 1  and shall set forth the following:
   A.   If a person, the name and address of the applicant;
   B.   If a partnership, the name, residence and business address of each
partner;
   C.   If a corporation, the name, date and state under whose laws such
corporation was organized, and if a foreign corporation, whether authorized to
do business in the State, the names of the principal officers, directors and
local representatives, their residences and business addresses;
   D.   A plot or drawing of the parking lot or garage, showing:
      1.   The location, size and capacity;
      2.   The location and size of entrance and exit;
      3.   The kind of floor or ground surface;
      4.   The location, size and construction of attendant's station; and
      5.   The wall or barriers surrounding said premises.
   E.   The hours for storage or parking of the vehicles and whether night
storage is to be maintained upon the premises;
   F.   The hours during which parking attendants will be on duty;
   G.   A complete schedule of the rates to be charged for storing or parking
of vehicles; and
   H.   Such other information as the City Clerk may deem necessary. (1976 Code
§6-28-3)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-7C-4: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for a parking lot or public garage license shall be as provided
in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. The maintenance fee for commercial driveways need not be
paid when the driveway is for a licensed parking lot. (1976 Code §6-28-5)
3-7C-5: BOND OR INSURANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Bond: Every application for a license hereunder shall be accompanied by
a bond, approved by the City Attorney, executed by a bonding or surety company
authorized to do business in the State, in the penal sum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) conditioned upon the payment by the licensee of any and all
final judgments for damages resulting to persons or property including the
theft of any motor vehicle or any part or accessory thereof arising out of the
operation or maintenance of any parking lot or garage. Such bond shall run to
the City for the benefit of any person who may claim redress for property
damage or theft resulting from the operation or maintenance of a parking lot or
garage. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for the full period of
time for which the license is effective.
   B.   Insurance: A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of Illinois conforming to the
requirements of this Section may be permitted in lieu of a bond. (1976 Code §6-
28-4)
3-7C-6: RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Rates and Charges to be Filed with Clerk: Every licensee shall file
with the City Clerk at the time of application for license a complete schedule
of rates and charges to be made for storing or parking motor vehicles on the
premises to be licensed. (1976 Code §6-28-6)
   B.   Day and Night Rates: Where separate rates or charges are made for day
parking and night parking, the night rate shall become effective at six thirty
o'clock (6:30) P.M., and notice thereof shall be posted on the signs described
in Section
3-7C-7 of this Article. (1976 Code §6-28-9)
   C.   Change in Rates: No licensee shall make any charge for storing or
parking any vehicle in a parking lot or garage in excess of that set forth in
his application for a license unless and until he has notified the City Clerk
in writing of the new schedule of rates and posted signs showing such increase
in the same manner as required by this subsection.
Every application for a change in the schedule of rates or charges as filed
under subsection A of this Section shall first be submitted, in writing, to the
City Council which shall hold hearings on such application to determine the
necessity of such change. In making its decision, the City Council shall take
into consideration in each case where application is made, operating and labor
costs, increases in rental or maintenance costs and such other factors as may
reasonably enter into the conduct of the business. If the City Council approves
the proposed change in rates and charges, the schedule as filed shall be
amended. (1976 Code §6-28-7)
3-7C-7: SIGNS:
   A.   Rate and Hour Signs Required: Each licensee shall maintain at each
entrance to its parking lot or garage a permanently affixed sign suitable to
apprise persons using same of the name of the licensee, the hours of the date
or night when such places are open for parking or storing motor vehicles, the
rates charged and the closing hours of such parking lot or garage.
Where more than one rate is charged for parking, the figures for each rate will
be of the same size and dimensions and such figures shall measure not less than
six inches (6") in height, and the letters and figures indicating the closing
hours shall be not less than six inches (6") in height. All such signs shall be
subject to the approval of the Director of Health and Inspectional Services or
his representative. (1976 Code §6-28-8)
   B.   Height Above Sidewalk: All signs shall be erected at a height not less
than eight feet (8') and not more than twelve feet (12') above the sidewalk
level and shall not be erected in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead
or confuse traffic. (1976 Code §6-28-10)
3-7C-8: BUILDING AND PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Generally: No person shall maintain or operate any public garage in a
frame building or in any building or structure used for school, church or
theater purposes or in any building which does not conform to the requirements
of the Building Code. 1  The premises of every garage must be kept clean and
free from flammable waste material. (1976 Code §6-28-30)
   B.   Entrances and Exits: Each parking lot or garage shall have one common
entrance and one common exit, which may or may not be combined, and the
operator of such parking lot or garage shall keep such entrance and exit
properly attended at all times during the period the parking lot or garage is
in operation. (1976 Code §6-28-14)
   C.   Barrier Requirements in Parking Lots: Except for places of entrance and
exit, every parking lot shall be completely enclosed by barriers constructed
and maintained so as to withstand the shocks and stresses to which they will
normally be subjected by vehicles using the premises and shall be of such
height as to engage the bumper of any motor vehicle on the lot so that no
portion of the vehicles shall extend over the property lines. When the lot
abuts on a building, barriers shall be erected as provided in this subsection
to prevent motor vehicles from striking the building. (1976 Code §6-28-27)
   D.   Maintenance Requirements:
      1.   Sidewalk Maintenance: Every operator of a parking lot or garage
shall keep the sidewalk surrounding the premises free from dirt, ice, sleet and
snow and shall keep the sidewalk and driveways in a safe condition for the
travel of pedestrians.
      2.   Surface Maintenance: The ground or floor space of each parking lot
or garage, if made of dirt, sand, cinders or other loose mixture, shall at all
times be kept thoroughly sprinkled or treated with water, calcium chloride or
other means so that the dust, sand, cinders or other substance of which the
ground or floor space is made will not be raised, carried or blown by the wind,
movement of vehicles or other causes into or upon public property or the
adjacent property of others. The surface or floor of the premises shall be
constructed so as to prevent retention of water thereon. (1976 Code §6-28-15)
   E.   Fire Protection: Every parking lot or garage shall be equipped with
proper fire extinguishing apparatus, subject to the approval of the Fire
Department, and all vehicles shall be parked or stored that they may be reached
readily in case of fire or other emergency. (1976 Code §6-28-22)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 8, Chapter 1, Article A of this Code.
3-7C-9: OPERATION OF PARKING LOTS AND GARAGES:
   A.   Refusing Vehicles Prohibited: No licensee shall refuse to park or store
any vehicle for which there shall be accommodation in such parking lot or
garage on tender of the stated fee for such parking lot. (1976 Code §6-28-11)
   B.   Claim Checks; Return of Vehicle: When a vehicle is left for storing or
parking, the licensee of the parking lot or garage, his agent, servant or
employee, shall furnish the owner or operator of the vehicle with a distinctive
claim check which shall have printed thereon the full name and address of the
parking lot or garage, a number corresponding to a coupon placed upon the
vehicle and shall have written or stamped thereon the date and license number
of the motor vehicle. The licensee shall not deliver any vehicle without the
proper claim check being presented, or without satisfactory proof of ownership
of the vehicle.
This subsection shall not apply where vehicles are stored or parked on a weekly
or monthly fee basis. (1976 Code §6-28-12)
   C.   Parking Coupons on License Plates: No person shall affix any parking
coupon upon any vehicle so as to obliterate in whole or in part any portion of
the license plates on such vehicle. (1976 Code §6-28-13)
   D.   Ingress and Egress of Vehicles:
      1.   The loading or unloading of passengers or drivers of vehicles across
or upon a public sidewalk is hereby expressly prohibited, and any operator or
employee who, by receiving or delivering vehicles other than within the
property line of the parking lot or garage, aids and assists in blocking any
sidewalk or street shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this
Article. (1976 Code §6-28-17)
      2.   No person operating a parking lot or garage shall invite or permit
any person to drive into or out of such lot or garage over any sidewalk, curb
or parkway at any place other than a permanent driveway or in any way in
violation of any City ordinance. Vehicles driven into or out of such parking
lot or garage shall be driven with due respect to traffic conditions and in
accordance with police regulations. (1976 Code §6-28-23)
   E.   Unauthorized Use or Removal of Vehicles Prohibited:
      1.   No licensee of a parking lot or garage shall make or permit any use
for any purpose whatsoever of any vehicle parked in such place, unless the use
shall have first been expressly authorized by the owner or person having
control of the vehicle.
      2.   No licensee shall transfer or cause to be moved or transferred any
parked vehicle through or upon the streets or alleys of the City without the
written consent of the owner or person having control of the vehicle. (1976
Code §6-28-20)
   F.   Changing Identification Marks:
      1.   No person shall change the identification marks on the engine of any
car or automobile in any public garage or parking lot.
      2.   No person shall change the license tags on such cars except in
accordance with the register of motor vehicles kept by the Secretary of State
of Illinois. (1976 Code §6-28-24)
   G.   Care of Vehicles After Closing Time: When vehicles are not called for
at closing time, the attendant shall leave the keys and parking coupon for
safekeeping at a place within a reasonable distance of the parking lot or
garage with a responsible person whose name and address shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on said premises. (1976 Code §6-28-21)
3-7C-10: NOTICE OF LOST, DAMAGED OR UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
   A.   Every licensee shall immediately notify the Police Department of every
claim made by reason of loss, theft or conversion or any damage or injury to
person or property from the operation of a parking lot or garage and occurring
during the hours the premises are regularly open for business. The obligation
created by this subsection shall not extend beyond the regular hours of
attendance as posted upon the premises and printed upon the regular receipt
furnished to the owner or person parking a vehicle. (1976 Code §6-28-18)
   B.   Every licensee shall immediately notify the Police Department, in
writing, of the license number, make and the name of the owner, if known to
him, of every vehicle left in the parking lot or garage for a period of more
than forty eight (48) consecutive hours. (1976 Code §6-28-19)
3-7C-11: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Distribution of Handbills: No person shall distribute literature or
place handbills in or upon any vehicle while parked in a parking lot or garage.
(1976 Code §6-28-16)
   B.   Disabled or Abandoned Vehicles in Parking Lots: No person shall park or
store, in any parking lot, any vehicle which is not in condition for use or
permit the parking of any abandoned, junked or partially dismantled vehicle in
any such lot. (1976 Code §6-28-28)
   C.   Displaying or Repairing Vehicles in Parking Lot: No person shall use
any parking lot for storage or parking of any vehicle for the purpose of
displaying it for sale or use any parking lot or portion thereof as an
automobile repair shop. (1976 Code §6-28-29)
   D.   Smoking in Public Garages: No person shall smoke or light a cigarette,
pipe or cigar in any public garage. (1976 Code §6-28-31)
3-7C-12: INSPECTIONS:
The Chief of Police and the Fire Marshal shall make or cause to be made such
inspection of public garages and parking lots as may be necessary to insure
compliance with the provisions of this Article. Any police officer shall be
permitted at any reasonable hour to view every car stored in any public garage
or parking lot, and no person shall hinder any such inspection or conceal any
car or motor vehicle from such inspection. (1976 Code §6-28-25)
ARTICLE D. SNOW REMOVAL AND PLOWING BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-7D-1: License Required
3-7D-2: Application For License
3-7D-3: License Fee And Term
3-7D-4: Penalties
3-7D-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No vehicle utilized within the city for purposes of removing or plowing snow,
for profit, shall be operated unless there shall have been obtained therefor a
snow removal and snowplowing business license from the city clerk and paid the
required license fee as provided herein 1 . (Ord. O-02-79, 1-23-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-1A-1 of this title.
3-7D-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a snow removal and plowing business license shall be submitted
to the city clerk on a form provided by the city and shall contain information
regarding a full name, address and age of the applicant, a complete description
of each vehicle utilized for said purposes, a statement as to whether or not
the vehicle is properly equipped with necessary and required safety features
and a statement as to whether or not the vehicle is properly covered by
property damage and personal liability insurance by the applicant. (Ord. O-02-
79, 1-23-1979)
3-7D-3: LICENSE FEE AND TERM:
A business license fee as provided in section 1-3A-1 of this title shall be
required to be paid prior to the issuance of any said license.
A snow removal or snowplowing business license shall be issued for the term of
the fiscal year or such portion thereof as remains at the time a license is
issued and shall be effective until the end of the fiscal year unless sooner
suspended or revoked. (Ord. O-02-79, 1-23-1979)
3-7D-4: PENALTIES:
The failure of any snow removal or snowplowing vehicle's owner or operator to
secure the required business license shall result in such owner or operator
being subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be
considered a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. O-02-79, 1-23-1979; amd. 1992
Code)
ARTICLE E. CATALYTIC CONVERTERS
SECTION:
3-7E-1: Prohibited Acts
3-7E-2: Exceptions
3-7E-3: Maintenance Of Records
3-7E-4: Violation
3-7E-1: PROHIBITED ACTS:
Except as otherwise permitted in this article it shall be illegal for any
person, firm, entity or corporation to purchase, collect, transport or dispose
of any catalytic converter or any portion of a catalytic converter that is not
attached to a motor vehicle. (Ord. O-21-2015, 9-14-2015)
3-7E-2: EXCEPTIONS:
The prohibition contained in section
3-7E-1 of this article shall not apply to any business licensed by the city to
repair motor vehicles. (Ord. O-21-2015, 9-14-2015)
3-7E-3: MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
A dated invoice shall be prepared for each catalytic converter that is removed
from a motor vehicle. The invoice shall include the full name, address,
telephone number, and driver's license number of the owner of the motor vehicle
from which the catalytic converter was removed, and the make, model, year, and
VIN number of the vehicle. The invoices shall be kept by the licensee for two
(2) years and, upon request by the city, shall be made available for inspection
during the business' regular business hours. (Ord. O-21-2015, 9-14-2015)
3-7E-4: VIOLATION:
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day that a violation exists constitutes a
separate and distinct offense. In addition to a fine the business license of
any licensee violating this article may be suspended or revoked. (Ord. O-21-
2015, 9-14-2015)
CHAPTER 8
ANIMAL – RELATED BUSINESSES
ARTICLE A. SMALL ANIMAL DEALERS
SECTION:
3-8A-1: License Required
3-8A-2: Application For License; Investigation
3-8A-3: License Fee And Term
3-8A-4: Compliance With Health Provisions
3-8A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of buying, selling or dealing in birds,
dogs or other small animals used as household pets or used for domestic
purposes without first obtaining a license. (1976 Code §
6-7-1)
3-8A-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
An application for small animal dealer's license shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this code relating to applications for
licenses 1 . (1976 Code §
6-7-2)
The director of health and inspectional services shall cause an investigation
to be made of the premises named and described in the application for a license
for the purpose of determining the fitness and suitability of such premises for
such business from a sanitary standpoint. (1976 Code §
6-7-3)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-1-3 of this title.
3-8A-3: LICENSE FEE AND TERM:
The annual fee for a license for a dealer in birds, dogs and other small
animals shall be provided in section
3-1A-1 of this title. (1976 Code § 6-7-4)
Every license issued under this article shall expire on April 30 following the
date of its issuance. (1976 Code § 6-7-5)
3-8A-4: COMPLIANCE WITH HEALTH PROVISIONS:
Every person licensed to engage in the business of dealing in birds, dogs and
other small animals used as household pets or for domestic purposes shall
comply with the provisions of this code regulating health and sanitation
applicable thereto.
The director of health and inspectional services shall periodically inspect
each such place of business to determine whether the applicable provisions of
this code regulating health and sanitation are being complied with. (1976 Code
§ 6-7-6)
ARTICLE B. DOG KENNELS AND CATTERIES
SECTION:
3-8B-1: Definitions
3-8B-2: License Required
3-8B-3: Applications for Licenses; Investigation
3-8B-4: License Fee and Term
3-8B-5: Building and Premises
3-8B-6: Removal of Dog or Cat
3-8B-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
CATTERY: Any establishment wherein three (3) or more cats over the age of eight
(8) weeks are kept.
DOG KENNEL: Any establishment where three (3) or more dogs over the age of
eight (8) weeks are kept harbored or boarded. (1976 Code §
6-8-1)
3-8B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of operating a dog kennel or a cattery
without having obtained a license therefor. In case the business of buying,
selling or dealing in birds, dogs and other small animals used as household
pets or for domestic purposes is conducted or carried on in connection with the
business of a dog kennel or a cattery in the same premises and by the same
person, then only one license need be obtained, and that license shall be that
which requires the payment of the higher license fee under either of the two
(2) license provisions of this Code. 1
 
Notes
1 1. See Article A of this Chapter for small animal dealers.
3-8B-3: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES; INVESTIGATION:
An application for a license under this Article shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for
licenses. 1  Such application shall also state the number of animals which it
is proposed to keep in the establishment or premises for which application for
license is made. (1976 Code §
6-8-3)
The Director of Health and Inspectional Services shall cause an investigation
to be made of the premises named and described in the application for license
for the purpose of determining the fitness and suitability of such premises for
such business from a sanitary standpoint. (1976 Code §
6-8-4)
 
Notes
1 2. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-8B-4: LICENSE FEE AND TERM:
The annual license fee for each dog kennel or cattery shall be as provided in
Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §
6-8-5)
Any person licensed to operate a kennel shall be exempt from the payment of the
dog license fee for each and every dog which is kept in any licensed kennel.
(1976 Code §
6-8-2)
All licenses issued for the business of operating a dog kennel or cattery shall
expire on April 30 following the date of issuance. (1976 Code §
6-8-6)
3-8B-5: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
   A.   Location: No person shall maintain any dog kennel or cattery in any
location in which business uses are prohibited by the Zoning Ordinance. 1
   B.   Sanitary Provisions: All dog kennels and catteries shall be kept free
and clean from decaying food and from filth of any kind. The kennels, buildings
and pens shall be whitewashed or disinfected from time to time and shall be
kept in a sanitary condition satisfactory to the Director of Health and
Inspectional Services. (1976 Code §
6-8-9)
The Director of Health and Inspectional Services shall periodically inspect
each such place of business to determine whether the applicable provisions of
this Code regulating health and sanitation are being complied with. (1976 Code
§
6-8-10)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
3-8B-6: REMOVAL OF DOG OR CAT:
No dog or cat shall be permitted to stray or be taken outside the limits of the
kennel or cattery unless such animal is on leash or is taken out temporarily
for the purpose of hunting, breeding, trial, show or exhibition. (1976 Code §
6-8-8)
CHAPTER 9
CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-9-1: Bond And Insurance
3-9-1: BOND AND INSURANCE:
   A.   Bond: All contractors and subcontractors including, but not limited to,
general building contractors, electrical contractors, carpenter contractors,
excavation contractors, plumbing contractors, or cement or masonry contractors
shall be required to post an indemnity bond in the amount of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) for improvements costing up to five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00); the amount of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
for improvements costing up to one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and the
amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for improvements costing over one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) protecting the City against any and all damages
that may arise to the public ways and to the City and to any person in
consequence of or by reason of such contractor's occupation and operation
within the City. A person bonded as a general building contractor need not be
bonded as a subcontractor or any other kind of contractor. (Ord. O-40-96, 8-19-
1996)
   B.   Insurance: In addition to such bond, each contractor and subcontractor
shall be required to maintain, at all times such license is in effect,
liability insurance with a minimum coverage of three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage or in the
alternative minimum coverage of two hundred fifty thousand dollars
($250,000.00) per person, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per
occurrence for bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per
occurrence for property damage. Evidence of such insurance shall be filed with
the City Clerk and updated periodically upon request. In the event such
insurance coverage is not maintained, the license shall be revoked. (Ord. O-17-
90, 4-2-1990)
ARTICLE A. ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS 1
SECTION:
3-9A-1: Definition
3-9A-2: Registration Required
3-9A-3: Application For Registration; Certificate
3-9A-4: Registration Fee; Expiration Of Registration
3-9A-5: Supervising Electrician
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 1, article C of this Code.
3-9A-1: DEFINITION:
"Electrical contractor", as used in this article, shall mean any person engaged
in the business of installing or altering by contract or otherwise electrical
equipment for the utilization of electricity supplied for light, heat or power
not including radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and
signals, and not including apparatus, conductors and other equipment installed
for or by public utilities, including common carriers, which are under the
jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission, for use in their operation as
public utilities; and the term does not include employees employed by such
contractor to do or supervise such work. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
3-9A-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of electrical contractor without being
registered as an electrical contractor in the manner hereinafter set forth. An
electrical contractor shall be required to pay a registration fee for the year
and shall post bond as required in section
3-9-1 of this chapter. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-
1989; Ord. O-32-93, 10-18-1993)
3-9A-3: APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION; CERTIFICATE:
Any person desiring to engage in the business of electrical contractor shall
apply for registration to the Department of Public Services; it being
understood that any such person or representative of a firm or corporation
making application for registration shall have had at least four (4) years'
experience as a journeyman electrician, and in case any statements made by such
person or representative of a firm or corporation shall be found to be untrue,
such application for registration shall immediately become null and void.
Upon the filing of such application in proper form and the payment of the
registration fee fixed herein, the Department of Public Services shall register
the applicant as an electrical contractor and shall issue to the applicant a
certificate of registration which will authorize the applicant to engage in
such business for the year in which issued. No such certificate of registration
will be transferable, and the certificate shall be kept conspicuously in view
in the business place of the registrant. The Department of Public Services
shall keep a record of such registration. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord.
O-49-89, 10-16-1989; Ord. O-06-94, 3-7-1994)
3-9A-4: REGISTRATION FEE; EXPIRATION OF REGISTRATION:
The fee for registration as an electrical contractor shall be as provided in
section
3-1A-1 of this title, which sum shall be paid by the applicant to the
Department of Public Services in advance upon filing the application. All such
fees collected shall be paid by the department to the Finance Director.
The certificate or registration issued hereunder shall expire on December 31 of
the year in which it is issued. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-49-89,
10-16-1989; Ord. O-06-94, 3-7-1994; Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
3-9A-5: SUPERVISING ELECTRICIAN:
   A.   Supervising Electrician Required for Permit; Qualifications: Before any
permit shall be issued to any person, he shall appoint or employ a supervising
electrician in conformity with this Code who shall be responsible for all
installations to be in compliance with this Code.
Minimum requirements for supervising electricians are as follows:
      1.   Minimum of twenty one (21) years of age;
      2.   Minimum of four (4) years' journeyman experience, particularly
motors, controls, circuitry and have a basic understanding of the National
Electrical Code 1 ;
      3.   Must pass the Electrical Commission's written and oral examination.
The fee for examination shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00) or as set by the
Electrical Commission from time to time. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; 1992 Code)
   B.   Certification: When the person employed or appointed to perform the
work or supervise the installation, alteration and repair of electrical wires
and apparatus under the authority of semi-annual permits as provided in section
8-1C-4-2 of this Code shall have complied with the requirements of the
Electrical Commission, the electrical inspector shall certify him as a
supervising electrician by placing his name on the affidavit form filed by the
person desiring to secure permits to perform electrical work. (Ord. O-23-79,
11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-1989)
   C.   Termination Of Supervising Electricians: Whenever a supervising
electrician shall leave or be discharged from the employ of any person required
to employ a supervising electrician, within fourteen (14) days, written notice
shall be given the Department of Public Services by the employer. Permit
privileges of such person shall be suspended until a certified supervising
electrician is employed or appointed. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-
06-94, 3-7-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 1, article C of this Code.
ARTICLE B. SEWER AND WATER CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-9B-1: License Required
3-9B-2: Application for License; Issuance
3-9B-3: License Fee
3-9B-4: Revocation of License
3-9B-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall be permitted to engage in the business of sewer and water
contractor, including the business of laying water or sewer pipes for
connection to the waterworks and sewerage systems of the City, unless he shall
have obtained a license for that purpose. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79; amd. Ord. 0-
34-90, 6-18-90)
3-9B-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE: 1
An application for a sewer and water contractor license shall be made to the
Director of Public Works setting out therein the name, residence and place of
business of such applicant.
The Director of Public Works, upon receipt of such application, shall ascertain
or cause to be ascertained whether such applicant is in possession of the
necessary skill to enable him to engage in the business. If such applicant
shall be duly qualified, such officer shall, upon the payment by such applicant
to the City Clerk of the license fee and upon the order of the Mayor and the
City Council so to do, issue or cause to be issued a license authorizing such
applicant to engage in the business of sewer and water contractor. (Ord. 0-23-
79, 11-20-79)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 3-9-1 of this Chapter for bond.
3-9B-3: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for a sewer and water contractor license shall be as provided in
Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. No license shall be issued for less than the full annual
fee herein specified. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
3-9B-4: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any licensed sewer and water contractor who shall violate any provision of this
Article or Title 7, Chapter 7, Articles A and B of this Code or shall perform
any work other than in a safe and workmanlike manner, shall have his license
revoked by the Mayor and City Council, upon recommendations of the Director of
Public Works, and shall not again be permitted to engage in the business of
sewer and water contractor unless satisfactory assurance shall be given to the
Mayor and City Council that such person thereafter will faithfully observe said
provisions, and until such sewer and water contractor shall have made good any
loss, damage or expense caused by or on account of any negligence or misconduct
on his part which was the cause of revocation of his license. (Ord. 0-23-79,
11-20-79)
ARTICLE C. DRAIN LAYERS
SECTION:
3-9C-1: License Required
3-9C-2: Application for License; Issuance
3-9C-3: License Fee
3-9C-4: Renewal of License
3-9C-5: Drain Laying Requirements
3-9C-6: Revocation of License
3-9C-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of drain layer without first obtaining a
license therefor. (1976 Code §6-9-1)
3-9C-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE: 1
An application for license under this Article shall be made to the Director of
Health and Inspectional Services, setting forth therein the name, residence and
place of business of the applicant. (1976 Code §6-9-2)
The Director of Health and Inspectional Services, upon receipt of the license
application, shall ascertain or cause to be ascertained whether the applicant
is in possession of the necessary skill to enable him to engage in the
business; if such applicant shall be duly qualified, such officer shall, upon
the payment by the applicant to the City Clerk of the license fee and upon the
order of the Mayor and the City Council to do so, issue or cause to be issued a
license authorizing such applicant to engage in the business of drain layer.
(1976 Code §6-9-3)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
   3-9-1 of this Chapter for bond.
3-9C-3: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for a drain layer's license shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. No license shall be issued for less than the full annual
fee. (1976 Code §6-9-4)
3-9C-4: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any person licensed as a drain layer shall be entitled to have his license
renewed without filing an application upon payment by him of the annual license
fee and the renewal of the bond provided for in Section
3-9-1 of this Chapter. (1976 Code §6-9-6)
3-9C-5: DRAIN LAYING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Supervision:
      1.   All work done by licensed drain layers on drains or pipes inside any
building or structure and all work done on any catch basin or cesspool located
on or in any private premises shall be done according to plans approved by the
Department of Health and Inspectional Services and under the supervision and to
the satisfaction and approval of the Director of Health and Inspectional
Services.
      2.   All work done by licensed drain layers on drains or pipes outside
any building or structure or upon any public way shall be done under the
supervision and subject to the approval of the Director of Health and
Inspectional Services.
   B.   Permit Required: No such work shall be done except on a permit in
writing issued by the Director of Health and Inspectional Services. (1976 Code
§6-9-7)
   C.   Inspections: All work done by licensed drain layers, other than work
done on local improvements paid wholly or in part by special assessment, while
such work is under the supervision and control of the Board of Local
Improvements, 1  shall be subject to the inspection, supervision, and approval
of the Director of Health and Inspectional Services. Any faulty or defective
work done by any licensed drain layer which may at any time be discovered by
the said officer shall be made satisfactory to the officer. (1976 Code §6-9-8)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 2, Chapter 2 of this Code.
3-9C-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any licensed drain layer who shall violate any of the provisions of this
Article or any rule or regulation of the building ordinance governing or
regulating the business of drain laying 1  shall have his license revoked by
the Mayor and the City Council upon the recommendation of the Director of
Health and Inspectional Services and shall not again be permitted to engage in
the business of drain laying until satisfactory assurance shall be given to the
Mayor and City Council that such person will thereafter faithfully observe the
provisions of this Article and the rules and regulations of the building
ordinances and until such drain layer shall have made good any loss, damage or
expense caused by or on account of any negligence or misconduct on his part
which was the cause of the revocation of his license. (1976 Code §6-9-9)
 
Notes
1 2. See Title 8, Chapter 1, Article B of this Code.
ARTICLE D. HOUSE MOVERS 1
SECTION:
3-9D-1: License Required
3-9D-2: Application for License; Fee
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 8, Chapter 4 of this Code for moving building regulations.
3-9D-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall move any house, barn or other building over, across or along
any street or alley within the limits of the City without first obtaining a
license from the City Clerk. (1976 Code §6-21-1)
3-9D-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE: 1
An application for a license under this Article shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to application for license.
2  (1976 Code §6-21-2)
The annual fee for a house mover's license shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §6-21-4)
 
Notes
1 2. See Section 3-9-1 of this Chapter for bond.
2 3. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
ARTICLE E. MASON CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-9E-1: Definition
3-9E-2: License Required
3-9E-3: Application for License; Fee and Term
3-9E-4: Exemptions from Provisions
3-9E-1: DEFINITION:
As used herein, "mason contractor" shall mean any person engaging in the
business of work in brick, stone, concrete, terracotta, tile and fireproofing
or any combination of these materials as used in and about the construction of
buildings or structures above or below the surface of the ground. (1976 Code
§6-27-1)
3-9E-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of a mason contractor or of constructing
or repairing sidewalks in any public street or place in the City without first
having obtained a license therefor and furnishing a bond as provided in Section
3-9-1 of this Chapter. (1976 Code §6-27-2)
3-9E-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE AND TERM:
An application for a license under this Article shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for
licenses. 1  (1976 Code §6-27-3)
The annual license fee for a mason contractor shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §6-27-4)
All licenses shall be due on May 1 of each year and shall expire on April 30
following the date of issuance. (1976 Code §6-27-5)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-9E-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any person who, by himself,
lays a sidewalk in front of property owned by him. (1976 Code §6-27-2)
ARTICLE F. ROOFERS
SECTION:
3-9F-1: Definition
3-9F-2: License Required; Application; Fee
3-9F-1: DEFINITION:
As used herein, "roofer" shall mean any person engaged in the business of
repairing, recoating, altering or changing roofs of buildings or other
structures within the City with tile, slate, sheet metal, mastic and gravel
roofing, ready roofing over shingles, asphalt and asphalt shingle roofing and
felt composition roofing or any other kind of prepared roofing. (1976 Code §6-
34-1)
3-9F-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE: 1
No person shall engage in the business of a roofer without first obtaining a
license therefor. An application for a license under this Article shall be made
in conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to
applications for license. 2  (1976 Code §§6-34-2, 6-34-3)
The annual fee for a license under this Article shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §6-34-4)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-9-1 of this Chapter for bond.
2 2. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
ARTICLE G. EXCAVATORS
SECTION:
3-9G-1: Definition
3-9G-2: License Required; Application
3-9G-3: License Fee and Term
3-9G-1: DEFINITION:
As used herein, "excavator" shall mean a person who, with horses and teams or
electrically equipped apparatus or steam shovels or other mechanical device or
devices or by day labor, excavates, removes or carries away dirt, rock,
cinders, building material, sand, debris or other substance or material in
order to construct the foundation of any house, residence, store or other
public or private building or structure requiring a foundation to be
constructed below the level of the street or any sewer, vault or other like
work requiring the removal of dirt, rock, sand, debris or other substance.
(1976 Code §6-11-1)
3-9G-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION: 1
No person shall engage in the business of excavation without a license. An
application for a license under this Article shall be made in conformity with
the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. 2
(1976 Code §§6-11-2, 6-11-3)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-9-1 of this Chapter for bond.
2 2. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-9G-3: LICENSE FEE AND TERM:
The annual license fee for an excavator shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. No license shall be issued for any sum less than the full
annual license fee.
All licenses shall be due on May 1 of each year and shall expire on April 30
following the date of issuance. (1976 Code §§6-11-4, 6-11-5)
CHAPTER 10
RETAIL DEALERS AND OCCUPATIONS
ARTICLE A. CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO DEALERS
SECTION:
3-10A-1: License Required; Restrictions
3-10A-2: Application For License; Fee
3-10A-3: Required Warning Signs
3-10A-4: Location Restrictions
3-10A-5: Tobacco Vending Machines
3-10A-6: Inspections And Analyses
3-10A-7: Penalties
3-10A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; RESTRICTIONS:
No person shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes or tobaccos within the city
without obtaining a license therefor. Nothing herein contained shall be held to
authorize the following: (Ord. O-04-96, 1-22-1996)
   A.   Selling, buying for, distributing samples of or furnishing any cigar,
cigarette, electronic cigarette, smokeless tobacco or tobacco in any of its
forms, either over the counter or through vending machines, to any minor under
eighteen (18) years of age.
For the purpose of this section, "smokeless tobacco" means any tobacco products
that are suitable for dipping or chewing.
For the purposes of this section "electronic cigarette" means any
electronically actuated device which in operation causes the user to exhale any
smoke, vapor or other substance other than those produced by unenhanced human
exhalation. "Electronic cigarette" includes any such device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, an
electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic
hookah or under any other product name or descriptor. The term "electronic
cigarette" does not include any asthma inhaler or other device that has been
specifically approved by the United States food and drug administration. (Ord.
O-13-2014, 4-21-2014)
   B.   Cigarettes containing opium, morphine or any other narcotic or
hallucinatory drug or jimsonweed, belladonna, glycerine, sugar or so called
marijuana cigarettes. (Ord. O-04-96, 1-22-1996)
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, including
any licensee, to sell or offer for sale individual cigarettes to any person;
said cigarettes shall be contained in the original package, pack or carton upon
sale. (Ord. O-20-96, 3-18-1996)
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any minor under eighteen (18) years of age to
possess or use any cigar, cigarette, electronic cigarette, smokeless tobacco or
tobacco of any form. (Ord. O-13-2014, 4-21-2014)
3-10A-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
An application for a license under this article shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this code relating to applications for
licenses.
The annual fee for a license for the sale of cigarettes or tobaccos in the city
shall be as provided in section
3-1A-1 of this title. (Ord. O-04-96, 1-22-1996)
3-10A-3: REQUIRED WARNING SIGNS:
All persons licensed under this article shall post a sign at or near "over the
counter sales" display locations and on tobacco vending machines. Each such
sign shall be plainly visible and shall state the following:
   NOTICE
The Sale of Tobacco Products to Persons Under 18 Years of Age is Prohibited by
Law.
The text shall be at least one inch (1") high and on white background. Persons
or businesses covered by this article shall have sixty (60) days after passage
of this article to comply. (Ord. O-04-96, 1-22-1996)
3-10A-4: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away, or
deliver tobacco products within one hundred feet (100') of any school,
childcare facility, or other building used for education, or recreational
programs for persons under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. O-04-96, 1-22-
1996)
3-10A-5: TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES:
It shall be unlawful to install, place or permit the use of any tobacco vending
machines in any establishment which is open to minors, except in a place where
the machine is not accessible to or cannot be used by minors; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to the installation and use by the
proprietor, his agent or employees of tobacco vending machines behind a counter
or in some place in any establishment in which access by minors is prohibited
by law; provided further, this article shall not apply to the installations and
use of a tobacco vending machine in commercial buildings of industrial plants
where the public is not usually admitted and where such machines are intended
for the sole use of the employees who are not minors. (Ord. O-04-96, 1-22-1996)
3-10A-6: INSPECTIONS AND ANALYSES:
The chief of police shall, from time to time, inspect and examine all places
where cigarettes and tobaccos are sold or offered for sale with a view of
ascertaining whether the provisions of this code or any laws of the state
relating to cigarettes and tobaccos are complied with.
All persons licensed under this article shall, upon demand of the chief of
police, furnish to the chief of police for his inspection samples of all
cigarettes and tobaccos sold or offered for sale. The said samples shall be
analyzed by or under the direction of the chief of police. (Ord. O-04-96, 1-22-
1996; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
3-10A-7: PENALTIES:
Any person or business accused of violating any of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to the following penalties as recommended by the
license committee of the city council.
First offense:
Shall pay a fine not to exceed $1,000.00.
Second offense:
Tobacco license suspended for 3 months and a fine not to exceed $1,000.00.
Third offense:
Tobacco license suspended for 6 months and a fine of $1,000.00.
Fourth offense:
Tobacco license revoked and a fine of $1,000.00. (Ord. O-04-96, 1-22-1996)
ARTICLE B. JUNK DEALERS
SECTION:
3-10B-1: Definitions
3-10B-2: License Required; Application; Issuance
3-10B-3: License Fee
3-10B-4: Separate License for Each Location; Change of Location
3-10B-5: Contents of License; License Posted
3-10B-6: Closing Hours
3-10B-7: Building and Premises
3-10B-8: Prohibited Acts and Conditions
3-10B-9: Lost or Stolen Articles
3-10B-10: Vehicle Requirements
3-10B-11: Inspections
3-10B-12: Revocation of License
3-10B-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
FENCE: Means and includes any place for the purchase, reception or keeping of
stolen goods.
JUNK: Means and includes old iron, brass, copper, tin, lead and other base
metals, old rope, bags, rags, wastepaper, paper clippings, bagging, rubber and
glass, empty bottles, old or used chain, cable, wire, tires, batteries and
battery parts and all other articles, goods or things which have been discarded
or are no longer used as manufactured articles composed of or consisting of any
one or more of the materials or articles herein mentioned.
JUNK DEALER: Means and includes every person who shall buy, sell, barter or
exchange or collect, receive, store or hold in his possession for sale, barter
or exchange any of the articles, goods or things in this Section defined as
"junk" and that does not perform work or service on such articles, goods or
things so as to enhance the value thereof and carries on such business as a
main pursuit rather than as an incident to any other principal business.
JUNK STORE: Means and includes any store, shop, house, warehouse or other
building where junk is bought, sold, bartered, traded or exchanged or is
collected, received, stored or held in possession for sale, barter, trade or
exchange.
JUNK YARD: Means and includes any yard, place, enclosure or premises other than
a "junk store", as herein defined, where junk is bought, sold, bartered,
traded, or exchanged or where junk is collected, received, stored or held in
possession for sale, barter, trade or exchange.
JUNK WAGON: Means and includes every wagon, automobile, car or other vehicle
used by a junk dealer in the collection, disposition or transportation of junk
from one place to another. (1976 Code §6-23-1)
3-10B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE:
No person shall maintain or conduct the business of a junk dealer without first
obtaining a license therefor. (1976 Code §6-23-2)
An application for a license under this Article shall be made in conformity
with the provisions of this Code relating to applications for licenses. 1  In
addition, the application shall be executed under oath. The application shall
also, if the applicant is a natural person, state that the applicant has not
kept, conducted or operated and has not, within one year prior to the date of
the application, been convicted of keeping, conducting or operating a fence.
The application, if by a corporation, shall state that the applicant has not,
nor has any of its officers, stockholders or employees, kept, conducted or
operated, or within one year prior to the date of application, been convicted
of keeping, conducting or operating a fence. The application shall, in
addition, furnish satisfactory evidence of good character and repute. If the
application is granted, license shall issue upon payment of the prescribed fee.
(1976 Code §6-23-3)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-10B-3: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for a license as a junk dealer shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §6-23-4)
3-10B-4: SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH LOCATION; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
   A.   A junk dealer's license shall be valid only for the particular place of
business designated therein. Every junk dealer conducting business at more than
one place in the City shall procure a separate license for each place of
business; provided, that where a junk store and yard located upon the same,
contiguous or adjoining premises are conducted by the same junk dealer, such
business shall be considered as one business and only one license shall be
required therefor. (1976 Code §6-23-5)
   B.   In case any licensed junk dealer shall desire for any reason to remove
his place of business from the place or location designated in his license to
another place or location within the City, such junk dealer shall make and file
written notice with the City Clerk who shall issue a new license, and the
license previously issued shall be returned to the City Clerk for cancellation.
(1976 Code §6-23-6)
3-10B-5: CONTENTS OF LICENSE; LICENSE POSTED:
Every junk dealer's license shall state, in addition to the name of the
licensee, the nature of the business, the term of the license and the
particular location within the City where such business is to be conducted. The
license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of
business so as to be easily seen. (1976 Code §6-23-7)
3-10B-6: CLOSING HOURS:
No junk dealer shall purchase or receive, in the exercise and conduct of his
business any goods, articles or things from any person between the hours of six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and at any time on Sunday.
(1976 Code §6-23-10)
3-10B-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES: 1
   A.   No junk dealer shall establish, conduct or operate any junk store or
junk yard in the City at any location other than that provided for and
permitted by the zoning ordinances of the City. 2
   B.   Sanitary and Safety Conditions:
      1.   The premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to
constitute a nuisance or menace to the health of the community or of residents
nearby or a place for the breeding of rodents and vermin.
      2.   No garbage or other organic waste and no paper, rubbish, rags or
other flammable article or materials shall be stored in such premises.
      3.   Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received in such premises as
junk, all gasoline and oil shall be drained and removed therefrom, and none
shall be permitted to remain upon the premises.
      4.   The manner of storage, arrangement of junk and the drainage
facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water upon the premises and to facilitate access for firefighting
purposes.
      5.   All outdoor storage facilities shall be enclosed in a substantial,
solid, nontransparent fence not less than eight feet (8') nor more than ten
feet (10') high. Such enclosure shall at all times be painted and kept in good
order.
      6.   No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any premises in such
form or manner that they may be transferred off such premises by natural causes
or forces.
      7.   No material or merchandise of any sort shall be stored in front of
the enclosure provided for in subsection B5 hereof.
      8.   No person shall burn in any junk yard refuse or junk including
rubber tires, batteries and rubber from wires or any type of junk or old used
automobiles which may cause fumes or odors injurious to the health and welfare
of adjoining residents. (1976 Code §6-23-16)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 4, Chapter 2 of this Code for nuisances.
2 2. See Title 10 of this Code.
3-10B-8: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   No junk dealer shall:
      1.   Sale Without Holding: Expose or offer for sale, sell, exchange or
dispose of any goods or junk of any kind within seventy two (72) hours next
following the actual time of purchase, collection, receipt or taking possession
thereof. (1976 Code §6-23-13)
      2.   Purchasing From Minors: Purchase, collect or receive any goods,
articles or things of any kind from any minor without the written consent first
had of the parents or guardian of such minor. (1976 Code § 6-23-14)
      3.   Acting As Or Carrying Of License Of Pawnbroker:
         a.   Receive any goods, articles or things of any kind, character or
description as a pledge or pawn nor lend or advance any sum of money or credit
on the security of such goods, articles or things. (1976 Code § 6-23-17)
         b.   During the period of his license, receive or hold any license to
engage in the business of pawnbroker. (1976 Code § 6-23-18)
   B.   Maintaining A Fence: No person conducting or operating a junk store or
junkyard shall conduct or maintain the same as a fence. (1976 Code § 6-23-15)
3-10B-9: LOST OR STOLEN ARTICLES:
Every junk dealer who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles
or things which may have been lost or stolen, or are alleged or supposed to
have been lost or stolen shall forthwith, upon demand, exhibit the same for
inspection by any member of the police department or any member of the city
council. (1976 Code § 6-23-12)
3-10B-10: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
Every junk wagon used or operated in the city for the collection, handling,
transportation or disposition of junk, shall have painted on each side thereof,
in letters and figures not less than two and one-half inches (21/2") in height,
of sufficient width to be clearly legible and in a position thereon so as to be
plainly visible, the name of the junk dealer owning, using or operating such
junk wagon, the street and number and the name of the city, town or village
wherein such junk dealer's principal place of business is located. (1976 Code §
6-23-9)
3-10B-11: INSPECTIONS:
The place of business of every junk dealer shall, at all reasonable times, be
open to inspection by any member of the police department, and no junk dealer
shall refuse access thereto or permission for such inspection. (1976 Code § 6-
23-11)
3-10B-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The license of any junk dealer issued under this article may be revoked and
canceled by the mayor or city council when and after such junk dealer or any of
his officers, stockholders, employees, agents or representatives has been
convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of the charge of keeping,
conducting or maintaining a fence. Whenever any junk dealer or any officer,
stockholder, employee, agent or representative thereof has been so convicted,
he shall thereafter be barred, for a period of not less than one year next
following the date of such conviction, from receiving or holding a license
under this article. (1976 Code § 6-23-19)
ARTICLE C. SECONDHAND DEALERS
SECTION:
3-10C-1: License Required; Exceptions
3-10C-2: Application For License; Investigation
3-10C-3: License Fee
3-10C-4: Purchase From Minors Prohibited
3-10C-5: Lost Or Stolen Goods
3-10C-6: Records
3-10C-7: Melting, Wrecking And Remodeling Of Items
3-10C-8: Revocation Of License
3-10C-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
No person shall engage in the business of a secondhand dealer or any type of
resale store or of issuing payment in exchange for jewelry, merchandise or
other items within the city limits without first obtaining a license therefor
for each separate place, premises or location where such business is to be
carried on; provided, that the words "secondhand dealer", as used in this
section, shall not include pawnbrokers or junk dealers as provided in other
provisions of this title, or sales or exchanges of used articles or materials
conducted by charitable or religious organizations. (Ord. O-14-2010, 4-19-2010)
3-10C-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
An application for a license as a secondhand dealer shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this code relating to applications for
licenses 1 . (1976 Code § 6-37-2)
When an application for a license under this article is made, the chief of
police shall cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether the
applicant has complied with the state laws and the provisions of this code, and
whether the applicant is of good character and repute. (1976 Code § 6-37-3)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-1-3 of this title.
3-10C-3: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for a secondhand dealer's license shall be as provided in
section
3-1A-1 of this title. (1976 Code § 6-37-4)
3-10C-4: PURCHASE FROM MINORS PROHIBITED:
No secondhand dealer or keeper of a resale store shall purchase any secondhand
article whatsoever from any minor without the written consent of his parent or
guardian. (1976 Code § 6-37-5)
3-10C-5: LOST OR STOLEN GOODS:
Any secondhand dealer, keeper, operator or manager of a resale or secondhand
store who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles of personal
property or things of value, which may have been lost or stolen or which may be
alleged to have been lost or stolen shall, upon demand to view or examine the
same, forthwith produce such goods, articles of personal property or things of
value to the mayor or any officer of the police department. (1976 Code § 6-37-
6; amd. 1992 Code)
3-10C-6: RECORDS:
   A.   Records Kept: Every secondhand dealer doing business in the city shall
keep a record, in English, of every article pledged with him or sold to him,
and this record shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at any
time during business hours.
The record maintained by the secondhand dealer shall be made at the time of the
transaction and shall set forth the following information:
      1.   Name, age, sex, and a general description of the individual with
whom the transaction is had, as well as the individual's residence and his
signature on the receipt and permanent record kept by the secondhand dealer;
      2.   A photocopy of a driver's license;
      3.   Confirmation that a second item of identification was shown;
      4.   The price of consideration paid or received at the time of the
transaction;
      5.   A description of every article received, purchased, sold or
exchanged by the secondhand dealer giving the manufacturer's name and other
marks of identification appearing on the article including, but not limited to,
the serial number, if any on the article. If writing a description of every
article is impracticable because of the number of items being sold as a unit
(for example, a coin, magazine or baseball card collection), then the
secondhand dealer shall write as detailed description as practicable for the
unit as a whole, which may include such details as number of estimated of items
within the unit, the range of dates appearing on the items, general physical
description of unit as a whole, etc.;
      6.   All entries in the record shall be signed by the person making the
entry; and
      7.   Such records shall be retained for a period of at least one year
from the date of the transaction. (Ord. O-14-2010, 4-19-2010)
   B.   Inspections:
      1.   Such record shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection
of the mayor, chief of police and any member of the police department or any
person duly authorized to make such inspection. (1976 Code § 6-37-7; amd. 1992
Code)
      2.   The chief of police or some person duly authorized by him shall
inspect the register book and other records of the secondhand dealer or owner,
operator or manager of a licensed resale store at least once every six (6)
months to assure compliance with the provisions of this article. (1976 Code §
6-37-8)
3-10C-7: MELTING, WRECKING AND REMODELING OF ITEMS:
No secondhand dealer shall melt, or transfer to another to be melted, any
watch, watchcase, jewelry, or other identifiable article composed, or
manufactured, in whole or in part, of gold, silver, platinum, or other precious
metals until such secondhand dealer has made a record of his intention to do
so, along with all other data required to be recorded by the specific
recordation provisions of this article, and has reported the same to the chief
of police or his designated agent(s), and unless and until he has kept such
article intact in his licensed place of business, for inspection for seven (7)
working/business days after the report has been made sent to the chief of
police or his designated agent(s). However, if the identifiable article
proposed to be melted down, wrecked, or remodeled has been sooner inspected by
the chief of police or his designated agent(s) and has received written
clearance for such melting, wrecking, or remodeling from same, said article may
be melted, wrecked, or remodeled prior to the expiration for the seven (7)
working/business days. (Ord. O-14-2010, 4-19-2010)
3-10C-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked for any violation of
any provision of this article. (1976 Code § 6-37-9; amd. Ord. O-14-2010, 4-19-
2010)
ARTICLE D. LUMBERYARDS; MATERIALS STORAGE YARDS
SECTION:
3-10D-1: License Required
3-10D-2: Applications For Licenses; Fees
3-10D-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Lumberyard: No person shall maintain or operate within the city any
lumberyard or place where lumber is sold without first obtaining a license so
to do. (1976 Code § 6-25-1)
   B.   Material Storage Yard: No person shall maintain or operate within the
city any material storage yard, meaning thereby, a yard or place where brick,
stone, gravel, cement, tile, sewer pipe or other building materials are stored
or kept for sale, without first obtaining a license therefor. (1976 Code § 6-
25-2)
   C.   Contractor's Storage Yard: No person shall keep or maintain within the
city any contractor's storage yard, meaning thereby, any yard or place where
contractor's equipment including, but without limitation thereto, steamrollers,
excavating machinery, asphalt pavement plants, tar kettles, wagons, graders and
building forms are kept or stored, without first obtaining a license therefor.
(1976 Code § 6-25-3)
3-10D-2: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES; FEES:
An application for any license under the provisions of this article shall be
made in conformity with the general requirements of this code relating to
applications for licenses 1 . (1976 Code § 6-25-4)
The annual license fee for operating a lumberyard or a material storage yard or
a contractor's storage yard shall be as provided in section
3-1A-1 of this title. (1976 Code § 6-25-5)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-1-3 of this title.
ARTICLE E. FLORISTS
SECTION:
3-10E-1: Definitions
3-10E-2: Licenses Required
3-10E-3: Application for License; Fee
3-10E-4: Separate License for Each Business and Each Location or Vehicle
3-10E-5: Sanitary Conditions
3-10E-6: Inspections
3-10E-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
RETAIL FLORIST: Any person engaged in the business of selling, offering for
sale or keeping with the intention of selling at retail flowers, bridal
bouquets, funeral designs or growing plants.
WHOLESALE FLORIST: Any person engaged in the business of selling, offering for
sale or keeping with the intention of selling at wholesale flowers, bouquets,
funeral floral designs or growing plants. The term shall also include any
person not operating from a fixed location in the City who shall deal, sell,
offer for sale or deliver at wholesale within the City from any vehicle
flowers, bouquets, funeral floral designs or growing plants. (1976 Code §6-14-
1)
3-10E-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of retail florist or wholesale florist
without first having procured a license therefor. (1976 Code §6-14-2)
3-10E-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
An application for a license under this Article shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for
licenses. 1  Every application for a license as an itinerant wholesale florist
shall also contain the address of the applicant. The application shall indicate
the nature of the business which the applicant desires to engage in. (1976 Code
§6-14-3)
The annual license fee for a retail florist or a wholesale florist shall be as
provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §6-14-5)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-10E-4: SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH BUSINESS AND EACH LOCATION OR VEHICLE:
   A.   Every person who shall engage in both a retail florist business and a
wholesale florist business shall procure a separate license for each. (1976
Code §6-14-2)
   B.   A separate license shall be required for each location, place or
premises where a person is wholesale florist, and a separate license shall be
required for each vehicle from which flowers, bouquets, funeral floral designs
and growing plants are sold. (1976 Code §6-14-4)
3-10E-5: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
Every establishment where the business of a florist is conducted, managed or
carried on shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No decayed,
decaying, unwholesome, contaminated or diseased flowers, plants or other things
shall be allowed to remain in or about such establishment, and such
establishment shall be kept clear of rubbish and inflammable matter. Such
establishment shall comply with all State laws governing the sale, possession,
growing or disposition of noxious, diseased or infected plants, trees or
shrubs. (1976 Code §6-14-6)
3-10E-6: INSPECTIONS:
The Director of Health and Inspectional Services shall cause an annual
inspection to be made of all florist establishments to determine whether the
requirements of this Code relating to health, sanitation and safety are being
complied with. (1976 Code §6-14-7)
ARTICLE F. CHRISTMAS TREE DEALERS
SECTION:
3-10F-1: License Required
3-10F-2: Application for License; Fee
3-10F-3: Bond
3-10F-4: Inspections; Location
3-10F-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, other than a florist who has been licensed for one year, shall
store, sell or offer for sale within the City any pine, balsam, spruce, fir or
other tree or any branches or parts thereof which have been cut for use as
Christmas trees or for ornamental or decorative purposes without first having
obtained a license to do so from the City. (1976 Code §
6-2-1)
3-10F-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
An application for a license under this Article shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for
licenses 1  and shall be accompanied by a cash bond as hereinafter provided.
(1976 Code §
6-2-2)
The annual fee for a license under this Article shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §
6-2-6)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-10F-3: BOND: 1
A cash bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be
deposited with the City Clerk for the purpose of indemnifying the City against
having any location remain in an unsanitary and unhealthy condition after the
Christmas season. Such cash bond shall be refunded within five (5) days after
discontinuance or termination of the Christmas tree sale business so long as
the location has been placed in a sanitary and safe condition. If the material
and debris remain on the premises, then the City shall cause the same to be
removed and pay the cost of removal out of the said deposit. The balance, if
any, shall then be returned to the licensee. (1976 Code §
6-2-3; amd. Ord. 0-62-89, 12-18-89)
 
Notes
1 2. See also Section 3-1A-1, Christmas tree sales, of this Title.
3-10F-4: INSPECTIONS; LOCATION:
The Fire Marshal and/or the Director of Health and Inspectional Services shall
inspect each location for which a license is requested. No license shall be
issued for any location that will create a fire hazard within the City, and no
license shall be granted except for locations that are properly zoned. (1976
Code §§
6-2-4,
6-2-5)
ARTICLE G. HARDWARE AND PAINT STORES
SECTION:
3-10G-1: Definitions
3-10G-2: License Required
3-10G-3: Application for License; Fee
3-10G-4: Investigations and Inspections
3-10G-5: Rights and Conditions of License
3-10G-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
RETAIL: Sales other than those for the purpose of resale or for use by
manufacturers, contractors, trades, railroads, public service corporations and
institutions or for the supplying of branch or general establishments from a
central depot or store and shall not include the sale at retail of secondhand
or used goods, wares or commodities.
RETAIL HARDWARE STORE: Any building, room, enclosure, premises, place,
establishment or part of an establishment in the City operated, maintained or
conducted for the sale or offering for sale at retail any of the following
articles: hardware, tinware, aluminumware, enamelware, cutlery, tools,
implements, apparatus, machinery, plumbing, engineers', janitors',
blacksmiths', contractors' or electrical supplies, gas, plumbing or electrical
fixtures, other articles or wares made largely of metals, kerosene, rifles,
shotguns and loaded shot shells or cartridges; provided, however, that dealers
or establishments or parts of establishments of a similar nature specifically
defined and licensed by other parts of this Article shall be exempt from the
provisions licensing retail hardware stores.
RETAIL PAINT STORE: Any building, room, enclosure, premises, place,
establishment or part of an establishment in the City operated or conducted for
the sale or offering for sale at retail of any paints, dry colors, wallpaper,
varnishes, calcimine, white or red lead, raw or boiled linseed oil, turpentine,
dryer, benzine, naphtha and painters' tools, supplies and equipment. Dealers or
establishments or parts of establishments of a similar nature specifically
defined and licensed by other provisions of this Article shall be exempt from
the provisions of that part of this Article dealing with paint stores. (1976
Code §6-19-1)
3-10G-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct or operate a retail hardware store or paint store
without first obtaining a license therefor. (1976 Code §6-19-2)
3-10G-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
An application for a retail hardware store license or retail paint store
license shall be made in conformity with the requirements of this Code relating
to applications for licenses, 1  and the applicant shall also describe the
premises to be licensed and state the location of same. Every such application
shall be approved by the Fire Marshal and by the Director of Health and
Inspectional Services before the license shall be issued. (1976 Code §6-19-3)
The annual fee for a retail hardware store or retail paint store license shall
be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §6-19-4)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-10G-4: INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Initial Investigations:
      1.   The Director of Health and Inspectional Services shall cause an
investigation to be made of the premises named and described in the application
for a license for the purpose of determining the fitness and suitability of
such premises for such business from a sanitary standpoint and determining
whether or not such premises comply with all the provisions of this Article and
laws of the State regulating health, safety and sanitation.
      2.   The Fire Marshal shall also cause an investigation to be made of
such premises for the purpose of determining whether the same comply with all
the fire regulations of this Code.
   B.   Annual Inspections: The Director of Health and Inspectional Services
and the Fire Marshal, in addition to making an initial inspection provided for
herein, shall visit or cause to be visited all such places of business licensed
under this Article as often as they deem necessary, but at least once a year.
(1976 Code §6-19-5)
3-10G-5: RIGHTS AND CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Every licensed retail hardware store shall have the privilege of
engaging in the business of a retail paint store within the same building,
room, enclosure, premises, place, establishment or part of an establishment
without the necessity of obtaining an additional license.
   B.   No retail hardware store license shall include the right or privilege
of selling deadly weapons or air rifles and toy weapons or gunpowder and
explosives. 1  (1976 Code §6-19-2)
 
Notes
1 1. See Article H of this Chapter for licensing provisions for firearms
  dealers.
ARTICLE H. FIREARMS DEALERS
SECTION:
3-10H-1: License Required
3-10H-2: Application for License; Issuance; Fee
3-10H-3: Reports Required; Form
3-10H-4: Penalty
3-10H-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling or to
sell or to give away to any person within the City any firearms which are of
such size or nature as may be concealed upon the person without securing a
license therefor. (Ord. 0-42-90. 8-6-90)
3-10H-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE; FEE:
Any dealer desiring a license to sell firearms shall make written application
to the City Council, stating in such application his full name and residence
or, if a corporation, the name thereof and of its principal officers and their
addresses. Such application shall also state the location at which it intends
to conduct such business. Upon the receipt of such application, with the City
Council's approval, it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to issue a license
to the applicant upon payment to the City Treasurer of the required applicant
up on payment to the City Treasurer of the required annual license fee. 1
(Ord. 0-42-90, 8-6-90)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1A-1 of this Code for fee.
3-10H-3: REPORTS REQUIRED; FORM:
Each dealer in firearms shall be required to return a report to the Chief of
Police each day of the sales or other disposition of firearms made by such
dealer on a form substantially as follows:
PERMIT NO.      
Date of sale or gift                     
Firearms Dealer's Name                   
Name and address of purchaser or donee                     
                                                           
Age of purchaser or donee      
Date of birth                     
Sex       Race       Height       Weight      
Drivers License Number                     
Social Security Number                     
Illinois firearms owner's identification card number                     
Description of weapon                     
Serial number of weapon                     
Purpose for which purchased or obtained                          
Price of weapon                     
Signature of purchaser                     
Ord. 0-42-90, 8-6-90)
3-10H-4:PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be punished by a fine
of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and a dealer in firearms
convicted of violating any provision of this Article shall, in addition to such
penalty, forfeit his license. (Ord. 0-42-90, 8-6-90; 1992 Code)
CHAPTER 11
LAUNDRIES AND DRY CLEANERS
ARTICLE A. LAUNDRIES AND LAUNDROMATS
SECTION:
3-11A-1: Definitions
3-11A-2: License Required
3-11A-3: Application for License; Fee
3-11A-4: Investigation; Issuance of License
3-11A-5: Attendant
3-11A-6: Revocation of License
3-11A-7: Laundry Vehicles
3-11A-8: Penalty
3-11A-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
LAUNDROMAT: Any place, building, structure, room, establishment or portion
thereof having within such premises one or more automatic washing machines and/
or drying machines which are rented, leased or hired out to any member of the
public for a consideration and for use upon such premises.
LAUNDRY: Any place, building, structure, room, establishment or portion thereof
which is used for the purpose of washing, drying, starching or ironing shirts,
dresses, underwear, collars, cuffs or other wearing apparel, table, bed or
other household linens, towels, curtains, draperies or other washable fabrics,
such work being done for the general public. The word "laundry", as used in
this Article, shall also be held to include any private laundry maintained or
operated in connection with any hotel, restaurant or public institution, except
a hospital or charitable institution where no charge is made for laundry
service.
LAUNDRY VEHICLE: Any wagon, automobile or other vehicle used for the purpose of
collecting and delivering laundry within the City. (1976 Code §6-24-1)
3-11A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct, operate, maintain or carry on the business of any
laundry or laundromat without first obtaining a license to do so. (1976 Code
§6-24-2)
3-11A-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
The application for a license to conduct a laundry or laundromat shall be made
in writing and shall conform to the general provisions of this Code relating to
applications for licenses 1  and shall also state the maximum number of persons
to be employed therein. (1976 Code §6-24-3)
The annual license fee for a laundry or laundromat shall be as provided in
Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §6-24-7)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-11A-4: INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The director of public services shall cause an investigation to be made of the
premises named and described in the application for license for the purpose of
determining whether the sanitary conditions and the other requirements of this
article are fully complied with. If the director of public services shall find
that the proposed laundry or laundromat and the premises wherein it is located
are in conformity with the provisions of this article, he shall transmit his
recommendations to the mayor for the issuance of a license. (1976 Code §§ 6-24-
4, 6-24-5; amd. Ord. O-06-94, 3-7-1994)
The mayor, upon receipt of the recommendation of the director of public
services, shall issue or cause to be issued to the applicant, upon payment of
the license fee, a license to conduct or operate a laundry or laundromat at the
place designated in the application. (1976 Code § 6-24-6; amd. Ord. O-06-94, 3-
7-1994)
3-11A-5: ATTENDANT:
   A.   Attendant Required: No coin operated, self-service laundry or
laundromat shall be operated between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
and six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. without having present on the premises an
attendant. (1976 Code § 6-24-8)
   B.   Information On Attendant To Police: The owner or operator of a laundry
or laundromat employing an attendant shall provide the police department with
the name and address of such attendant and all other information that may be
required by the police department. (1976 Code § 6-24-9; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-
4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
   C.   Posting Of Emergency Numbers By Owner: All laundry and laundromat
owners shall post the name, address and phone number of a contact person and a
police emergency phone number in a clearly visible section of their businesses.
(Ord. O-23-95, 6-5-1995)
3-11A-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The license granted under this article shall be subject to revocation for cause
as in the case of all other licenses, and in addition thereto, the mayor may
revoke it at any time that it shall appear to his satisfaction from any report
or recommendation of the director of public services that the maintenance of
any such laundry or laundromat is dangerous or detrimental to the health of the
residents of the city or the health of the persons employed therein. (1976 Code
§ 6-24-12; amd. Ord. O-06-94, 3-7-1994)
3-11A-7: LAUNDRY VEHICLES:
   A.   License Required: No person shall operate or cause to be operated, on
any of the streets, alleys or other public places in the city any laundry
vehicle without first obtaining a license therefor. (1976 Code § 6-24-13)
   B.   Application For License; Fee: Any person desiring to operate a laundry
vehicle on any of the streets, alleys or other public places of the city shall
make an application in writing to the city clerk which shall conform to the
general provisions of this code relating to applications for licenses 1  and
stating the character of the vehicle for which the license is applied for.
(1976 Code § 6-24-14)
The annual license fee for each laundry vehicle shall be as provided in section
3-1A-1 of this title. (1976 Code § 6-24-18)
   C.   Inspection Of Vehicle; Issuance Of License: Upon receipt of the
application for a laundry vehicle license, the city clerk shall forward the
same to the director of public services, who shall cause such investigation to
be made as is necessary for the purpose of determining whether such laundry
vehicle complies with the sanitary and health regulations of the city. If the
director of public services finds that such laundry vehicle complies with the
sanitary and health regulations, he shall forward such application with his
approval to the mayor. (1976 Code §§ 6-24-15, 6-24-16; amd. Ord. O-06-94, 3-7-
1994)
The mayor, upon receipt of the recommendation of the director of public
services, shall cause a license to be issued to such applicant upon the payment
of the license fee. (1976 Code § 6-24-17; amd. Ord. O-06-94, 3-7-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-1-3 of this title.
3-11A-8: PENALTY:
Any person who shall establish, maintain, conduct, carry on or operate a
laundry or laundromat without first procuring a license or who fails to employ
and have present on the licensed premises, when required to do so, an
attendant, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. (1976 Code § 6-24-11; amd. 1992 Code)
ARTICLE B. DRY CLEANERS
SECTION:
3-11B-1: License Required
3-11B-2: Application for License; Fee
3-11B-3: Fire Prevention and Protection
3-11B-4: Inspections
3-11B-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct or operate a dry cleaning establishment in which
gasoline, benzine, turpentine, petroleum or any of the products thereof are to
be used without first obtaining a license so to do. (1976 Code §6-10-1)
3-11B-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
An application for a license under this Article shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for
licenses. 1  Such application shall be accompanied by a sketch or plan of the
building in which such business is to be conducted showing the proposed
location of the dry cleaning equipment and showing all measures proposed to be
taken to avoid damage from fire and explosion. (1976 Code §6-10-2)
The annual license fee for a dry cleaning establishment shall be as provided in
Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §6-10-3)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-11B-3: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION:
   A.   No dry cleaning establishment shall be operated in other than a
fireproof building, as defined in the Building Code. 1
   B.   Such establishment shall be kept free from flammable wastes, so far as
possible, and no stove or open flame of any kind shall be kept or maintained in
the premises.
   C.   No smoking shall be permitted in such premises.
   D.   All operations shall be conducted in compliance with the standards of
the National Fire Protection Association, Pamphlet No. 32, Drycleaning Plants,
1972 Edition, for safeguarding dry cleaning and dry dyeing plants. (1976 Code
§6-10-4)
 
Notes
1 2. See Title 8, Chapter 1, Article A of this Code.
3-11B-4: INSPECTIONS:
The Fire Marshal shall, from time to time, make inspections of premises used as
dry cleaning establishments to determine that all provisions of this Article
relating to the storage or handling of volatile flammable liquids are being
complied with. (1976 Code §6-10-5)
CHAPTER 12
BUSINESSES DEALING WITH HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR CONDITIONS
ARTICLE A. FUEL OIL DEALERS
SECTION:
3-12A-1: License Required; Exceptions
3-12A-2: Application for License; Investigation
3-12A-3: License Fees
3-12A-4: Sanitary and Safety Conditions
3-12A-5: Inspections
3-12A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
No person shall engage in the business of fuel oil dealer without first having
obtained a license so to do. This Section shall not be construed to include or
apply to dealers in fuel oil who are licensed at the same place, location or
premises under the provisions of Chapter 7, Article B of this Title, licensing
gasoline service stations, in such a way as to require an additional license
fee from persons so licensed who pay an annual license fee that is equal to or
greater than the annual license fee required of a fuel oil dealer hereunder who
uses or proposes to use storage facilities in connection with his business;
except, that all such persons shall be required to procure an additional
license hereunder for each vehicle used by them for the conveyance of fuel oil.
(1976 Code §6-16-61)
3-12A-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
An application for such license under this Article shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for
licenses. 1  In addition, such application shall state whether the applicant
uses or proposes to use storage facilities in connection with the business of
fuel oil dealer and, if so, the location, place or premises where such storage
facilities are located or to be located, their capacity and the number of
vehicles, if any, to be used in connection with the business. (1976 Code §6-16-
2)
The Director of Health and Inspectional Services and the Fire Marshal shall
investigate application for a license and the matters and things therein
stated. (1976 Code §6-16-3)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-12A-3: LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fee for a fuel oil dealer who stores and sells fuel oil and
for a fuel oil dealer who sells but does not store or possess facilities for
storing fuel oil within the City shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title and, in addition thereto, an annual fee as provided in
said Section
3-1A-1 of this Title for each vehicle, if any, in excess of one used by the
licensee in connection with such business. (1976 Code §6-16-4; amd. Ord. 0-62-
89, 12-18-89)
3-12A-4: SANITARY AND SAFETY CONDITIONS:
   A.   Generally: All places of business of fuel oil dealers shall be kept in
a clean condition, free from accumulations of rags, wastepaper and other
combustible waste materials.
   B.   Smoking Prohibited: Smoking shall be prohibited in all such places of
business.
   C.   Toilets: Adequate toilet facilities shall be provided.
   D.   Filling Tanks:
      1.   No fuel oil dealer shall refill any fuel oil storage container or
tank used in connection with an oil burning heater, boiler or furnace unless
such storage container or tank is equipped with an automatic or return vent
pipe or unless the fill pipe or such storage container or tank is equipped with
a screw or automatic cap.
      2.   Every dealer, after filling or refilling any fuel oil storage
container or tank, shall replace the screw cap on such fill pipe or, if
equipped with an automatic cap, shall see to it that the fill cap is properly
closed. (1976 Code §6-16-6)
3-12A-5: INSPECTIONS:
All premises and all vehicles used in connection with the business of fuel oil
dealers shall be inspected by the Fire Marshal or his duly authorized
representative at least once every year. (1976 Code §6-16-6)
ARTICLE B. FLAMMABLE CHEMICALS
SECTION:
3-12B-1: Acetylene Gas
3-12B-1-1: Generating Acetylene Gas
3-12B-1-2: Compressing Acetylene Gas
3-12B-2: Generating or Compressing Oxygen and Hydrogen
3-12B-3: Storage of Flammable Liquids
3-12B-4: License Fees
3-12B-5: Exemptions from Provisions
3-12B-1: ACETYLENE GAS:
3-12B-1-1: GENERATING ACETYLENE GAS:
   A.   Definition: As used herein, "portable generator" shall mean an
acetylene generator of not more than thirty (30) pounds' carbide capacity which
has been approved for portable use by the underwriters Laboratories and
included in the "List of Inspected Gas, Oil and Miscellaneous Appliances" dated
July 1934 with supplement to June 1935 of low pressure and medium pressure
acetylene generators. (1976 Code §6-13-3)
   B.   License Required: No person shall generate acetylene gas in any form of
generator, holder, container or associated apparatus at a pressure which
exceeds fifteen (15) pounds to the square inch in the generator without first
obtaining a license therefor. (1976 Code §6-13-1)
   C.   Application for License: An application for a license under this
Section
3-12B-1-1 shall be made to the Fire Marshal. Such application shall be in
writing and shall conform to the general requirements of this Code relating to
applications for licenses 1  and shall set forth the proposed location of the
generator or generators, together with the name and type of generator or
generators to be used. (1976 Code §6-13-2)
   D.   Restrictions on Portable Generators:
      1.   Installation: Portable generators shall not be installed in a
permanent or semi-permanent location unless provided with vent and relief
piping equipped with approved, interlocking devices to the open air outside of
buildings. (1976 Code §6-13-5)
      2.   Use: Portable generators shall not be used in rooms of total volume
less than thirty five (35) times the nominal aggregate gas-generating capacity
per hour of all such generators in the room. Portable generators shall not be
used in any room containing flammable liquids or gases or in which any dust-
producing process is carried on or in which any highly combustible or explosive
materials are contained. Portable generators shall not be used in any poorly
ventilated room. (1976 Code §6-13-4)
   E.   Exemptions from Provisions: The provisions of this Section
3-12B-1-1 relating to the generation of acetylene gas shall not apply to
portable generators used exclusively for lighting, to generators used in
connection with vehicle lighting, or to plants devoted to the manufacture and
compression of dissolved acetylene for sale purposes. (1976 Code §6-13-6)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-12B-1-2: COMPRESSING ACETYLENE GAS:
   A.   License Required: Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall
engage in the business of collecting or compressing acetylene gas at any
pressure in excess of fifteen (15) pounds to the square inch or of selling or
distributing acetylene gas under pressure unless such person shall have
procured a license so to do. (1976 Code §6-13-7)
   B.   Application for License: An application for a license under this
Section
3-12B-1-2 shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of this
Code relating to applications for licenses 1  and shall set forth the location
and description of the building in which in which such business is to be
carried on. (1976 Code §6-13-8)
   C.   Inspection of Premises and Equipment: The application for a license
shall be referred to the Fire Marshal who will make or cause an investigation
to be made to determine whether the location, buildings, premises, machinery
and equipment comply with the provisions of this Code applicable thereto. (1976
Code §6-13-9)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-12B-2: GENERATING OR COMPRESSING OXYGEN AND HYDROGEN:
   A.   License Required: No person shall generate or compress oxygen or
hydrogen in any form of generator, container or associated apparatus without
first obtaining a license so to do. (1976 Code §6-13-10)
   B.   Application for License: An application for a license under this
Section shall be made to the Fire Marshal in conformity with the general
requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses1 and shall give
the proposed location of such generator or generators, holders, containers and
associated apparatus, together with the name and type of the equipment to be
used. (1976 Code §6-13-11)
   C.   Inspection of Premises and Equipment: Upon receipt of the application
for a license, the Fire Marshal shall make or cause to be made an investigation
for the purpose of ascertaining whether the premises and the apparatus and
equipment are of such type and so located that they would not constitute a
nuisance or be a menace to the safety of the employees or to the general public
or to adjoining property. (1976 Code §6-13-12)
3-12B-3: STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS:
   A.   License Required; Exceptions: No person shall keep on hand or store for
use in any business any flammable liquid having a flash point below one hundred
eighty seven degrees (187°) Fahrenheit or eighty eight degrees (88°) Centigrade
(closed cup tester) without first procuring a license so to do for each
location, place or premises where such person keeps on hand or stores for use
any such flammable liquid.
Nothing herein contained shall require any gasoline service station, 1  dry
cleaner and spotter, 2  drug, chemical or paint factory, drug, chemical or
paint store (wholesale), fuel oil dealer, 3  fuel oil storer, retail hardware
store or retail paint store 4  duly licensed under any other provisions of this
Code to obtain a license hereunder. (1976 Code §6-13-13)
   B.   Application for License: An application for a license under this
Section shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of this Code
relating to applications for licenses 5  and, in addition, the applicant shall
state the location desired or intended to store flammable liquids for use in
applicant's business, the maximum aggregate quantity to be stored for use and
shall give a description of the business engaged in, the location and capacity
of all containers or tanks having a capacity of fifteen (15) gallons or more
for the storage of any flammable liquid and such other information as may be
required by the Fire Marshal. (1976 Code §6-13-14)
   C.   Inspection of Premises and Equipment: The Fire Marshal, upon receipt of
application for license, shall investigate or cause to be investigated the
place of business described in the application and the methods and equipment
intended to be used by the applicant. (1976 Code §6-13-15)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 7, Article B of this Title.
2 2. See Chapter 11, Article B of this Title.
3 3. See Article A of this Chapter.
4 4. See Chapter 10, Article G of this Title.
5 5. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-12B-4: LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fee for the generation of acetylene gas or for the use of
portable generators of acetylene gas or for the compression or sale of
acetylene gas or for the generation or compression of hydrogen or oxygen or for
the storage and handling of flammable liquids shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §6-13-16)
3-12B-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as applying to the
transportation of any article or thing shipped in conformity with the
regulations of the Interstate Commerce Commission nor as applying to the Armed
Forces of the United States. (1976 Code §6-13-17)
ARTICLE C. ROOFING OR PAVING MATERIALS FACTORY
SECTION:
3-12C-1: Definition
3-12C-2: License Required
3-12C-3: Application for License; Investigation
3-12C-4: License Fee and Term
3-12C-5: Sanitary and Safety Conditions
3-12C-1: DEFINITION:
As used herein, the term "roofing or paving materials factory" shall mean any
premises, building or structure where the business of boiling, distilling,
mixing or otherwise changing the form of crude asphalt, crude tar, coal-gas by-
products, with or without other materials for roofing, paving or similar uses,
is carried on. The by-products of such boiling, distilling or other process in
the manufacture of roofing or paving materials shall be considered as
incidental to and a part of such manufacture for the purposes of this Article.
(1976 Code §6-35-1)
3-12C-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct or operate any roofing or paving materials factory
without first having obtained a license therefor. (1976 Code §6-35-2)
3-12C-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
An application for a license under this Article shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for
licenses. 1  (1976 Code §6-35-3)
The Director of Health and Inspectional Services shall make or cause to be made
an investigation of the premises described in the application for license for
the purpose of determining the fitness and suitability of the premises for the
conduct of such business from a sanitary standpoint and also as to whether the
applicant has complied with the State laws and provisions of this Code
regulating such establishments. Plans and specifications shall be submitted to
the Director for approval of all new roofing or paving materials factories and
subsequent additions to the same.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall investigate the premises described in
the application to determine whether fire regulations of this Code applicable
thereto have been complied with. (1976 Code §6-35-4)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-12C-4: LICENSE FEE AND TERM:
The annual fee for a roofing or paving materials factory license shall be as
provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §6-35-5)
Every roofing or paving materials factory license shall expire on April 30
following the date of its issuance. (1976 Code §6-35-6)
3-12C-5: SANITARY AND SAFETY CONDITIONS:
   A.   Sanitary Conditions: No person shall conduct or operate a roofing or
paving materials factory in such a way as to permit the escape of gases, fumes
or odors that are deleterious or offensive or that are detrimental to health.
All the necessary precautions or installations, including condensers, shall be
installed to prevent the escape of offensive, deleterious or obnoxious fumes,
gases, odors or dust. Adequate measures shall be taken to safeguard the health
and lives of all persons employed in such establishments, and adequate and
convenient toilet facilities shall be provided for such employees. (1976 Code
§6-35-7)
   B.   Prevention and Protection: Every person licensed to conduct a roofing
or paving materials factory shall comply with the fire regulations of this Code
applicable thereto, and the Director of Health and Inspectional Services shall
periodically inspect each such place of business to determine whether the
regulations are being complied with. (1976 Code §6-35-8)
ARTICLE D. MACHINE SHOPS
SECTION:
3-12D-1: Definition
3-12D-2: License Required; Exceptions
3-12D-3: Application for License; Investigation
3-12D-4: License Fee
3-12D-5: Building and Premises
3-12D-6: Noise Restrictions
3-12D-1: DEFINITION:
As used herein, "machine shop" shall mean a workshop in which machines are made
or metal parts thereof are repaired or where parts of machines or tools,
implements, gears, dies, screws or other metal articles are cut, filed, shaped,
punched, stamped or repaired by means of a lathe or other machinery. (1976 Code
§6-26-1)
3-12D-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
No person shall conduct or operate a machine shop within the limits of the City
without having first obtained a license therefor. This Section shall not apply
to any class of machine shops specifically licensed under other provisions of
this Code. (1976 Code §6-26-2)
3-12D-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
An application for a license under this Article shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for
licenses. 1  (1976 Code §6-26-3)
The Director of Health and Inspectional Services and the Fire Marshal shall
make separate investigations in order to determine whether the building or
place within which such machine shop is conducted or is to be conducted
complies with all the provisions of this Code relating to health, safety and
sanitation, buildings and fire prevention, respectively. (1976 Code §6-24-4)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-12D-4: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for each machine shop license shall be as provided in
Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §6-26-5)
3-12D-5: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
   A.   Location: No machine shop shall be conducted or operated on any lot or
plot of ground of which any portion shall be within two hundred feet (200') of
any lot occupied by a public or parochial school, hospital or church. (1976
Code §6-26-6)
   B.   Fire Regulations: Each person conducting a machine shop shall comply
with the fire regulations of this Code. 1  The Fire Marshal shall inspect,
periodically, each such premises to determine whether such regulations are
being complied with. (1976 Code §6-26-8)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 8, Chapter 1, Article D of this Code.
3-12D-6: NOISE RESTRICTIONS:
No person shall operate, within two hundred feet (200') of any residence, a
machine shop wherein pneumatic hammers or other apparatus are used which cause
loud or unusual noises. (1976 Code §6-26-7)
ARTICLE E. PEST CONTROL
SECTION:
3-12E-1: License Required
3-12E-2: Application For License
3-12E-3: License Fee
3-12E-4: Bond And Insurance
3-12E-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of pest control without a license to so
to do. (1992 Code)
3-12E-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license under this article shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this code relating to applications for
licenses. In addition, the applicant shall file with the director of health and
inspectional services proof of licensing by the Illinois department of public
health as required by the "structural pest control act". (1992 Code)
3-12E-3: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for any person engaging in the business of pest control
shall be as provided in section
3-1A-1 of this title. (1992 Code)
3-12E-4: BOND AND INSURANCE:
No license shall be issued to any person unless a corporate surety or indemnity
bond and liability insurance is furnished as provided by subsections
3-9-1A and B of this title. (1992 Code)
CHAPTER 13
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
3-13-1: License Required
3-13-2: Application For License; Investigation
3-13-3: Restrictions On Issuance Of License
3-13-4: License Fee
3-13-5: Lost Or Stolen Goods
3-13-6: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
3-13-7: Records
3-13-8: Melting, Wrecking And Remodeling Of Items
3-13-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct or operate the business of pawnbroker without having
first obtained a license therefor. (1976 Code § 6-29-1)
3-13-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
An application for a pawnbroker's license shall be made to the mayor and city
council in conformity with the general requirements of this code relating to
applications for licenses 1  and shall state thereon the name of the applicant,
the place of business and the number of employees intended to be engaged. (1976
Code § 6-29-2)
The chief of police or any other officer designated by the city council shall
investigate each applicant for license and shall report back whether or not
such applicant is a person of good character. (1976 Code § 6-29-3)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-1-3 of this title.
3-13-3: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
No license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who has been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen
goods or of burglary or robbery. (1976 Code § 6-29-4)
   B.   Any person who is not twenty one (21) years of age or over. (1976 Code
§ 6-29-10)
3-13-4: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for a pawnbroker's license shall be as provided in section
3-1A-1 of this title. (1976 Code § 6-29-5)
3-13-5: LOST OR STOLEN GOODS:
Every pawnbroker shall report to the police any article pledged with him, or
which is sought to pledge with him, if he shall have reason to believe that the
article was stolen or that the article was lost and found by the person
attempting to pledge it. (1976 Code § 6-29-8)
3-13-6: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Pawnbroker As Secondhand Dealer: No pawnbroker shall conduct the
business of a secondhand dealer without having obtained the license required
for such dealer in addition to his pawnbroker's license 1 . (1976 Code § 6-29-
9)
   B.   Weapons: No pawnbroker shall receive as a pledge or purchase any
revolver, pistol, blackjack or sawed off shotgun or display in his window or
shop any such weapons for sale. (1976 Code § 6-29-7)
   C.   Minors: No pawnbroker shall:
      1.   Employ a person of less than twenty one (21) years of age to assist
him in his business.
      2.   Have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with any person less than
twenty one (21) years of age except with the written consent of the parent or
guardian of the minor to each particular transaction. (1976 Code § 6-29-10)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 10, article C of this title.
3-13-7: RECORDS:
Every pawnbroker doing business in the city shall keep a record, in English, of
every article pledged with him or sold to him, and this record shall be open to
the inspection of any police officer at any time during business hours.
The record maintained by the pawnbroker shall be made at the time of the
transaction and shall set forth the following information:
   A.   Name, age, sex, and a general description of the individual with whom
the transaction is had, as well as the individual's residence and his signature
on the receipt and permanent record kept by the pawnbroker;
   B.   A photocopy of a driver's license;
   C.   Confirmation that a second item of identification was shown;
   D.   The price of consideration paid or received at the time of the
transaction;
   E.   A description of every article received, purchased, sold or exchanged
by the pawnbroker giving the manufacturer's name and other marks of
identification appearing on the article including, but not limited to, the
serial number, if any on the article. If writing a description of every article
is impracticable because of the number of items being sold as a unit (for
example, a coin, magazine or baseball card collection), then the pawnbroker
shall write as detailed description as practicable for the unit as a whole,
which may include such details as number of estimated of items within the unit,
the range of dates appearing on the items, general physical description of unit
as a whole, etc.;
   F.   All entries in the record shall be signed by the person making the
entry; and
   G.   Such records shall be retained for a period of at least one year from
the date of the transaction. (Ord. O-14-2010, 4-19-2010)
3-13-8: MELTING, WRECKING AND REMODELING OF ITEMS:
No pawnbroker shall melt, or transfer to another to be melted, any watch,
watchcase, jewelry, or other identifiable article composed, or manufactured, in
whole or in part, of gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals until
such pawnbroker has made a record of his intention to do so, along with all
other data required to be recorded by the specific recordation provisions of
this chapter, and has reported the same to the chief of police or his
designated agent(s), and unless and until he has kept such article intact in
his licensed place of business, for inspection for seven (7) working/business
days after the report has been made sent to the chief of police or his
designated agent(s). However, if the identifiable article proposed to be melted
down, wrecked, or remodeled has been sooner inspected by the chief of police or
his designated agent(s) and has received written clearance for such melting,
wrecking, or remodeling from same, said article may be melted, wrecked, or
remodeled prior to the expiration for the seven (7) working/business days.
(Ord. O-14-2010, 4-19-2010)
CHAPTER 14
TELEVISION STUDIOS AND TOWERS
SECTION:
3-14-1: Television Studios And Communications Businesses
3-14-2: Television Broadcasting Apparatus
3-14-1: TELEVISION STUDIOS AND COMMUNICATIONS BUSINESSES:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
television or communications studio, business or venture within the city for
purposes of transmitting, publishing, broadcasting or otherwise disseminating
television shows, either with or without subscription, to the public, without
first obtaining a license or permit as required by this code 1 .
   B.   License Fee: Any person operating a television or communications
studio, business or venture within the city for purposes of transmitting,
publishing, broadcasting or otherwise disseminating television shows, either
with or without subscription, to the public, shall pay to the city a license
and permit fee as provided in section
3-1A-1 of this title. (Ord. O-18-80, 10-14-1980)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 1 of this title.
3-14-2: TELEVISION BROADCASTING APPARATUS:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to use, install,
construct, build or assemble an antenna, tower or other structure for purposes
of transmitting, publishing, broadcasting or otherwise disseminating television
programming for public use, with or without subscription, unless said person
first obtains a license or permit for the construction, building or assemblage
of such structure.
   B.   License Fee: Any person using, installing, constructing, building or
assembling an antenna, tower or other structure for purposes of transmitting,
publishing, broadcasting or otherwise disseminating television programming for
public use, with or without subscription, shall pay to the city a license and
permit fee as provided in section
3-1A-1 of this title. (Ord. O-18-80, 10-14-1980)
CHAPTER 15
FURNITURE MOVERS
SECTION:
3-15-1: Definitions
3-15-2: License Required
3-15-3: Application for License; Fee
3-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
03 FURNITURE MOVER: Any person using or operating one or more wagons, trucks,
vans or other vehicles for the purpose of moving or transporting household or
office furniture for hire upon the public ways of the City.
HOUSEHOLD OR OFFICE FURNITURE: Means and includes all articles of furniture
which have been in use as such. It shall not be construed to mean any furniture
owned or possessed as merchandise for sale by any merchant where transporting
or cartage of the same is incident to the conducting or operation of his
business. (1976 Code §6-18-1)
3-15-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of a furniture mover without first
having obtained a license therefor. (1976 Code §6-18-2)
3-15-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
An application for a license under this Chapter shall be made in conformity
with the general provisions of this Code relating to applications for licenses.
1  In addition, the applicant shall state the number of vehicles which it is
proposed to use in the conduct of such business. (1976 Code §6-18-3)
The annual license fee for each furniture mover shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. No license shall be issued for the sum of less than one-
half (1/2) of the annual license fee. (1976 Code §6-18-4)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
CHAPTER 16
HOTELS AND MOTELS 1
SECTION:
3-16-1: License Required
3-16-2: Application for License; Fee
3-16-3: Building and Premises
3-16-4: Guests
3-16-5: Inspections
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-2-7 of this Title for hotel/motel operator's tax.
3-16-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct or operate a hotel, motel or building or part thereof
used or held out to the public as a place where sleeping accommodations are
furnished for twenty (20) or more persons for a period of one day or more
without having first secured a license therefor. (1976 Code §6-20-1)
3-16-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
An application for a license under this Chapter shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for
licenses. 1  (1976 Code §6-20-2)
The annual fee for a license under this Chapter shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §6-20-3)
 
Notes
1 2. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-16-3: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
   A.   Sanitary and Safety Conditions:
      1.   All premises used for hotel or motel purposes shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition, and all portions of such premises that are open
for use by guests or by the public shall be kept lighted at all times they are
so open to use.
      2.   All such premises shall be kept heated between October 1 and May 1
to a temperature of not less than sixty eight degrees (68°) Fahrenheit between
the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and to a
temperature of not less than fifty five degrees (55°) Fahrenheit at all other
hours. (1976 Code §6-20-4)
      3.   Water closets and lavatories shall be available to all guests using
any hotel or motel. There shall be at least one bathroom equipped with water
closet, shower or tub and lavatory facilities for each unit on the premises.
(1976 Code §6-20-6)
   B.   Exits:
      1.   No building shall be used for a hotel or motel unless it is
furnished with the number of exits and fire escapes required by the building
ordinances of the City for the construction of a new hotel or motel. 1
      2.   No person shall block or permit the blocking of any exit from any
premises used for a hotel or motel. (1976 Code §6-20-5)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 8, Chapter 1 of this Code.
3-16-4: GUESTS:
   A.   Prohibited Guests: No person shall knowingly permit any fugitive from
justice to stay in any hotel or motel.
   B.   Register: Each hotel or motel proprietor shall keep or cause to be kept
a register of guests as required by State law. Such registration or list shall
be made available for inspection by any member of the Police Department at any
time. (1976 Code §6-20-7)
3-16-5: INSPECTIONS:
The Chief of Police shall inspect or cause to be inspected every hotel or motel
operated in the City as frequently as may be necessary to insure compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter. (1976 Code §6-20-8)
CHAPTER 17
DANCE SCHOOLS
SECTION:
3-17-1: Definition
3-17-2: License Required; Application
3-17-3: Investigation of Applicant; Issuance of License
3-17-4: License Fee
3-17-5: Revocation of License
3-17-1: DEFINITION:
As used herein, "dancing school" shall mean any building, room, enclosure,
premises, place or establishment in the City where instruction in the art of
dancing or dancing lessons are given and where charge or fee for such
instruction or lessons is made, paid or received. (1976 Code §
6-6-1)
3-17-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on any dancing school in the
City without first having obtained a license therefor. (1976 Code §
6-6-2)
Any person desiring to conduct a dancing school shall make application in
writing therefor which application shall conform to the general provisions of
this Code relating to applications for licenses 1  and shall state the place of
business. (1976 Code §
6-6-3)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-17-3: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Upon receipt of the application for license, the City Clerk shall refer
the same to the Chief of Police who shall cause an investigation to be made as
in his judgment is necessary to ascertain whether the applicant is of good
character, and he shall thereupon forward such application, together with his
recommendation, to the Mayor and City Council. (1976 Code §
6-6-4)
   B.   The Director of Health and Inspectional Services and the Fire Marshal
may cause such investigation to be made, as in their judgment is deemed
necessary, for the purpose of determining whether the premises occupied by the
applicant comply with the provisions of this Code relating to health, safety
and sanitation so as to properly safeguard the lives and health of the
employees engaged and pupils receiving their instruction therein.
If, from such investigation, they find that the applicant has failed to comply
with the fire prevention, sanitary and health regulations of the City relating
to such business, they shall forthwith report same in writing to the Mayor and
City Council who shall refuse to issue such license. (1976 Code §
6-6-5)
   C.   Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Chief of Police, the Mayor
and City Council, in their discretion, shall cause a license to be issued to
the applicant upon the payment of the license fee. (1976 Code §
6-6-6)
3-17-4: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for each dancing school licensed under the provisions of
this Chapter shall be graded upon the basis of the number of instructors
engaged in the dancing school and shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. The number of instructors engaged shall be determined by
the average number engaged during the preceding year in such establishment. In
case of an initial license, the number of instructors shall be estimated. (1976
Code §6-6-7)
3-17-5: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
If, at any time after the granting of a license, the Director of Health and
Inspectional Services or the Fire Marshal shall certify to the Mayor and City
Council that the safety or health of the public or of pupils taught in the
dancing school or of the persons employed therein is endangered by the
maintenance of such dancing school in such building, room, enclosure, premises,
place or establishment, the Mayor and City Council shall forthwith revoke the
license therefor. (1976 Code §6-6-8)
CHAPTER 18
SHEET METAL SHOPS
SECTION:
3-18-1: License Required
3-18-2: Application for License; Fee
3-18-3: Performance of Work
3-18-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person desiring to conduct a business or do work commonly known as sheet
metal work including hot air furnace installation or repair, metal ceiling or
gutter work or any kind of sheet metal work in or about any building within the
City shall, before starting any such work, secure a license for the conducting
of such business. (1976 Code §6-38-1)
3-18-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
An application for a license under this Chapter shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for
licenses. 1  (1976 Code §6-38-2)
The annual license fee for conducting the business of sheet metal and furnace
work shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §6-38-3)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-18-3: PERFORMANCE OF WORK:
Any person licensed hereunder shall comply with all provisions of this Code
relating to buildings 1  and to any other ordinances applying to the conduct of
such business. He shall, upon the completion of each job, remove all old or
surplus material or other material within five (5) days, and such metal or
waste material shall not be placed on vacant lots, streets or alleys. (1976
Code §6-38-4)
 
Notes
1 2. See Title 8 of this Code.
CHAPTER 19
GARAGE SALES; RESIDENTIAL SALES
SECTION:
3-19-1: Definition
3-19-2: Special Permit Required; Application; Fee
3-19-3: Validity And Display Of Permit; Nontransferability
3-19-4: Conditions Governing Residential Sales
3-19-5: Interval Between Sales
3-19-1: DEFINITION:
As used herein, "residential sale" shall mean any sale of what is held out to
be or is commonly known as a garage, porch, room, backyard or patio sale or any
other type of general sale conducted from or on any premises not located in a
zoning district which permits such sales where goods or articles of any type
are held out for sale to the public. This definition shall not include a
situation where specific items are held out for sale and all advertisement of
such sale specifically names the items to be sold. (1976 Code § 6-33-2)
3-19-2: SPECIAL PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE:
No person shall engage in or conduct a residential sale without first having
obtained a special permit from the city clerk. An application for a special
permit under this chapter shall be made in conformity with the general
requirements of this code relating to applications for licenses and permits 1 .
(1976 Code §§ 6-33-3, 6-33-4)
There shall be no fee charged for a special permit under this chapter. (1976
Code § 6-33-5)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-1-3 of this title.
3-19-3: VALIDITY AND DISPLAY OF PERMIT; NONTRANSFERABILITY:
A permit shall be valid only for the particular sale and premises designated
thereon, and such permit shall be posted in the front yard area so as to be
seen by the public. (1976 Code § 6-33-7)
The applicant-permittee must be the owner or lessee of the premises where the
residential sale is to be held, and the special permit shall be
nontransferable. (1976 Code § 6-33-8)
3-19-4: CONDITIONS GOVERNING RESIDENTIAL SALES:
The sale authorized by a special permit under this chapter shall be subject to
the following conditions:
   A.   No such similar sale shall have been conducted by the same applicant or
on the same premises listed on the permit during the preceding six (6) months;
   B.   The sale will involve only personal property items owned by the
applicant-permittee or members of his household;
   C.   No sale item shall be located and no sales activities shall be
conducted in the front yard area of any premises or on any public sidewalk,
parkway area or other public property;
   D.   All signs advertising such sale shall be located in the front yard area
of the premises, and no such sales signs, handbills or other advertising matter
shall be located or posted in or upon any public parkway, building or public
property in the city. All signs advertising such sale must be removed within
twenty four (24) hours after the expiration of the time limit for such sale;
(1976 Code § 6-33-1)
   E.   The sale shall be limited to a consecutive period of not more than
three (3) days and shall be conducted only during the hours of nine o'clock (9:
00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.; (Ord. O-30-2003, 11-17-2003)
   F.   The sale shall be conducted without the use of outdoor loudspeakers or
other amplification equipment;
   G.   The sale shall be conducted in accordance with all other laws or
ordinances in effect in the city. (1976 Code § 6-33-1)
3-19-5: INTERVAL BETWEEN SALES:
No permit shall be issued and no person or premises shall be eligible for a
permit to conduct a sale of personal property items more than twice during any
twelve (12) month period. (1976 Code § 6-33-6)
CHAPTER 20
PHOTOGRAPHERS
SECTION:
3-20-1: Definition
3-20-2: License Required
3-20-3: Application for License; Fee
3-20-4: Health and Safety Requirements
3-20-1: DEFINITION:
As used herein, "photographer" shall mean any person operating, managing or
maintaining a photographic studio, a postcard studio, a film finishing and
developing plant, a portrait copying house or engaging in the business of
photography, including a commercial portrait and home portrait photography or
an itinerant or transient photographer or the business of photography for any
purpose whatsoever. (1976 Code §6-31-1)
3-20-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of a photographer without first
obtaining a license therefor. (1976 Code §6-31-2)
3-20-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
An application for a license under this Chapter shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for
licenses. 1  In addition, the applicant shall state the place at which it is
desired or intended to carry on the business of a photographer, giving a
description of the premises as well as the location of the same. (1976 Code §6-
31-3)
The annual fee for a photographer's license shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §6-31-4)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-1-3 of this Title.
3-20-4: HEALTH AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Storage of Chemicals and Films: Every person conducting a business of a
photographer shall provide metal cabinets for the storage of chemicals and
inflammables and for all films and film negatives. (1976 Code §6-31-5)
   B.   Sanitary Premises:
      1.   Every building, place or establishment in which the business of
photography is carried on shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
      2.   All necessary appliances shall be installed to prevent the emission
of noxious odors, fumes or dust, and provision shall be made for disposal of
the sewerage and waste of such establishment.
      3.   Adequate washroom and toilet facilities shall be provided for
employees in such establishment. (1976 Code §6-31-6)
   C.   Compliance with Fire Regulations: Every person conducting a business of
a photographer shall comply with the fire regulations of this Code. 1  The Fire
Marshal shall inspect such establishment periodically to determine whether such
regulations are being complied with. (1976 Code §6-31-7)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 8, Chapter 1, Article D of this Code.
CHAPTER 21
TATTOO PARLORS
SECTION:
3-21-1: Definition; Prohibition
3-21-2: License Required
3-21-3: Requirements For Building And Operator
3-21-4: Tattooing Procedure Regulations
3-21-5: Recordkeeping
3-21-6: Unlawful Tattooing Of Minors
3-21-1: DEFINITION; PROHIBITION:
   A.   Definition: "Tattooing" is defined as any method of placing designs,
letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or other marks upon or under the skin with
ink or any other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid
of needles or any other instruments designed to touch or puncture the skin.
   B.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful to operate a tattooing shop, business
or establishment or to do or practice tattooing without complying with the
provisions of this Chapter. Any location where tattooing is practiced shall be
designated as a tattoo parlor. (Ord. O-13-98, 2-9-1998)
3-21-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to operate a tattoo shop or establishment without a tattoo shop
license. Applications for such license shall be made in the same manner as
required for general business licenses. (Ord. O-13-98, 2-9-1998)
3-21-3: REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING AND OPERATOR:
Every tattoo parlor is subject to the following regulations:
   A.   It shall be well ventilated and of sufficient size to accommodate the
required equipment and business done therein, and subject to the approval of
the health inspector in such respects.
   B.   It shall not be located in or operated as a part of any place where
intoxicating liquor is stored, served, or sold.
   C.   It shall be provided with artificial light sources equivalent to at
least ten (10) foot-candles at a distance of thirty inches (30") from the floor
throughout the room and at least twenty five (25) foot-candles at the patron
level in the portion of the shop or establishment where the tattooing operation
is performed.
   D.   Walls and ceilings shall be clean, tight, in good repair and shall be
painted or otherwise finished at such intervals as will maintain the surface in
a clean and sanitary condition.
   E.   Floors shall be constructed or covered with a smooth, water impervious
material and shall be maintained in clean and sanitary condition at all times.
Floors shall be swept and wet mopped at least once daily or more often if
necessary.
   F.   A sink with hot and cold running water, soap and sanitary towels shall
be located in the room where tattooing is done.
   G.   A toilet, urinal and hand-washing basin shall be conveniently and
accessible to patrons and operators.
   H.   Sufficient cabinets shall be provided for the storage of supplies and
materials and the same shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
   I.   Sufficient facilities shall be provided for the disposition of
cigarette butts and other debris.
   J.   All needles, instruments and other equipment used shall be maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. The tattooing unit shall be
dismantled at the close of the day's operation or more often if necessary, and
the stencils, needles, and tubes thoroughly cleaned by the use of a brush, soap
and hot water, and an appropriate disinfectant.
   K.   All operating instruments when not in use shall be kept in a
disinfectant solution approved by the health inspector.
   L.   All cabinets and tables shall be constructed of easily cleanable
material and of light-colored washable finish.
   M.   All operators while tattooing shall wear clean light- colored washable
covering garments.
   N.   Each operator shall wash his/her hands with liquid or granulated soap
or equivalent, as approved by the health inspector, and hot water before
beginning any tattooing operation. An individual brush shall be used by each
operator. After washing hands as required in this subsection, the operator
shall rinse his/her hands in a bowl of antiseptic solution approved in writing
by the health inspector. The operator's fingernails shall be kept clean and
short. (Ord. O-13-98, 2-9-1998)
3-21-4: TATTOOING PROCEDURE REGULATIONS:
The following additional regulations shall be complied with:
   A.   Tattooing shall be done only on normal healthy skin surface. No
tattooing shall be done on scar tissue. No tattoo operator shall remove any
tattoo marks.
   B.   Safety razors with individual blades for each patron shall be used for
preparation of the areas to be tattooed whenever possible. If a straightedged
razor is used, it shall be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized following use on
any patron. All clean and ready-to-use needles and instruments shall be kept in
a closed glass or metal case or storage cabinet when not in use. A steam
sterilizer (autoclave) or its equivalent shall be used to sterilize all needles
and similar instruments before use on any person. Sterilization shall be
accomplished by exposure to live steam for at least thirty (30) minutes at a
minimum pressure of fifteen (15) pounds per square inch and temperature of two
hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (240°F).
   C.   Before shaving, the area to be tattooed shall be thoroughly cleaned
with tincture of green soap (USP) or its equivalent as approved by the Director
of Public Health. After shaving the area to be tattooed, seventy percent (70%)
alcohol (rubbing alcohol) must be applied to the skin.
   D.   Only carbolated vaseline or its equivalent as approved by the Director
of Public Health shall be used on the area to be tattooed.
   E.   All dyes used shall be mixed with alcohol or a stock solution of
phenolized listerine which is made by adding one teaspoon of liquefied phenol
(carbolic acid 90 percent to 1 pint of listerine). All dyes used shall be
manufactured by a reputable dye manufacturing company and used without
adulteration of the manufacturer's original formula.
   F.   Excess dye shall be removed from the skin with an individual sterile
gauze, sterile cotton, or sterile napkin. The completed tattoo shall be washed
with a piece of sterile gauze or cotton saturated with a solution of tincture
of green soap or equivalent as approved by the health inspector and disinfected
with seventy percent (70%) alcohol. The tattooed area shall be allowed to dry
and carbolated vaseline or its equivalent as approved by the Director of Public
Health and sterile gauze applied.
   G.   Printed or mimeographed instructions approved by the health inspector
shall be given to each patron on the care of the skin as a precaution against
infection after tattooing. (Ord. O-13-98, 2-9-1998)
3-21-5: RECORDKEEPING:
Permanent records for each patron shall be maintained by the operator of the
tattoo shop. Before any tattooing operation starts, the patron shall be
required personally to enter on a record form provided for such shop the date,
his/her name, age, and his/her signature. Such records shall at all times be
maintained in the tattoo shop and shall be open at all reasonable times to
examination by City officials. The tattoo operator shall issue a receipt to
each patron containing the name and address of the tattoo shop, and the
signature of the operator. When the shop is closed by going out of business or
by license revocation, all such records shall be turned over to the City. (Ord.
O-13-98, 2-9-1998)
3-21-6: UNLAWFUL TATTOOING OF MINORS:
It shall be unlawful to tattoo any person under the age of eighteen (18) years
without the written consent of his/her parent or guardian, and such written
consent shall be kept on file for at least two (2) years in the tattoo shop
where the operation is performed. Where there is doubt about such age the
operator shall before the operation is performed obtain proof thereof. (Ord. O-
13-98, 2-9-1998)
CHAPTER 22
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
SECTION:
3-22-1: Definitions
3-22-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
3-22-3: PEG Access Support Fee Imposed
3-22-4: Applicable Principles
3-22-5: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
3-22-6: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
3-22-7: Late Fees/Payments
3-22-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the city.
   A.   Gross revenues shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.   Event based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
city. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the city
divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional
or national compensation arrangement.
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this
definition.
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   B.   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the city and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   C.   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the city for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to the city for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: The video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that
is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and
which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the
public right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet
protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming
provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332
(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that
enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other
services offered over the public internet. (Ord. O-14-2008, 4-7-2008)
3-22-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the city.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
   C.   Notice To City: The holder shall notify the city at least ten (10) days
prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video
service in the city.
   D.   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the city. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on
the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of
the ordinance adopting this section by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
section shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-401(b)(6) to the city.
   E.   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.
   F.   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the city in which a fee is paid.
   G.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. O-14-2008, 4-7-2008)
3-22-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the city in addition to the
fee imposed pursuant to subsection
3-22-2B of this chapter.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the city or
its designee for PEG access support in the city.
   C.   Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the city or
to the entity designated by the city to manage PEG access. The holder's
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth
in subsection
3-22-2D of this chapter.
   D.   Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   E.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments
made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be
credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection B of this
section. (Ord. O-14-2008, 4-7-2008)
3-22-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. O-14-2008, 4-7-2008)
3-22-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the city, including any tax that is
or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the city's simplified
municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local
unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. O-14-2008, 4-7-
2008)
3-22-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   A.   Audit Requirement: The city will notify the holder of the requirements
it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an
audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same
requirements the city imposes on other cable service or video service providers
in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute
any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the city. If all
local franchises between the city and cable operator terminate, the audit
requirements shall be those adopted by the city pursuant to the local
government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et
seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that
the amounts are correct.
   B.   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the city's submission of an invoice for the
sum. (Ord. O-14-2008, 4-7-2008)
3-22-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this city pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights
act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. O-14-2008, 4-7-2008)
CHAPTER 23
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
SECTION:
3-23-1: Customer Service And Privacy Protection Law
3-23-2: Enforcement
3-23-3: Penalties
3-23-4: Customer Credits
3-23-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
   A.   Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the city's boundaries.
   B.   Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection
law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be
incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the city. (Ord. O-15-2008, 4-7-
2008)
3-23-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the
customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
city. (Ord. O-15-2008, 4-7-2008)
3-23-3: PENALTIES:
The city, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(r)(1), does
hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the cable
and video protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the
penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a
competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per
customer.
   A.   "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   B.   The city shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any
alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty
(30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material
breach.
   C.   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice. (Ord. O-15-2008, 4-7-
2008)
3-23-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The city hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those
credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for
the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of
the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the
credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord. O-
15-2008, 4-7-2008)
CHAPTER 24
SELF-STORAGE USER FEE
SECTION:
3-24-1: Definitions
3-24-2: User Fee Imposed
3-24-3: Payment And Penalty For Nonpayment
3-24-4: Records
3-24-5: Penalty
3-24-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used herein, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
OCCUPANT: A person, his sublessee, successor or assignee, entitled to the use
of the storage space at a self-service storage facility under a rental
agreement to the exclusion of others.
OWNER: The owner, operator, lessor or sublessor of a self-service storage
facility, his agent, or any other person authorized by him to manage the
facility or to receive rent from an occupant under a rental agreement.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Movable property not affixed to land and includes, but is
not limited to, goods, merchandise, vehicles, and household items.
RENTAL AGREEMENT: Any agreement or lease, written or oral, that establishes or
modifies the terms, conditions, rules or any other provisions concerning the
use and occupancy of a self-service storage facility.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY: Any real property designed and used for the
purpose of renting or leasing individual storage space to occupants who are to
have access to such for the purpose of storing and removing personal property
and/or property leased or rented to occupants for the overnight parking or
storage of vehicles. A self-service storage facility, as defined herein, is not
a warehouse for the purpose of article 7 of the uniform commercial code. If an
owner issues any warehouse receipt, bill of lading, or other document of title
for the personal property stored, the provisions of the act do not apply.
VEHICLE: Any machine or device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a rail, street, road, highway or otherwise
upon land, in or upon water, or through the air. The term "vehicle" includes,
without limitation, automobiles, trailers, semitrailers, trucks, buses, trains,
motorcycles, boats, airplanes, recreational vehicles and helicopters. (Ord. O-
24-2014, 11-17-2014)
3-24-2: USER FEE IMPOSED:
There is hereby imposed and shall accrue and shall be collected a user fee as
herein provided upon the rental or leasing of any self-service storage facility
in the city at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross rental or leasing
charge. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the user fee
imposed by this chapter shall be borne by the occupant of any such self-
service storage facility. The user fee shall be in addition to any and all
other taxes. It shall be the duty of every owner, of every self-service storage
facility to collect the user fee from the occupant and pay over to the city the
user fee as required by this chapter. (Ord. O-24-2014, 11-17-2014)
3-24-3: PAYMENT AND PENALTY FOR NONPAYMENT:
Every owner shall file a sworn user fee return on a monthly basis with the city
showing user fee receipts received with respect to storage space rented or
leased during the preceding month on forms prescribed by the city. At the time
of filing the return, the owner shall pay to the city all user fees due for the
period to which the return applies.
If any user fee is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of two percent (2%)
per month on the amount of the user fee which remains unpaid shall be added and
collected. Whenever any person shall fail to pay the fees as required, the city
attorney shall bring a cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of
the user fees on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. The
costs of such enforcement to be borne by the owner. (Ord. O-24-2014, 11-17-
2014)
3-24-4: RECORDS:
Every owner shall keep books and records showing the prices, rents and charges
made or charged and occupancies assessed under this chapter. The city shall at
all reasonable times have full access to the books and records. (Ord. O-24-
2014, 11-17-2014)
3-24-5: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day any violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. This monetary penalty shall be
in addition to any and all other remedies which may be available to the city.
(Ord. O-24-2014, 11-17-2014)
CHAPTER 25
FEDERAL FIREARM LICENSEES
SECTION:
3-25-1: Definitions
3-25-2: License Required
3-25-3: Applications
3-25-4: Licensees In A Residential District
3-25-5: Number Of Licenses
3-25-6: Nontransferability
3-25-7: License Fee
3-25-8: Inspections
3-25-9: Safety Devices
3-25-10: Pretransfer Verification Process
3-25-11: Penalty
3-25-12: Revocation Of License
3-25-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
FEDERAL FIREARMS LICENSEE: Any person who has been issued a type 1 federal
firearms license by the bureau of alcohol, tobacco, firearms and explosive
devices.
FIREARM: Any pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, machine gun, assault weapon or
other device that fits within the definition of "firearm" contained in the
Illinois firearm owners identification card act, 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes
65/1.1.
GUNSMITH: Any person who has been issued a type 1 federal firearms license by
the bureau of alcohol, tobacco, firearms and explosive devices and is engaged
in the repair of firearms. (Ord. O-10-2016, 5-2-2016)
3-25-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the sale or repair of firearms without first having
obtained a license pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. O-10-2016, 5-2-2016)
3-25-3: APPLICATIONS:
   A.   All applications for a license or under this chapter shall be made in
writing on a form provided by the city. In addition to any other information
required by the city, each application for a license or permit shall include:
      1.   The applicant's full name, any aliases by which he or she has been
known, a copy of the applicant's federal firearms dealer's license, driver's
license or state identification card and state of Illinois firearms owner's
identification card, a full set of his or her fingerprints in digital format or
a sample fingerprint in digital format that may be used to verify
electronically the applicant's identity, or a statement under oath by the
applicant that, to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, the equipment
necessary to obtain such digital fingerprints was not available at the time the
application was submitted, his or her social security number and the address
and telephone number where he or she resides and proposes to engage in the
business of dealing in or repairing firearms ("premises"); and
      2.   If the applicant is a corporation, the corporate name, business, and
principal place of business of the applicant; the date and state of
incorporation; and the names and residence addresses of the corporate officers
and directors, the names and addresses of all individuals who own ten percent
(10%) or more of the stock in the corporation, its registered agent and a list
of all affiliated corporations noting whether any are engaged in the business
of dealing in firearms; and
      3.   If the applicant is a partnership, the name, business address and
telephone number of the principal office or place of business; the names,
addresses and telephone numbers of all partners noting whether any are engaged
in the business of dealing in firearms; and the name, address and telephone
number of a person authorized to receive notices issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      4.   Every person applying for a license must submit a list of the names
and addresses of all individuals who the applicant employed over the twelve
(12) months prior to the date of application and a statement attesting under
oath to the fact that the applicant has complied with the employee background
check provisions of this section; and
      5.   Every person applying for a license shall submit documentation
demonstrating that, at the time the application is submitted, he or she
possesses a valid federal firearms dealer's license issued to an address within
the city along with a written statement stating, under oath, whether or not he
or she, or, to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, his or her spouse
or relative, has ever owned ten percent (10%) or more in, been a partner in or
served as a corporate officer or director of any entity that has had a federal,
state or local firearms dealer license suspended or revoked at any time for any
reason.
   B.   The city shall deny an application for a license to any person who, at
the time the application is made, does not possess a valid federal firearm
dealer's license and an Illinois firearms owner's identification card.
   C.   The city shall deny an application for a license to any person who has
been convicted of any felony in any jurisdiction and may deny an application
for a license to any person who has been found in violation of any federal,
state or local law or ordinance relating to the sale, transfer or use of
firearms or any other deadly weapon described in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/24-1 or if he or she, or his or her spouse, served as a corporate officer or
director of, was a partner of, or owned ten percent (10%) or more of the stock
in, any entity that has had a federal, state or local firearms dealer license
suspended or revoked at any time for any reason.
   D.   Information required by, or is otherwise not in compliance with any
provisions of, this chapter or any other applicable law or regulation relating
to the sale, transfer or repair of firearms. (Ord. O-10-2016, 5-2-2016)
3-25-4: LICENSEES IN A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
A licensee may conduct business in an area R-1 zoning district subject to the
following conditions:
   A.   The premises is a single-family detached residence.
   B.   The premises shall be protected by a silent alarm that is managed by a
professional security company certified by the state of Illinois and shall
immediately notify the Northlake police department when the silent alarm is
activated.
   C.   The sale or delivery of any weapon at the premises is prohibited.
   D.   No more than eight (8) weapons may be on the premises at any time.
   E.   All firearms must be kept in a locked safe. The safe must be approved
by the city. Only the licensee and the licensee's current employees shall have
access to the safe.
   F.   No firearms shall be kept where they are visible to any person other
than the licensee or the licensee's employees.
   G.   The premises' exterior doors, windows, and areas where any weapon is
present must be monitored by video surveillance system which stores video
images for a minimum of twenty four (24) hours. The video images must be stored
off site from the premises. (Ord. O-10-2016, 5-2-2016)
3-25-5: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
   A.   No more than one license shall be issued allowing the sale of firearms
in an R-1 zoning district.
   B.   No more than one license shall be issued allowing a gunsmith to engage
in the repair of firearms in an R-1 zoning district. (Ord. O-10-2016, 5-2-2016)
3-25-6: NONTRANSFERABILITY:
No license issued under this chapter may be transferred or assigned to any
other person, nor may the licensee change the premises location, unless the
city first reviews and approves the transfer or assignment following the
submission of a new application pursuant to the standards and provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. O-10-2016, 5-2-2016)
3-25-7: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee shall be as provided in section
3-1A-1 of this title. (Ord. O-10-2016, 5-2-2016)
3-25-8: INSPECTIONS:
The licensee shall permit any employee of the city to enter and inspect the
premises when the licensee or one of its employees is present at any time
Monday through Friday, between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. (including any places used by the licensee for storage of firearms) for
the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Any
inspections or examinations performed pursuant to this section shall be done in
a reasonable manner designed to minimize, to the extent reasonably possible,
any interference with the licensee's ability to conduct business. (Ord. O-10-
2016, 5-2-2016)
3-25-9: SAFETY DEVICES:
No licensee shall transfer any firearm which does not contain a safety
mechanism such as a trigger lock, cable lock, combination handle lock or
solenoid use limitation device, that substantially hinders the use of the
firearm by children under the age of seventeen (17) or other unauthorized
users. This provision shall not apply to the transfer of antique firearms for
which no safety device is available. (Ord. O-10-2016, 5-2-2016)
3-25-10: PRETRANSFER VERIFICATION PROCESS:
Before engaging in the sale of any firearm, a licensee must have the following:
   A.   A copy of the purchaser's valid FOID card;
   B.   A copy of the purchaser's valid driver's license;
   C.   A statement, signed and sworn to by the purchaser under penalty of
perjury, containing:
      1.   The purchaser's name, address, telephone number and date of birth;
      2.   The type, model, manufacturer, serial number and price of the
firearm being purchased;
   D.   A statement that:
      1.   The purchaser is a peace officer, a law enforcement officer, a
member of the armed services or reserve forces of the United States, a member
of the Illinois national guard, a federal official required to carry a firearm,
a United States marshal, or a person authorized to carry a firearm under the
provisions of the private detective, private alarm, private security and
locksmith act 1 , and employed regularly as a private security contractor,
private detective, private alarm contractor or security guard and is legally
authorized to possess a firearm of the type sought to be purchased under state
and federal law; or
      2.   The purchaser:
         a.   Is twenty one (21) years of age or over;
         b.   Has never been convicted of a felony under the laws of this or
any other jurisdiction;
         c.   Is neither an alcoholic nor addicted to narcotics;
         d.   Has not been a patient in a mental institution within the past
five (5) years;
         e.   Is not mentally retarded or mentally ill;
         f.   Is not an alien who is unlawfully present in the United States
under the laws of the United States;
         g.   Has never been subject to an order of protection prohibiting the
purchaser from possessing a firearm, or restricting the purchaser's access to
or contact with any other person;
         h.   Has not been convicted within the past five (5) years of battery,
assault, misdemeanor aggravated assault, or any offense that is substantially
similar to any of these offenses in this or any other jurisdiction in which a
firearm was used or possessed;
         i.   Has not been convicted within the past five (5) years of domestic
battery or a substantially similar offense in this or any other jurisdiction;
         j.   Has no criminal charges pending against him in any jurisdiction
other than misdemeanor charges relating to an offense that does not involve
bodily harm, death or the use or possession of a firearm;
         k.   Has not purchased or otherwise obtained a firearm within the past
thirty (30) days; and
         l.   Has never been prohibited from acquiring or possessing a firearm
by any federal, state or local law, law enforcement agency, branch of federal
or state military or by order of any court in this or any other jurisdiction.
Copies of such records must be retained by the licensee. (Ord. O-10-2016, 5-2-
2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 447/5-5 et seq.
3-25-11: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be fined not less than
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. (Ord. O-10-2016, 5-2-2016)
3-25-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   The license shall be considered immediately and automatically revoked
at the time any of the following occurs, and any firearm transfers by the
licensee after any of the following occurs shall be considered a violation of
this chapter:
      1.   The licensee transfers a firearm to any person whom the licensee
knows, or reasonably should know, is acquiring the firearm, not for his or her
own use, but for the purpose of transferring it to another who could not
legally obtain the firearm (commonly known as a "straw purchaser").
      2.   The licensee is convicted of any felony in this or any other
jurisdiction.
      3.   The licensee's federal firearms license or Illinois firearm owner's
identification card is revoked or expires.
      4.   The licensee transfers a firearm to any person who does not possess
a valid Illinois firearm owner's identification card depicting a photograph of
the person to whom the firearm is being transferred.
   B.   The city may revoke the license if:
      1.   The licensee or any related person is found to be in violation of
any federal, state or local law or regulation relating to the sale, transfer or
use of firearms or any other deadly weapon described in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/24-1; or
      2.   The licensee fails to comply with any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. O-10-2016, 5-2-2016)
CHAPTER 26
PAID SICK LEAVE; MINIMUM WAGE
SECTION:
3-26-1: Paid Sick Leave; Minimum Wage - Employers
3-26-1: PAID SICK LEAVE; MINIMUM WAGE - EMPLOYERS:
   A.   For the purposes of this chapter, the term "employee" means an
individual permitted and/or hired to work by an employer regardless of the
number of persons the employer employs or the number of hours worked and the
term "employer" means any person, firm or corporation employing one (1) or more
employees or seeking to employ one (1) or more employees, if the employer has
its principal place of business within the City of Northlake or does business
within the City of Northlake.
For the purposes of this section, the term "employer" does not mean:
      1.   The government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by
the government of the United States;
      2.   An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe;
      3.   The government of the State or any agency or department thereof; or
      4.   The government of any municipality.
   B.   Employers located with the City of Northlake shall comply with all
Federal and State employment laws and guidelines with regard to paid sick leave
and the payment of minimum wages. Employee eligibility for paid sick leave and
payment of minimum wages shall be pursuant to all Federal and State employment
laws and guidelines.
No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave or payment of minimum
wages, including, without limitation, any additional obligations adopted by the
County of Cook Board of Commissioners, shall apply to employers located within
the City of Northlake and the City opts out of any such regulations or
requirements, except those required by Federal and State law or City. (Ord. O-
10-2017, 6-12-2017)
CHAPTER 27
SHORT TERM RENTALS
SECTION:
3-27-1: Purpose
3-27-2: Definitions
3-27-3: Short Term Rentals Restricted
3-27-4: Penalties
3-27-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and preserve the quiet enjoyment of
residential properties and neighborhoods within the City and to mitigate and/or
eliminate adverse secondary effects the City and its residents are likely to
experience by reason of short term rental(s) of certain residential structure
(s) in the City, including, but not limited to, gatherings by attendees who
have little connection to or consideration for the neighborhoods or neighbors,
which gatherings are likely to be characterized by excessive noise, overcrowded
parking and criminal activity. (Ord. O-17-2018, 8-13-2018)
3-27-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following phrases shall have the definitions
as set forth below:
RENTAL PREMISES: All or part of a principal structure or accessory structure in
a residentially zoned district being rented or otherwise let to person(s) other
than the owner of the subject property.
SHORT TERM RENTAL: The accessory use and/or occupancy for a period of less than
three (3) months of a principal structure or accessory structure pursuant to a
written or oral agreement which permits and/or provides for occupancy of all or
part of such structure by any person other than the owner thereof, or an
immediate family member of the owner thereof, and whether or not the permission
of such occupancy is in exchange for consideration therefor. (Ord. O-17-2018,
8-13-2018)
3-27-3: SHORT TERM RENTALS RESTRICTED:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, leasing, renting, offering or
inviting the leasing or renting, or otherwise permitting the short term rental
and/or occupancy of any dwelling and/or accessory structure located within the
City for less than three (3) consecutive months at a time shall be prohibited,
with the exception of a hotel or similar establishment duly licensed by the
City, and such conduct shall be prohibited, whether engaged in or participated
in by the owner(s) of the property, one or more agent(s) of the property owner
(s), and/or by any person(s) leasing, or seeking to lease as a lessor(s), or
renting or seeking to rent as lessee(s) and/or otherwise occupy a premises as
tenant(s) and/or temporary occupant(s) thereof.
   B.   The term of any lease or occupancy agreement which has satisfied the
minimum term required by this section may be extended on a month to month basis
on the condition that the tenant(s) remain(s) the same.
   C.   Dwellings shall not be leased, or otherwise permitted to be occupied by
other than the same tenant, more than two (2) times during any consecutive
twelve (12) month period unless the rental agreement therefor has been
terminated by reason of a tenant default.
   D.   The restrictions of this chapter shall be applicable whether the rental
premises comprise(s) all or a part of the principal structure, or all or part
of any accessory structure.
   E.   Whether or not consideration is exchanged for the lease and/or rental
of a premises shall not affect the fact that the occupancy thereof is treated
as a short term rental for the purposes of this chapter if the definition
thereof is otherwise applicable to such activity.
   F.   The property owner shall remain responsible for compliance with all
applicable provisions of this Code and/or the City zoning ordinance during the
term of any rental and/or occupancy agreement and/or during the term of any
occupancy of the rental premises by persons other than the property owner.
   G.   No temporary structure shall be permitted to be used for a short term
rental.
   H.   The prohibition on short term rentals as herein provided shall not
apply when the immediately preceding owner of a property maintains possession
of the dwelling unit after closing on a real estate transaction for the sale
thereof and leases said property back from the successor owner for a period of
time pursuant to a written agreement.
   I.   Each day a principal structure or any accessory structure in the City
is offered for rent as a short term rental, is leased or rented as a short term
rental, and/or each day a principal structure or any accessory structure is
occupied as a "short term rental", as that term is defined herein, shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter. (Ord. O-17-2018, 8-13-2018)
3-27-4: PENALTIES:
Notwithstanding anything otherwise provided in this Code to the contrary, any
person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day,
nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day. Each day a principal
structure or any accessory structure is offered for rent as a short term
rental, is leased or rented as a short term rental, and/or each day a principal
structure or any accessory structure is occupied as a short term rental shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter. Without any limitation on the
foregoing, each day a violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be a
separate offense, and each such offense shall be subject to not less than the
minimum mandatory daily fine. (Ord. O-17-2018, 8-13-2018)
CHAPTER 28
SALE OF CANNABIS
SECTION:
3-28-1: Adult-Use Cannabis; Purpose And Applicability
3-28-2: Definitions
3-28-3: Licenses Required
3-28-4: Application For License
3-28-5: Restriction On Number Of Licenses
3-28-6: License Fees
3-28-7: Duration Of License
3-28-8: Suspension And Revocation Of License
3-28-9: Hours Of Operation
3-28-10: Location Restrictions
3-28-11: Responsibility For Agents And Employees
3-28-12: Zoning
3-28-13: Sale Or Dispensation Of Tetrahydrocannabinol Prohibited
3-28-99: Penalty
3-28-1: ADULT-USE CANNABIS; PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide regulations regarding
the cultivation, processing and dispensing of adult-use cannabis, hemp-derived
THC products, and kratom occurring within the City of Northlake. Such
facilities and businesses shall comply with all regulations provided in the Act
and the requirements of this chapter. In the event that the Act is amended, the
more restrictive of the state or City regulations shall apply. (Ord. O-09-2020,
4-20-2020; amd. Ord. O-06-2025, 3-17-2025; Ord. O-13-2025, 6-16-2025)
3-28-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings described to them in this section:
      ACT: The Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/) as may be
amended from time to time and any regulations promulgated pursuant to the Act.
      ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: An adult-use cannabis
cultivation center, craft grower, processing organization, infuser
organization, dispensing organization or transporting organization.
      ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER: A facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, pursuant to the Act.
      ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, pursuant to the Act.
      ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, pursuant to the Act.
      ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER: A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product pursuant to the Act.
      ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR: A facility
operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois
Department of Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds
to produce cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate
into a product formulation to produce a cannabis product pursuant to the Act.
      ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER: An
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business
establishment or a community college licensed under the Community College
Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot Program pursuant to the Act.
      CANNABIS: Marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are identified as
including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and including derivatives or
subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of cannabis, whether growing or not;
the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
naturally produced cannabinol derivatives, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction; however, "cannabis" does not include the mature
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted from it),
fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of
germination. "Cannabis" does not include industrial hemp as defined and
authorized under the Industrial Hemp Act. "Cannabis" also means cannabis
flower, concentrate, and cannabis-infused products.
      DERIVED PSYCHOACTIVE CANNABIS PRODUCTS or DPCP: Any product containing or
infused with cannabis or cannabis concentrate that may cause a psychoactive
effect when consumed or ingested.
      HEMP-DERIVED THC PRODUCTS or HDTP:
   Any product that both:
         a.   Is intended for human or animal consumption by any means
including, without limitation: oral ingestion; inhalation; smoking; and topical
absorption; and
         b.   Contains a total THC concentration greater than:
            (1)   Three-tenths percent (0.3%) by dry weight for any
intermediate or finished plant product or material, or for any product intended
for consumption by inhalation or smoking.
            (2)   For all other products, more than 0.5 milligrams per serving
or individual product unit, or more than two (2) milligrams per retail package.
      KRATOM: Any parts of the plant Mitragyna speciosa, whether growing or
not, and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation
of that plant, including but not limited to mitragynine and 7-
hydroxymitragynine.
      PERSON: Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or
other organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee,
volunteer or agent.
      SMOKE SHOP: A permanent place of business engaged in the retail sale of
DPCP, HDTP, or Kratom in packages or original containers for consumption
outside the premises where sold.
      TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL or THC: Any naturally occurring or synthetic
tetrahydrocannabinol, including its salts, isomers, and salts of isomers
whenever the existence of such salts, isomers, and salts of isomers is possible
within the specific chemical designation and any preparation, mixture, or
substance containing, or mixed or infused with, any detectable amount of
tetrahydrocannabinol or tetrahydrocannabolic acid, including, but not limited
to, delta-8-tetrahydrocannabinol, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, delta-10-
tetrahydrocannabinol, tetrahydrocannabolic acid, tetrahydrocannabipherol, or
hexahydrocannabinol, however derived. As used in this definition, "isomer"
means the optical, position, and geometric isomers.
   B.   Other Definitions: All definitions contained in Section 1-10 of the Act
(410 ILCS 705/1-10) not set forth herein are incorporated by reference as
though fully set forth herein. (Ord. O-09-2020, 4-20-2020; amd. Ord. O-17-2024,
8-12-2024; Ord. O-06-2025, 3-17-2025; Ord. O-13-2025, 6-16-2025)
3-28-3: LICENSES REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell cannabis, derived
psychoactive cannabis products, hemp-derived THC products, or kratom without
having any license required by the Act and the local license required by this
chapter, however, nothing in this chapter shall regulate the sale or
distribution of cannabis which is being sold or distributed pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, 410 ILCS 130. (Ord. O-09-
2020, 4-20-2020; amd. Ord. O-06-2025, 3-17-2025; Ord. O-13-2025, 6-16-2025)
3-28-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for a local license shall be made to the City Clerk, in writing,
signed by the applicant if an individual, signed by each individual partner if
a partnership, or signed by a duly authorized agent thereof if corporation,
verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following statements and
information:
   A.   The applicant's name, mailing address and telephone number.
   B.   The name and address of the applicant's business.
   C.   If applicable, the date of the filing of the "assumed name" of the
business with the County Clerk of Cook County.
   D.   In case the applicant is a partnership, the date of the formation of
the partnership, the full name, age, address and telephone numbers of all
persons with an ownership interest in the partnership, or who have a right to
receive a direct or indirect benefit from the profits of the partnership.
   E.   In the case of a corporation, if an Illinois corporation, the date of
its incorporation, or if a foreign corporation, the state where it was
incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Illinois Business
Corporation Act to transact business in the state of Illinois, and in either
case, a statement of the objects for which the corporation was organized, the
full name, age, address and telephone number of all shareholders with an
aggregate of more than five percent (5%) of the capital stock of the
corporation or of any person(s) receiving a direct or indirect benefit from the
profits of the sale of cannabis in the City.
   F.   The name, age, address and telephone number of the person(s) who will
manage the business of the applicant in the City.
   G.   The location and description of the premises or place of business which
is to be operated under such license and the following information:
      1.   If a leased premises, a copy of the lease shall be provided and the
lease shall be for a term of sufficient length to encompass the term of the
license sought; and
      2.   The name and address of the owner or owners of the premises and the
names and addresses of all the owners of the beneficial interest of any trust
if said premises is held in trust.
   H.   A copy of the applicable license issued by the State of Illinois. (Ord.
O-09-2020, 4-20-2020)
3-28-5: RESTRICTION ON NUMBER OF LICENSES:
   The City Clerk shall not issue more than the number of licenses set forth
hereinbelow for each class:
LICENSE NUMBER
LICENSE                                                     NUMBER
Adult-Use cannabis craft grower                             1
Adult-Use cannabis cultivation center                       1
Adult-Use cannabis dispensing organization                  1
Adult-Use cannabis infuser organization or infuser          1
Adult-Use cannabis processing organization or processor     1
Adult-Use cannabis transporting organization or transporter 1
Smoke Shops                                                 3
 
(Ord. O-09-2020, 4-20-2020; amd. Ord. O-06-2025, 3-17-2025; Ord. O-09-2025, 5-
19-2025; Ord. O-13-2025, 6-16-2025)
3-28-6: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fees Enumerated: The fee for the various classes licenses authorized
herein for the administration hereof shall be as follows:
LICENSE FEE
LICENSE                                                     FEE
Adult-Use cannabis craft grower                             $   1,000.00
Adult-Use cannabis cultivation center                          1,000.00
Adult-Use cannabis dispensing organization                     1,000.00
Adult-Use cannabis infuser organization or infuser             1,000.00
Adult-Use cannabis processing organization or processor        1,000.00
Adult-Use cannabis transporting organization or transporter    1,000.00
Smoke Shops                                                    1,500.00
 
   B.   Application Fee: At the time application is made for the issuance of a
license of any class, the applicant shall pay to the City a non-refundable
license application fee according to the fees enumerated herein which shall be
in addition to all other license fees required by the City Code.
   C.   License Revocation; Forfeiture Of Fee: Whenever any license hereunder
has been revoked as provided for in this chapter, the licensee shall incur a
forfeiture of all monies that have been paid for said license.
   D.   Proration Of License Fees: The license fee for a new applicant shall be
prorated when said applicant files an application following the expiration of
the first quarter of the license year. The license fee shall be prorated by
quarters. Such prorations shall not apply to special event licenses.
   E.   Renewal Applications: All renewal applications for liquor licenses
shall be filed by November 30. (Ord. O-09-2020, 4-20-2020; amd. Ord. O-02-2022,
3-7-2022; Ord. O-06-2025, 3-17-2025; Ord. O-13-2025, 6-16-2025)
3-28-7: DURATION OF LICENSE:
Every license issued for annual periods to begin on January 1 and end December
31 of the same year.
(Ord. O-09-2020, 4-20-2020)
3-28-8: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any proceeding to suspend or revoke a license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be conducted pursuant to section
3-1-17 of the City Code. (Ord. O-09-2020, 4-20-2020; Ord. O-13-2021, 9-13-2021)
3-28-9: HOURS OF OPERATION:
The hours of operation of an adult use dispensary organization shall be daily
between ten o’clock (10:00) A.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) P.M. (Ord. O-09-2020,
4-20-2020; Ord. O-13-2021, 9-13-2021)
3-28-10: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any cannabis at any
building located within two hundred feet (200') of any church, public park or
school. In determining the distance provided for in this section, the boundary
of the lot or parcel of land upon which a church, public park or school is
located and the boundary of the lot or parcel of land where the building is
located that are closest to each other shall be used as the points from which
the measurement shall be made. (Ord. O-13-2021, 9-13-2021)
3-28-11: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by an officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee, if such act is committed or omission is made
within the scope of such agency or employment or with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act
of such employer or licensee and such employer and licensee shall be punishable
in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by him
personally.
(Ord. O-09-2020, 4-20-2020)
3-28-12: ZONING:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organizations are
permitted uses in the B-1 and B-2 zoning districts.
   B.   Permitted Uses: The following users are permitted uses in the I-1 and
I-2 zoning districts:
      1.   Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower.
      2.   Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center.
      3.   Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser.
      4.   Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor.
      5.   Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter. (Ord.
O-09-2020, 4-20-2020; Ord. O-13-2021, 9-13-2021; Ord. O-13-2022, 10-3-2022)
3-28-13: SALE OR DISPENSATION OF TETRA- HYDROCANNABINOL PROHIBITED:
The sale or other dispensing of Tetrahydrocannabinol is prohibited.
(Ord. O-17-24, 8-12-2024)
3-28-99: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable of a fine of not less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
Every day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
(Ord. O-09-2020, 4-20-2020)
CHAPTER 29
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLES
SECTION:
3-29-1: Definitions
3-29-2: Licenses Required
3-29-3: Application For License
3-29-4: License Fees
3-29-5: Duration Of License
3-29-6: Suspension And Revocation Of License
3-29-7: Hours Of Operation
3-29-8: Location And Operation Restrictions
3-29-9: Responsibility For Agents And Employees
3-29-10: Penalty
3-29-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section.
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLES: A commercially manufactured, motorized mobile food unit
in which ready-to-eat food is cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed or
proportioned for service, sale or distribution.
PERSON: Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other
organization including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer of
agent. (Ord. O-08-2022, 5-8-2022)
3-29-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food truck without having the
City license required by this chapter. (Ord. O-08-2022, 5-8-2022)
3-29-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for a mobile food vehicle license shall be made to the City Clerk,
in writing, signed by the applicant if an individual, signed by each individual
partner if a partnership or signed by a duly authorized agent there of
corporation, verified by oath or affidavit and shall contain the following
statements and information:
   A.   The applicant's name, mailing address and telephone number.
   B.   The name and address of the applicant's business.
   C.   If applicable, the date of the filing of the "assumed name" of the
business with the County Clerk of Cook County.
   D.   In case the applicant is a partnership, the date of the formation of
the partnership, the full name, age, address and telephone numbers of all
persons with an ownership interest in the partnership or who have a right to
receive a direct or indirect benefit from the profits of the partnership.
   E.   In the case of a corporation, if an Illinois corporation, the date of
its incorporation, or if a foreign corporation, the state where it was
incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Illinois Business
Corporation Act to transact business in the state of Illinois, and in either
case, a statement of the objects for which the corporation was organized, the
full name, age, address and telephone number of all shareholders with an
aggregate of more than five percent (5%) of the capital stock of the
corporation or of any person(s) receiving a direct or indirect benefit from the
profits of the sale of cannabis in the City.
   F.   The name, age, address and telephone number of the person(s) who will
manage the mobile food vehicles.
   G.   Proof of access to restrooms with a hand sink for use by employees
within two hundred feet (200') of the mobile food vehicle during times when the
mobile food vehicle is parked in one (1) location for more than two (2) hours.
Proof of access shall be evidenced by written agreement between the licensee
and the business or entity which will provide such access.
   H.   A valid copy of all necessary licenses or permits required by state or
county authorities. This includes proof of food handler certification training
or valid Illinois Food Service Sanitation Manager Certification as required in
the Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act, 410 ILCS 625/0.01 et seq. During
all times of mobile food vehicle operation in the City, at least one (1)
certified trained food handler or someone holding a food service sanitation
manager certificate must be present in the vehicle.
   I.   A copy of the applicable license issued by the State of Illinois. (Ord.
O-08-2022, 5-8-2022)
3-29-4: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fees Enumerated: The annual license fee for food trucks shall be five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
   B.   License Denial; Return Portion Of Fee: At the time application is made
to the City Clerk for the issuance of a license, the applicant shall pay to the
City the license fee provided for in this chapter. The license fee is non-
refundable.
   C.   License Revocation; Forfeiture Of Fee: Whenever any license hereunder
has been revoked as provided for in this chapter, the licensee shall incur a
forfeiture of all monies that have been paid for said license.
   D.   Renewal Applications: All renewal applications for a license shall be
filed by November 30. (Ord. O-08-2022, 5-8-2022)
3-29-5: DURATION OF LICENSE:
Every license issued for annual periods to begin on January 1 and end December
31 of the same year. (Ord. O-08-2022, 5-8-2022)
3-29-6: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any proceeding to suspend or revoke a license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be conducted pursuant to section
3-1-17 of the City Code. (Ord. O-08-2022, 5-8-2022)
3-29-7: HOURS OF OPERATION:
The hours of operation of a food truck shall be daily between ten o'clock (10:
00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. (Ord. O-08-2022, 5-8-2022)
3-29-8: LOCATION AND OPERATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   No mobile food vehicle may be operated on any public right-of-way.
   B.   No mobile food vehicle may be operated in an area that is zoned
residential under the City's zoning ordinance.
   C.   Mobile food vehicles may only operate on private property or in a
public park in conjunction with an event licensed by the City not to exceed
five (5) consecutive days. (Ord. O-08-2022, 5-8-2022)
   D.   Mobile food vehicles may operate on private property located in areas
that are zoned industrial under the City's zoning ordinance provided that the
operator of the mobile food vehicle has first obtained the written
authorization of the owner or lessee of the property and that sales are limited
to employees of a business located on the property. (Ord. O-08-2022, 5-8-2022;
amd. Ord. O-17-2023, 10-2-2023)
3-29-9: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by an officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee, if such act is committed or omission is made
within the scope of such agency or employment or with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act
of such employer or licensee and such employer and licensee shall be punishable
in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by him
personally. (Ord. O-08-2022, 5-8-2022)
3-29-10: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable of a fine of not less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
Every day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. O-08-2022, 5-8-2022)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Adoption By Reference
4-1-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
There is hereby adopted by reference that publication known as the BOCA Basic
National Fire Prevention Code, 1996 Edition 1 , and all subsequent revisions
thereto published by the Building Official and Code Administrators,
International, Inc. (Ord. O-12-97, 5-19-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  8-1D-1 of this Code.
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Nuisances Prohibited; General Provisions
4-2-2: Nuisances Enumerated
4-2-3: Abatement Procedure
4-2-1: NUISANCES PROHIBITED; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
No person shall permit or maintain the existence of a nuisance on any property
under his control.
In all cases where no provision is herein made defining what are nuisances and
how the same may be removed, abated or prevented, in addition to what may be
declared as such herein, those offenses which are known to the common law of
the land and the statutes of Illinois as nuisances 1  may, in case the same
exist within the city limits or within one mile thereof, be treated as such,
and proceeded against as is provided in this code or in accordance with any
other provision of law. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. 715 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
4-2-2: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
   A.   Nuisance Businesses Or Hazardous Working Conditions: No substance,
matter or thing of any kind whatever which shall be dangerous or detrimental to
health shall be allowed to exist in connection with any business or be used
therein or be used in any work or labor performed in the city, and no nuisance
shall be permitted to exist in connection with any business or in connection
with any such work or labor. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
   B.   Dangerous Conditions:
      1.   Generally: No building, vehicle, structure, receptacle, yard, lot,
premises or part thereof shall be made, used, kept, maintained or operated in
the city if such use, keeping, maintaining or operating shall be the occasion
of any nuisance or shall be dangerous to life or detrimental to health.
      2.   Dangerous Buildings 1 :
         a.   Every building or structure constructed or maintained in
violation of the building code 2  or which is in an unsanitary condition or in
an unsafe or dangerous condition or which, by reason of damage from fire, wind
or water, is damaged and permitted to remain unrepaired an unreasonable length
of time or which in any manner endangers the health or safety of any person or
persons is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
         b.   Every building or part thereof which is in an unsanitary
condition by reason of the basement or cellar being covered with stagnant water
or by reason of the presence of sewer gas or by reason of any portion of a
building being infected with disease or being unfit for human habitation or
which, by reason of any other unsanitary condition, is a source of sickness or
which endangers the public health is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(1976 Code §
5-8-4)
   C.   Animals Or Other Offensive Substances: No person shall bring into the
city or keep therein for sale or otherwise, either for food or for any other
purpose, any dead or live animal nor any matter, substance or thing which shall
be a nuisance or which shall occasion a nuisance in the city or which may or
shall be dangerous or detrimental to health. (1976 Code §
5-8-6)
   D.   Offensive Odors; Nauseous Conditions: Any factory, yard, building or
structure of any kind, or any tallow chandler's shop, soap factory, tannery,
distillery, livery stable, cattle yard or shed, barn, packing house,
slaughterhouse or rendering establishment which shall become nauseous, foul or
offensive, is hereby declared a nuisance, and the person owning, maintaining or
in possession or control of any such factory, shop, yard, house, building or
structure aforesaid shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense. (1976 Code §
5-8-7; amd. 1992 Code)
   E.   Stagnant Pools: Any stagnant pool of water in the city is hereby
declared to be a nuisance, and no person shall permit any such nuisance to
remain or exist on any property under his control. (1976 Code § 20-1-10)
   F.   Any property containing grass or weeds more than eight inches (8") in
height is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and no person shall permit any such
nuisance to remain or exist on any property under his control. (Ord. O-23-93,
7-19-1993)
   G.   Nuisance Residential Rental Property: It is hereby declared a nuisance
and to be declared against the health, peace and comfort of the city of
Northlake for any property owner, agent or manager to allow or permit the
following:
      1.   Rental of a residential unit, or residential building within an
apartment community or governed by a homeowners' association to a tenant who
allows any of the following offenses to occur relating to the tenant, member of
the tenant's household, guest or other party under control of the tenant to
occur: murder, kidnapping, aggravated kidnapping, prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, pandering, obscenity, child pornography, harmful materials, sale
of obscene publication, criminal housing management, possession of explosives,
unlawful use of weapons, sale of firearms, gambling, keeping a gambling place,
concealing a fugitive, violation of the Illinois controlled substances act,
violation of the cannabis control act or commission of any two (2) or more of
any other crimes under the state of Illinois or under the federal government
not specifically listed above; or
      2.   Rental of a residential unit, or residential building within an
apartment community or governed by a homeowners' association to a tenant who
allows any of the following offenses to occur relating to the tenant, member of
the tenant's household, guest or other party under control of the tenant to
occur: commission of four (4) or more city ordinance violations in a six (6)
month period or an unreasonably high number of calls for police service
including, but not limited to, calls that may fall within the descriptions
listed above that when compared to other properties in the city of Northlake or
similar type, reasonably indicate that the activity at this property is out of
character for the area and is impacting the quality of life of those in the
area. (Ord. O-05-2006, 3-6-2006)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 8, chapter 3 of this code.
2 3. See title 8, chapter 1, article A of this code.
4-2-3: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Authority: The chief of police and the director of health and
inspectional services are hereby authorized to abate any such nuisance existing
in the city, whether such nuisance is specifically recognized by ordinance or
not. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
   B.   Notice Of Nuisance: The director of health and inspectional services
shall serve notice, in writing, upon the owner, occupant, agent or person in
possession or control of any lot, building or premises in or upon which any
nuisance may be found, requiring him to abate the same, in such manner as he
shall prescribe, within a reasonable time. It shall not be necessary, in any
case, for the director of health and inspectional services to specify in his
notice the manner in which any nuisance shall be abated unless he shall deem it
advisable to do so. Such notice may be given or served by any officer who is so
directed or deputized.
The notices required by this subsection shall be in the following form:
To: (Party to be notified)
YOU ARE NOTIFIED THAT AS OF
            Day, Month, Year
that you are maintaining a nuisance in violation of Section            of the
Municipal Code of the City of Northlake, in that (here specify condition which
violates ordinance). YOU ARE FURTHER ADVISED THAT UNLESS YOU REMOVE (remedy or
repair) the aforesaid violation by           (not less then 3 days from the
date of service of the notice) you shall be held responsible for the full
penalty of the law.
      Signed    
            Title
   C.   Abatement By City; Costs: The director of health and inspectional
services shall proceed at once upon the expiration of the time specified in
said notice to cause such nuisance to be abated; provided, however, that
whenever the owner, occupant, agent or person in possession or control of any
premises in or upon which any nuisance may be found is known or cannot be
found, the director of health and inspectional services shall proceed to abate
such nuisance without notice. In either case, the cost or expenses of such
abatement shall be collected from the person who may have created, continued or
suffered such nuisance to exist, in addition to any penalty or fine. Within
sixty (60) days after performance of abatement procedures, the city shall file
a lien for the reasonable costs and expenses for the services provided. (Ord.
O-23-93, 7-19-1993)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE, REFUSE AND WASTE
ARTICLE A. GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
4-3A-1: Definitions
4-3A-2: Storage Of Garbage And Refuse
4-3A-3: Collection Of Garbage At Residences
4-3A-4: Unlawful Deposits
4-3A-5: Litter Control
4-3A-6: Control Of Windblown Refuse
4-3A-7: Charitable Collection Boxes Prohibited
4-3A-8: Refuse Collection Fee
4-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ASHES: The residue from burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible
materials.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER: Any garbage, refuse, rubbish, handbills and all other waste material.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes,
including garbage, rubbish and ashes.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescrible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, tin cans,
glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. (1976 Code § 21-1-1)
4-3A-2: STORAGE OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE 1 :
   A.   Containers Required: Every owner or his agent or occupant of any house,
building, flat, apartment or tenement in the city where people reside, board or
lodge shall at all times maintain in good order and repair containers for
garbage. Regulation of quantity and type of containers shall be set forth from
time to time for compliance with state and government laws. (1976 Code § 21-1-
2; amd. 1992 Code)
   B.   Container Specifications And Location:
      1.   One- Through Four-Family Residences: The garbage containers used at
any one-, two-, three- or four-family residential dwelling are to be
constructed of rustproof galvanized metal or a heavy duty plastic or rubber
type material with handles attached and tightfitting covers and shall have a
capacity of not less than twenty (20) nor more than thirty (30) gallons. All
such garbage containers must be made identifiable by painting the house number
on each container. (1976 Code § 21-1-3)
      2.   Other Residences; Businesses: All containers must be placed on a
five inch (5") thick concrete slab with wire mesh reinforcement atop a four
inch (4") base of stone. Each slab shall be surrounded by a six foot (6') high
privacy fence of the following type: wood, brick or wire with inserts. The
entrance and exit to and from the containers shall be protected by a gate which
shall be part of the fence.
The size of each concrete slab and fence shall be based on the sizes of the
containers. The concrete slab shall be three feet (3') wider than the container
on each side; two feet (2') longer in the rear; and one foot (1') longer in
front.
All existing commercial retail businesses and dwellings containing five (5) or
more apartments shall have six (6) months from the date of passage of this
subsection B2 to comply. (Ord. O-25-93, 7-19-1993)
      3.   Dumpsters For Special Pick Ups: A licensed scavenger 2  shall obtain
a permit from the department of health and inspectional services prior to
placing any dumpster or any other container with a capacity in excess of two
(2) cubic yards designed or used to hold refuse or garbage on any public or
private property. Said permits shall be issued for no more than seven (7)
consecutive days but may be renewed upon application to the department of
health and inspectional services. No such dumpster or container may be placed
on public property unless it shall have affixed to it reflective material or
warning signals or devices on all sides within the public way, subject to the
approval of the department of health and inspectional services. (Ord. O-19-90,
4-16-1990; amd. 1992 Code)
      4.   Plastic Garbage Bags: Plastic garbage bags shall be permissible;
provided, that they are closed securely by tying the top, and provided, that
they meet the requirements set forth by the department of health and
inspectional services. (1976 Code § 21-1-3)
   C.   Placement Of Containers For Pick Up: Except in the case of those
buildings where the owner or occupant is required to cause the removal of
garbage or refuse therefrom at his own cost or expense, the standard container,
can or receptacle shall be placed in the following manner:
      1.   Alley Collection: At the alley lot line on the premises served so as
to be immediately accessible to garbage and refuse collection vehicles. The
owner or his agent shall provide suitable space at the alley line for such
container, can or receptacle or cause all garbage and refuse produced therein
to be removed at his own cost and expense. (1976 Code § 21-1-4)
      2.   Curb Collection: Trash, refuse and garbage may not be placed out on
a parkway, curb area or street for pick up prior to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on
the day prior to the scheduled pick up date, and empty containers must be
removed from the parkway, curbside or street not later than seven o'clock (7:
00) P.M. on the day of the pick up.
Any person violating the terms of this subsection shall be fined not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. O-21-89, 7-19-1989; amd. 1992 Code)
No container, can or receptacle used for the storage, collection and removal of
garbage and other refuse shall be placed so as to constitute a nuisance to
adjacent property or to the occupants thereof. (1976 Code § 21-1-4)
 
Notes
  1. See also subsections
1 8-1F-3-7A1e and
  8-1F-3-8B of this code.
2 1. See article D of this chapter.
4-3A-3: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AT RESIDENCES 1 :
All containers or receptacles containing garbage and all containers or
receptacles containing ashes, tin cans, bottles and other refuse shall be
collected from the parkways in front of the residences in the city. Said
collections of garbage and refuse shall be made not less than once in each
week. (1976 Code § 21-1-5; amd. Ord. O-21-89, 7-19-1989)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  4-3D-5C of this chapter.
4-3A-4: UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   No garbage or refuse of any kind shall be deposited in any street,
alley or public way, except as provided in this chapter, and no such refuse
shall be so placed that it can be blown about or scattered by the wind. (1976
Code § 21-1-5)
      2.   No person shall cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit in any manner in
or upon any public way or upon the waters of any creek or waterway or public
sewer or drain within the city any kind of dirt, rubbish or waste article
whatsoever, whether liquid or solid 1  nor shall any person cast, throw, sweep,
sift or deposit any of the aforementioned items anywhere within the
jurisdiction of the city in such manner that it may be carried or deposited, in
whole or in part, by the action of the sun, wind, rain or snow into any of the
aforementioned places 2 .
This subsection A2 shall not apply to the deposit of material under a permit
authorized by any ordinance of the city nor to the goods, wares or merchandise
deposited upon any public way or other public place, temporarily, in the
necessary course of trade and removed therefrom within two (2) hours after
being so deposited or to articles or things deposited in or conducted into the
sewer system through lawful drains in accordance with the ordinances of the
city relating thereto 3 . (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
   B.   Deposits On Private Property: No person shall place, deposit, leave or
dump any trash, ashes, broken articles, garbage, junk or refuse or waste
material of any kind on any premises in the city without the consent of the
owner or tenant in possession of such premises. For the purpose of this
subsection, vehicles or parts of vehicles not in condition for normal use shall
be considered junk or trash 4 . (1976 Code § 21-1-6)
   C.   Refuse Or Garbage Dumps: No person shall maintain or operate any refuse
or garbage dump in the city. Any place where refuse or garbage is deposited,
other than on the premises where the same originated, is hereby defined to mean
a refuse or garbage dump. Any such dump is hereby defined to be a nuisance.
(1976 Code § 21-1-7)
 
Notes
1 2. See chapter 4, article A of this title for water pollution control.
2 1. See also section
  4-3A-6 of this article.
3 2. See title 7, chapter 7 of this code.
4 3. See title 3, chapter 10, article B, "Junk Dealers", of this code; see
  title 6, chapter 6 of this code for abandoned, wrecked vehicle regulations.
4-3A-5: LITTER CONTROL:
   A.   Littering In Public Places: No person shall:
      1.   Throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or
other public place within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized
private receptacles or city dumps.
      2.   Sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, alley or other public
places in the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from
any public or private sidewalk and driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk and parkway in front of their premises free
from litter.
      3.   While a driver or passenger in a vehicle, throw or deposit litter
upon any street, alley or other public place within the city or upon private
property. (1976 Code § 21-1-9)
   B.   Litter On Private Property: No person shall throw or deposit litter on
any private property within the city whether owned by such person or not;
except, that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
private receptacles for collection in such manner that litter may be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, that this subsection shall not
prohibit the storage of litter in private receptacles for collection, which
receptacles shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be
so constructed as to prevent the litter deposited therein from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public
place or upon any private property. (1976 Code § 21-1-10)
   C.   Penalties; Signs Posted: Any person violating this section, upon
conviction, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
The director of health and inspectional services is authorized to post
appropriate "NO LITTERING" signs showing the penalty herein provided. (1976
Code § 21-1-11; amd. 1992 Code)
4-3A-6: CONTROL OF WINDBLOWN REFUSE 1 :
   A.   Methods Of Control: Dusts and other types of air pollution borne by the
wind from such source as storage areas, yards, roads and so forth within lot
boundaries shall be kept to a minimum by such measures as wetting piles,
landscaping, paving, oiling or other acceptable means.
   B.   Precautions To Be Taken:
      1.   No person shall:
         a.   Cause or permit the handling, loading, unloading, reloading,
storing, transferring, transporting, placing, depositing, throwing, discarding
or scattering of any ashes, fly ash, cinders, slag or dust collected from any
combustible process, any dust, dirt, chaff, wastepaper, trash, rubbish, waste
or refuse matter of any kind or any other substance or material whatever which
is likely to be scattered by the wind or is susceptible to being windborne
without taking reasonable measures or precautions so as to minimize atmospheric
pollution or nuisance to other property.
         b.   Operate or maintain or cause to be operated or maintained any
building, structure, premises, open area, right of way, storage pile of
materials, vehicle or construction, alteration, building, demolition or
wrecking operation or any other enterprise which has or involves any matter,
material or substance likely to be scattered by the wind or susceptible to
being windborne without taking reasonable precautions or measures so as to
minimize pollution nuisance to other property.
      2.   Trucks carrying material subject to becoming airborne shall be
operated in such a manner as to keep such airborne material to a minimum by
such measures as wetting the load, covering the load with canvas, lessening the
load or other acceptable means.
      3.   All vehicles used for the carrying of refuse shall be strong and
tight so that no part of such contents or load shall fall, leak or spill
therefrom onto any public street, alley or private property, and be adequately
and tightly covered so as to prevent the same from being offensive or give
access to flies 2 . (1976 Code § 21-1-12)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  4-3A-4A2 of this article and chapter 4, article B of this title.
2 1. See also section
  4-3D-6 of this chapter.
4-3A-7: CHARITABLE COLLECTION BOXES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Prohibited: Charitable collection boxes are hereby prohibited. For
purposes of this section "charitable collection box" shall mean an unattended
canister, box receptacle or similar device used for soliciting and collecting
donations of personal property.
   B.   Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be
fined in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day
that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
   C.   Effective Date: The prohibition imposed shall take effect on July 1,
2009, and all outstanding permits authorizing charitable collection boxes are
revoked as of that date and no renewal permit shall be issued following the
effective date hereof. (Ord. O-18-2009, 6-1-2009)
4-3A-8: REFUSE COLLECTION FEE:
   A.   Residential: A refuse collection fee of nine dollars ($9.00) per month
per household shall be imposed on all residential properties. This fee shall
take effect on January 1, 2012.
   B.   Condominium:
      1.   The refuse collection fee for condominium buildings shall be seven
dollars and twenty five cents ($7.25) per month per unit effective September 1,
2019.
      2.   The refuse collection fee for condominium buildings shall be nine
dollars ($9.00) per month per unit effective September 1, 2020.
      3.   The refuse collection fee for condominium buildings shall be fifteen
dollars and ninety-one cents ($15.91) per month per unit effective January 1,
2023.
      4.   The refuse collection fee for condominium buildings shall be sixteen
dollars and forty-three cents ($16.43) per month per unit effective January 1,
2024.
      5.   The refuse collection fee for condominium buildings shall be sixteen
dollars and ninety-six cents ($16.96) per month per unit effective January 1,
2025.
      6.   The refuse collection fee for condominium buildings shall be
seventeen dollars and fifty-one cents ($17.51) per month per unit effective
January 1, 2026.
      7.   The refuse collection fee for condominium buildings shall be
eighteen dollars and eight cents ($18.08) per month per unit effective January
1, 2027. (Ord. O-19-2011, 11-7-2011; amd. Ord. O-12-2019, 8-12-2019; Ord. O-17-
2022, 12-19-2022; Ord. O-1-2023, 1-9-2023)
ARTICLE B. LANDSCAPE WASTE
SECTION:
4-3B-1: Intent
4-3B-2: Definitions
4-3B-3: Methods of Disposal
4-3B-4: Collection Fees
4-3B-5: Landscape Contractors, Business and Commercial Property Owners
4-3B-6: Prohibited Acts
4-3B-7: Noncompliance; Penalties
4-3B-1: INTENT:
Pursuant to Public Act 85-1430, Illinois Revised Statutes, chapter 1111/2,
paragraph 1022.19, effective July 1, 1990, landscape wastes may not be
deposited at landfill sites and it is, therefore, necessary to separate
landscape waste and provide alternative methods for disposal of landscape
waste. (Ord. 0-30-90, 6-4-90)
4-3B-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
APPROVED LANDSCAPE WASTE CONTAINER: A flat-bottomed, thirty (30) gallon paper
bag of a minimum two-ply, fifty (50) pound wet strength Kraft paper, with
approximate dimensions of sixteen inches by twelve inches by thirty five inches
(16" x 12" x 35") or other biodegradable paper bags of comparable size and
quality. Plastic bags, whether described as "biodegradable" or not, shall not
be permitted.
COMPOSTING: The controlled biological decomposition of organic solid waste
under aerobic (in the presence of oxygen) conditions. Organic waste materials
are transformed into soil amendments such as humus or mulch.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Grass clippings, leaves, twigs, branches, brush and other
plant matter or yard materials generated in the City.
OFFICIAL YARD MATERIAL IDENTIFICATION: A biodegradable tag or sticker purchased
from the City or other authorized vendor which, when firmly affixed or fastened
to an approved landscape waste container, requires the City or its authorized
representative to collect and dispose of the container and its contents. (Ord.
0-30-90, 6-4-90)
4-3B-3: METHODS OF DISPOSAL: 1
   A.   Home Management: Home management of landscape waste entails mulching
and composting lawn and garden debris at home. Although landscape waste has
traditionally been regarded as a waste product, it is actually a valuable
source of organic matter. Ideally, it should remain where it is generated to
replenish the soil from which it is produced.
A compost pile may be placed only in the rear yard of the property and may not
be located less than fifteen feet (15') from the property line. Compost piles
shall not be contained within a facility greater than four feet (4') above the
grade level of the property. Compost piles shall be properly maintained to
minimize odors and prevent the attraction of insects or rodents which would
create a public nuisance.
   B.   Drop Off Facilities: Residential landscape waste may be deposited loose
or in approved landscape waste containers by the resident generating the
landscape waste into a container to be maintained at the City Public Works
Department and/or other locations as may from time to time be designated by the
City or its authorized representative.
   C.   Residential Pickup:
      1.   In order to be collected, landscape waste shall be separated from
other garbage or refuse. No person shall place any landscape waste into any
bag, container or other receptacle in which other garbage or waste matter is
placed. Landscape waste to be disposed of pursuant to this Section shall be
placed into approved landscape waste containers which shall be placed at the
curbside in front of the dwelling unit. All such containers, when properly
marked or tagged with official yard material identification, shall be collected
and removed according to the pickup schedule established by the Department of
Public Works. Landscape waste containers may only be used for landscape waste
as defined herein. The City or its authorized representative may reject any
landscape waste container that is not limited to landscape waste, that is not
marked or tagged with an official yard material identification tag or sticker
or any nonbiodegradable container but shall tag the container with a note
explaining why the City or its authorized representative refused collection of
the container. Landscape waste containers may not be placed in front of the
dwelling unit prior to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the day prior to the
scheduled pickup date.
      2.   Brush and branches three inches (3") or less in diameter, securely
tied in bundles not exceeding three feet (3') in length and two feet (2') in
diameter shall be collected by City Department of Public Works. (Ord. 0-30-90,
6-4-90)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  5-6-5-2 of this Code, burning leaves prohibited.
4-3B-4: COLLECTION FEES:
Homeowners, landlords and/or tenants shall pay for curbside pickup of
residential landscape waste at a charge of one dollar ten cents ($1.10) per bag
or that charged from time to time by the City. Said charges shall be collected
by the sale of official yard material identification tags or stickers to be
affixed to each bag.
There shall be no charge for disposal of residential landscape waste deposited
by residents into a container at the City's Department of Public Works or for
pickup of brush or branches collected by the City Department of Public Works as
defined in subsection
 4-3B-3C2 of this Article. (Ord. 0-30-90, 6-4-90; 1992 Code)
4-3B-5: LANDSCAPE CONTRACTORS, BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL PROPERTY OWNERS:
Landscape contractors and business and commercial property owners shall be
responsible for the removal of landscape waste from the City limits at their
own expense. (Ord. 0-30-90, 6-4-90)
4-3B-6: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   No landscape waste shall be deposited in any street, gutter or upon any
curb.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, attempt to remove,
deface or alter any official yard material identification tag or sticker that
has been placed upon a bag or other container which is intended by the property
owner or occupant to be removed by the City or its authorized agent pursuant to
this Article, which tag or sticker indicates that such bag or container
contains landscape waste, unless authorized by the property owner or occupant.
(Ord. 0-30-90, 6-4-90)
4-3B-7: NONCOMPLIANCE; PENALTIES:
Collection can be refused if the landscape waste is not separately bagged in an
approved landscape waste container and/or tagged with an official yard material
identification tag or sticker as required by this Article.
Any person who violates the terms of this Article shall be subject to the
payment of a penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
violation. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate
violation. (Ord. 0-30-90, 6-4-90; 1992 Code)
ARTICLE C. HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC WASTES
SECTION:
4-3C-1: Definitions
4-3C-2: Storage and Transport Prohibited
4-3C-3: Penalty
4-3C-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC WASTE: Any substance which is toxic, corrosive, an
irritant, strong sensitizer, flammable, combustible or which generates pressure
through decomposition, heat or other means and which may cause substantial
personal injury or illness during or as a proximate result of any customary or
reasonably anticipated handling or use including foreseeable ingestion by
children. A "hazardous and toxic waste" also means any radioactive waste if,
with respect to such waste as used in a particular class of article or as
packaged, the waste is determined by a governmental agency that such waste is
sufficiently hazardous to require labeling in accordance with Illinois State
statute and City ordinance in order to protect the public health or any waste
which has the capacity to produce bodily injury or illness to man through
ingestion, inhalation or absorption through any body surface.
PERSON: Means and includes any corporation, association, copartnership or one
or more individuals. (Ord. 0-10-86, 5-19-86)
4-3C-2: STORAGE AND TRANSPORT PROHIBITED:
It shall be illegal for any person to store, house, transport, or otherwise
control any hazardous or toxic waste within the City which may cause
substantial personal injury or illness during or as a proximate result of any
customary or reasonably anticipated handling or use. (Ord. 0-10-86, 5-19-86)
4-3C-3: PENALTY:
Any person in violation of this Article shall be fined not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. (Ord. 0-10-86, 5-19-86; 1992
Code)
ARTICLE D. SCAVENGERS
SECTION:
4-3D-1: License Required
4-3D-2: Application for License; Issuance
4-3D-3: Bond and Insurance
4-3D-4: Number of Licenses
4-3D-5: Conditions of License
4-3D-6: Vehicle Requirements
4-3D-1: LICENSE REQUIRED: 1
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of scavenger or
the collection or disposal of refuse or garbage, including animal, human or
vegetable refuse or offal, including those collecting from commercial
establishments, without first having secured a license therefor. (Ord. 0-19-90,
4-16-90)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 3, Chapter 1 of this Code for general licensing provisions.
4-3D-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE:
The application for the license required by Section
4-3A-1 above shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be referred by him to
the Mayor and the City Council. No such license shall be issued until the
required license fee has been paid. 1  (Ord. 0-19-90, 4-16-90)
 
Notes
1 2. See Section
  3-1A-1 of this Code.
4-3D-3: BOND AND INSURANCE:
   A.   Bond: No license required by this Article shall be issued unless the
applicant for such license has first filed a surety bond to be approved by the
Mayor and City Council in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
protecting the City against any and all damages that may arise to the public
ways and the City and to any person in consequence of or by reason of such
licensee's occupation and operation within the City.
   B.   Insurance: In addition to such bond, each licensee shall be required to
maintain, at all times as such license is in effect, liability insurance with a
minimum coverage of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence
for bodily injury and property damage. Such insurance shall include public
liability and automobile and truck liability coverage. Evidence of such
insurance shall be filed with the City Clerk and updated periodically upon
request.
   C.   Failure to Maintain Bond or Insurance: In the event such insurance
coverage or bond is not maintained, the license shall be revoked.
4-3D-4: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
The number of scavenger licenses in the City shall be limited to seven (7).
There shall be authorized two (2) restricted scavenger license to duly
qualified scavengers upon their application filed in the office of the City
Clerk. The restricted license shall permit the licensee to service certain
specified commercial and industrial accounts listed with the City Clerk at the
time application is made. (Ord. 0-19-90, 4-16-90)
4-3D-5: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
Each licensee shall be subject to the following terms and conditions:
   A.   The licensee will have at least one vehicle in operation in collecting
garbage;
   B.   Collection will be made of all garbage and refuse properly placed in
suitable containers, complying with this Chapter, on the premises served;
provided, the person so served is not delinquent in paying proper bills
rendered for such service;
   C.   The licensee will collect garbage for each location asking for such
service and paying the established fee at least once each week;
   D.   The licensee will comply with this Chapter and will properly dispose of
all garbage and refuse collected;
   E.   The charge established at the start of the license year for garbage and
refuse collection shall not be increased during the license year without the
consent of the Mayor and the City Council;
   F.   A failure to comply with the provisions hereof because of conditions,
acts or occurrences beyond the control of the licensee or mechanical failure of
equipment repaired or replaced as promptly as possible shall not be considered
a breach of these conditions. (Ord. 0-19-90, 4-16-90)
4-3D-6: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS: 1
   A.   Any vehicle used by such scavenger in his business shall be watertight
and equipped with covers for such portions as are used for the transportation
of refuse.
   B.   No person owning or controlling any such vehicle shall cause or permit
any such vehicle to be so loaded or to be in such defective condition or so out
of repair or of such faulty construction or to be so improperly driven or
managed that any garbage, rubbish, offal, dirt, offensive liquid or other
material with which such vehicle is loaded shall drop or fall upon or in any
street, public way or other place. Such vehicle and any box, can or other
receptacle carried thereon or therein and in which any of the substances
described in this subsection shall be carried shall be so constructed as to be
strong and practically airtight so as to effectually prevent the same from
emitting any odor and so as to prevent any part of the contents or load thereof
from falling, leaking or spilling therefrom. It shall be the duty of every
person in charge, possession or control of such vehicle used for the purposes
mentioned in this Section to replace at once on such vehicle any part of the
contents thereof which shall or may have fallen, dropped or have been spilled
from such cart or vehicle or from any box or receptacle conveyed therein upon
any street, public way or other place. (Ord. 0-19-90, 4-16-90)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
   4-3A-6A and B of this Chapter.
CHAPTER 4
POLLUTION CONTROL
ARTICLE A. WATER POLLUTION 1
SECTION:
4-4A-1: Definitions
4-4A-2: Unlawful Pollution
4-4A-3: Permit to Discharge
4-4A-4: Required Treatment of Polluted Waters
4-4A-5: Detergents
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 2 of this Title for nuisances
4-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
OUTLET: The point of discharge of an effluent or other substance into the
underground, ditch or other area, watercourse or other body of surface or
ground water and onto any surface or place.
WATER POLLUTION: An impairment of the quality of the underground or surface
waters by sewage, dead animals, garbage, discarded metal articles, industrial
wastes or any other thing which adversely affects the use of such water for
domestic, industrial, agricultural, navigational, recreational or other
purposes.
WATERCOURSE: Any channel, either natural or artificial, for the flow of water.
(1976 Code §20-1-1)
4-4A-2: UNLAWFUL POLLUTION:
   A.   Generally: No person shall discharge or deposit wastes or sewage which
creates a public nuisance, a menace to the public safety, pollution or
contamination of underground or surface waters or impairs the use of any
private sewer, storm drain channel or public or private property. 1  (1976 Code
§20-1-2)
   B.   Pollution of Swimming Pools: Every person who illegally pollutes in any
manner the water of any swimming pool shall be guilty of violating this
Article. (1976 Code §20-1-11)
 
Notes
1 2. See also subsection
  4-3A-4A2 of this Title.
4-4A-3:PERMIT TO DISCHARGE:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall discharge without a permit into any
watercourse, tributary thereof, retention pond or storm sewer; onto the ground,
into the ground by percolation or injection, or into any ditch; or into the
air, any of the following:
      1.   Wastes, sewage, contaminants, polluted water or soil;
      2.   Water or soil that has been treated for wastes, sewage, contaminants
or any pollution;
      3.   Water or soil used in the treatment of wastes, sewage, contaminants
or any pollution.
Said permit shall be subject to the review of the City Engineer and approval of
the City Council. The City Council may place any conditions, stipulations or
requirements on the applicant as a condition to issuance of the permit which it
deems in the best interest of the City and in order to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the community. (Ord. 0-21-93, 6-7-93)
   B.   Application for Permit: The application for a discharge permit shall be
in writing, signed by the applicant and filed with the City. The application
shall state:
      1.   Name and address of applicant;
      2.   Type of wastes or sewage to be discharged;
      3.   Quantity to be discharged, maximum amounts per hour per day;
      4.   Treatment given to discharge, if any;
      5.   Proof by affidavit of compliance with all ordinances and County,
State and Federal laws concerning pollution of waterways. (1976 Code §20-1-5;
1992 Code)
   C.   Investigations and Inspections:
      1.   Investigation and Inspection of Applicant:
         a.   The City shall cause an investigation to be made of the facts
stated in the application for a permit to discharge into the City waterways.
         b.   The City shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises and
facilities to be used for the discharges to ascertain the fitness of such
premises and facility to comply with the ordinances and County, State and
Federal laws concerning water pollution. (1976 Code §20-1-6; 1992 Code)
      2.   Periodic Inspections: The City shall inspect the premises and
facilities of any permittee hereunder to insure compliance is being had with
all ordinances and County, State and Federal laws concerning water pollution.
(1976 Code §20-1-7; 1992 Code)
      3.   Inspection Fees: The applicant shall be charged all actual costs to
the City for the initial inspections, all subsequent inspections,
investigations, testing of air, soil, water and ground, monitoring of
discharges, equipment and operations and all other necessary costs. (Ord. 0-21-
93, 6-7-93)
   D.   Issuance of Permit: Upon fulfilling the requirements of this Section
the City shall grant a discharge permit to the applicant. (1976 Code §20-1-9;
1992 Code)
4-4A-4: REQUIRED TREATMENT OF POLLUTED WATERS:
No person shall discharge from any outlet any sanitary sewage, industrial
wastes or other polluted liquids except when the same has been treated as
required by law. (1976 Code §20-1-3)
4-4A-5: DETERGENTS:
   A.   Definitions: When used in this Section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein:
DAIRY EQUIPMENT, BEVERAGE EQUIPMENT and FOOD PROCESSING EQUIPMENT: That
equipment used in the production of milk and dairy products, foods and
beverages including the processing, preparation or packaging thereof for
consumption.
INDUSTRIAL CLEANING EQUIPMENT: Machinery and other tools used in cleaning
processes during the course of industrial manufacturing, production and
assembly.
MACHINE DISHWASHER: Equipment manufactured for the purpose of cleaning dishes,
glassware and other utensils involved in food preparation, consumption or use,
using a combination of water agitation and high temperatures.
POLYPHOSPHATE BUILDER or PHOSPHOROUS: A water softening and soil suspending
agent made from condensed phosphates, including pyrophosphates, triphosphates,
tripolyphosphates, metaphosphates and glassy phosphates used as a detergent
ingredient but shall not include "polyphosphate builders" or "phosphorous"
which is essential for medical, scientific or special engineering use under
such conditions and regulations as may be prescribed, after hearing, by the
Department of Health and Inspectional Services.
RECOMMENDED USE LEVEL: The amount of synthetic detergent or detergent which the
manufacturer thereof recommends for use per wash load, at which level, the
synthetic detergent or detergent will effectively perform its intended
function.
SYNTHETIC DETERGENT or DETERGENT: Any cleaning compound which is available for
household use, laundry use, other personal uses or industrial use which is
composed of organic and inorganic compounds, including soaps, water softeners,
surface active agents, dispersing agents, foaming agents, buffering agents,
builders, fillers, dyes, enzymes and fabric softeners, whether in the form of
crystals, powders, flakes, bar, liquids, sprays or any other form. (1976 Code
§20-1-12)
   B.   Detergents to be Labeled: No person shall sell, offer or expose for
sale any synthetic detergent or detergent, whether in the form of crystals,
powders, flakes, bars, liquids, sprays or any other form, in the City unless
the container, wrapper or other packaging thereof shall be clearly labeled with
respect to its polyphosphate builder or phosphorus ingredient content clearly
and legibly set forth thereon in terms of percentage of phosphorus by weight,
expressed as elemental phosphorus per container, wrapper or other packaging
thereof, as well as grams of phosphorus, expressed as elemental phosphorus, per
recommended use level. (1976 Code § 20-1-13)
   C.   Phosphate Content Limited:
      1.   No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale:
         a.   Any synthetic detergent or detergent containing more than eight
and seven-tenths percent (8.7%) of phosphorus by weight, expressed as elemental
phosphorus, within the city.
         b.   Any synthetic detergent or detergent which requires a recommended
use level of said synthetic detergent or detergent which contains more than
seven (7) grams of phosphorus by weight, expressed as elemental phosphorus,
within the city. (1976 Code § 20-1-14)
         c.   Any synthetic detergent or detergent containing any phosphorus,
expressed as elemental phosphorus, including synthetic detergents or detergents
manufactured for machine dishwashers, dairy equipment, beverage equipment, food
processing equipment and industrial cleaning equipment, within the city, from
and after January 1, 1977. (1976 Code § 20-1-14; amd. Ord. O-08-76, 4-13-1976)
      2.   Synthetic detergents or detergents manufactured for use in machine
dishwashers, dairy equipment, beverage equipment, food processing equipment and
industrial cleaning equipment shall not be subject to the limitations set forth
in subsections C1a and C1b of this section, but are hereby made expressly
subject to the provisions of subsection C1c of this section.
      3.   The concentration of phosphorus by weight, expressed as elemental
phosphorus, in any synthetic detergent or detergent shall be determined by the
current applicable method prescribed by the American society for testing and
materials (ASTM). (1976 Code § 20-1-14)
   D.   Penalties: Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this section, except when otherwise
specifically provided, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or shall be punishable as a misdemeanor by
incarceration in the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months under
procedures set forth in section 5/1-2-1.1 of the Illinois municipal code, as
amended 1 , or by both fine and imprisonment. A separate and distinct offense
shall be regarded as committed each day on which such person shall continue or
permit any such violation or failure to comply is permitted to exist after
notification thereof. (1976 Code § 20-1-15; amd. 1992 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1.
ARTICLE B. AIR POLLUTION 1
SECTION:
4-4B-1: Short Title
4-4B-2: Findings And Declaration Of Policy
4-4B-3: Interpretation Of Provisions
4-4B-4: Definitions
4-4B-5: Air Pollution Prohibited
4-4B-6: Open Burning
4-4B-7: Smoke Emissions
4-4B-8: Incinerators
4-4B-9: Inspections
4-4B-10: Outdoor Fireplaces
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapters 2 and 5 of this title.
4-4B-1: SHORT TITLE:
This article shall be known and may be cited as the AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
ORDINANCE. (1976 Code § 20-2-1)
4-4B-2: FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY:
It is hereby declared that pollution of the atmosphere by smoke, cinders, soot,
fly ash, gases, fumes, vapors, odors, dust and other contaminants is a menace
to the health, welfare and comfort of the residents of the city and a cause of
substantial damage to property. For the purpose of controlling and reducing
atmospheric pollution, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to
minimize "air pollution" as herein defined and prohibit excessive emission of
the same, to establish standards governing the installation, maintenance and
operation of equipment and appurtenances relating to combustion which are a
source or potential source of air pollution and in furtherance of this purpose
to cooperate and coordinate these efforts with the state department of
environmental control and air pollution control program 1 . (1976 Code § 20-2-
2)
 
Notes
1 2. 415 ILCS 5/1 through 5/13.
4-4B-3: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
This article shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes herein
described. Nothing herein is to be construed as repealing or abridging the
emergency powers of any agency or government except to the extent expressly set
forth herein. (1976 Code § 20-2-10)
4-4B-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this article, shall
have the respective meanings assigned to them unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context:
AIR POLLUTION: The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or more air
contaminants in such quantities and duration as are, or tend to be, injurious
to human health or welfare, to animal or plant life or to property, or would
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property throughout the
city or such portion as shall be affected thereby and excludes all aspects of
employer-employee relationship as to health and safety hazards.
ECONOMIC POISONS: Those chemicals used as insecticides, rodenticides,
fungicides, herbicides, nematocides or defoliants.
FUEL BURNING EQUIPMENT: Any furnace, boiler, water heater, device, mechanism,
stoker, burner, stack, oven, stove, kiln, still or other apparatus or a group
of collections of such units in the process of fuel burning for the generation
of heat or power. Refuse burning equipment shall be considered incinerators as
herein defined and not as fuel burning equipment under this definition. Ovens,
stoves or ranges used exclusively for domestic cooking purposes are not
included herein.
INCINERATOR: Any device, apparatus, equipment or structure used for destroying,
reducing or salvaging by fire any material or substance including, but not
limited to, refuse, rubbish, garbage, debris or scrap or facilities for
cremating human or animal remains.
ODOR: A property of a substance which affects the sense of smell.
OPEN BURNING: Any fire wherein the products of combustion are emitted into the
open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or chimney.
OPERATOR: Any person who has care, custody or control of a building or
premises, or a portion thereof, whether with or without knowledge of the owner
thereof.
OWNER: Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have
legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof, or who shall have charge, care or control of any premises
or part thereof including, but not limited to, a dwelling or dwelling unit, as
owner or agent of the owner or as a fiduciary including, but not limited to,
executor, administrator, trustee, receiver, guardian or as a mortgagee in
possession regardless of how such possession was obtained. Any person who is a
lessee or sublessee of all or any part of any premises including, but not
limited to, a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to be a co-owner with
the lessor and shall have joint responsibility with the owner over the premises
or portion thereof so leased or subleased.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible wastes (except body wastes) and
shall include, but not be limited to, garbage, rubbish, yard trimming, leaves,
ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market
and industrial wastes.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART: "Ringelmann's Scale for Grading the Density of Smoke",
published by the United States bureau of mines, or any chart, recorder,
indicator or device for the measurement of smoke density which is approved by
the state department of environmental control of the state of Illinois as the
equivalent of the "Ringelmann's Scale".
RUBBISH: Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive and shall
include, but not be limited to, rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets,
wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, tin
cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS: Any business, trade or industry engaged in whole or in part
in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material including, but not limited
to, metals, chemicals, shipping containers or drums.
SMOKE: Small gas borne and airborne particles arising from a process of
combustion in sufficient number to be observable.
TRADE WASTE: All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business, trade or
industry and shall include, but not be limited to, plastic products, cartons,
paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and other
forms of solid or liquid waste materials. (1976 Code § 20-2-3)
4-4B-5: AIR POLLUTION PROHIBITED:
No person or owner of property and no person having possession or control of
property shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the open air
substances in such quantities as shall result in air pollution. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to the use of economic poisons. (1976 Code §
20-2-7)
4-4B-6: OPEN BURNING:
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse or plant
life nor conduct a salvage operation by open burning; except, that the open
burning of trade waste is not prohibited where no other known method of
disposal can be used without hazard to health or property; provided, that such
person complies with the provisions of the Illinois environmental control act 1
.
This section shall not apply to fires in conjunction with holiday and festive
celebrations and other special occasions set and attended by personnel trained
in firefighting technique, fire containment and the use of firefighting
equipment. Such fires shall be allowed only by special permit issued by the
director of health and inspectional services. (1976 Code § 20-2-4)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
4-4B-7: SMOKE EMISSIONS:
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any fuel burning
equipment, the shade or appearance of which is darker than no. 1 of the
Ringelmann smoke chart, to be emitted into the open air.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to smoke emitted during the
cleaning of a fire box or the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance
of which is not darker than no. 3 of the Ringelmann smoke chart, for a period
or periods aggregating no more than four (4) minutes in any one consecutive
hour. (1976 Code § 20-2-5)
4-4B-8: INCINERATORS:
No person shall:
   A.   Cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any incinerator, the shade or
appearance of which is darker than no. 1 of the Ringelmann smoke chart, to be
emitted into the open air or emissions of such opacity within a stack or
chimney or, exclusive of water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or
chimney to a degree greater than the emission designated as no. 1 of the
Ringelmann smoke chart.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to smoke emitted during the
building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is not darker than no.
2 of the Ringelmann smoke chart, for a period of no longer than four (4)
consecutive minutes or to emissions of such opacity within a stack or chimney
or, exclusive of water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or chimney to a
degree which is not greater than the emissions designated as no. 2 of the
Ringelmann smoke chart for a period of no longer than four (4) consecutive
minutes.
   B.   Cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of particles of unburned
waste or ash from any incinerator which are individually large enough to be
visible while suspended in the atmosphere.
   C.   Construct, install, use or cause to be used any incinerator which will
result in odors being detectible by sense of smell in any area of human use or
occupancy.
   D.   Operate and no owner of any building in the city shall permit the
operation of an incinerator prior to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. of any day and all operations shall be completely
terminated by five o'clock (5:00) P.M. including complete extinction of the
fire and removal of material in a safe manner from the firebox to a
noncombustible container; provided, however, that by special permit, the
director of health and inspectional services or his designee may, because of
exceptional circumstances, permit different hours of operation under such
conditions as he shall deem necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the
public or of persons in the vicinity. (1976 Code § 20-2-6)
4-4B-9: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Entry Powers:
      1.   All buildings and premises subject to this article are subject to
inspection from time to time by the director of health and inspectional
services or his designee. All rooms and areas in the building shall be
available and accessible for such inspection which shall be made during usual
business hours if the premises is used for nonresidential purposes; provided,
however, that inspection may be made at other times if:
         a.   The premises is not available during the foregoing hours for
inspection;
         b.   There is no reason to believe that violations are occurring on
the premises which can only be apprehended and proved by inspection during
other than the prescribed hours; or
         c.   There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character
which is an immediate threat to health or safety requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
      2.   Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the
director of health and inspectional services or his designee has reason to
believe that a condition exists which poses an immediate threat to life, health
or safety. Such procedure shall take place only where the time required to
apply for and secure the issuance of a warrant would render ineffective the
immediate action necessary to abate the condition.
Emergency inspections may also be authorized in times of air pollution
emergencies as provided by law.
      3.   Where the director of health and inspectional services or his
designee is refused entry or access or is otherwise impeded or prevented by the
owner, occupant or operator from conducting an inspection of the premises, such
person shall be in violation of this article.
   B.   Search Warrant Or Access Warrant:
      1.   The director of health and inspectional services or his designee
may, upon affidavit, apply to the judge of competent jurisdiction for a search
warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that
provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this
article may exist on the premises, including one or more of the following:
         a.   That the premises requires inspection according to the cycle
established by the director of health and inspectional services or his designee
for periodic inspections of premises of the type involved;
         b.   That observation of external conditions (for example, smoke, ash,
soot, odors) of the premises and its public areas has resulted in the belief
that violations of this article exist; or
         c.   Circumstances such as age and design of fuel burning equipment
and/or system, types of incinerators, particular use of premises or other
factors which render systematic inspections of such buildings necessary in the
interest of public health and safety.
      2.   If the judge of competent jurisdiction is satisfied as to the
matters set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search
warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the premises on
which the nuisance or violation may exist. (1976 Code § 20-2-9)
4-4B-10: OUTDOOR FIREPLACES:
   A.   Regulated: No person shall cause or permit the burning of any garbage,
refuse, yard waste, grass clippings, leaves, pressure treated or painted wood
in an outdoor fireplace.
   B.   Unattended: No person shall cause or permit an outdoor fireplace to be
unattended while anything is burning in the outdoor fireplace.
   C.   Defined: For the purpose of this section, an "outdoor fireplace" is
defined as any fireplace, firepit, chiminera, barbeque grill or other similar
device, whether portable or stationary which is designed to hold burning
materials outdoors. (Ord. O-06-2002, 2-4-2002)
ARTICLE C. NOISE POLLUTION
SECTION:
4-4C-1: Loud And Disturbing Noises Prohibited
4-4C-2: Loud And Disturbing Noises Enumerated
4-4C-3: Noisy Premises
4-4C-4: Sound Pressure Level; Public Way
4-4C-5: Sound Pressure Level; Time Restrictions
4-4C-6: Exempted Acts
4-4C-7: Motor Vehicles
4-4C-99: Penalty
4-4C-1: LOUD AND DISTURBING NOISES PROHIBITED:
No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which either annoys, disturbs,
injures and endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others
within the corporate limits of the city. (1976 Code § 20-3-1)
4-4C-2: LOUD AND DISTURBING NOISES ENUMERATED:
Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
   A.   Horns And Signaling Devices:
      1.   In Public Places: The sounding of any horn or signaling device on
any automobile, motorcycle, motorbus or other vehicle on any street or public
place of the city except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such
signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any
such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any
signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any
horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust, and the use of any
such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.
      2.   On Private Property: The sounding of any horn or signaling device on
any automobile, motorcycle, motorbus or other vehicle on any driveway or on
private property within the city, in such a manner as to be plainly audible at
a distance of fifty feet (50') from the property line except as a danger
warning.
   B.   Musical Instruments:
      1.   On Public Ways: No person shall use or perform with any hand or band
organ or other musical instrument for pay or in expectation of payment in any
of the streets or public places in the city before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or
after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. of each day.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to band music or organized
musical society engaged in serenading or civic or military parades.
      2.   On Other Than Public Ways: The using, operating or permitting to be
played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound
in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring
inhabitants at any time.
The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device
between the hours of nine o’clock (9:00) P.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) A.M.
Sunday through Thursday and between ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o’clock
(8:00) A.M. on Friday, Saturday and federal holidays at a decibel level in
excess of fifty-five (55) Db when measured from a distance of thirty five feet
(35') from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this article.
   C.   Yelling And Shouting: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or gang
singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. or at any time or place so as to
annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or in a
dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
   D.   Noisy Animals: The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing
frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any
persons in the vicinity.
   E.   Steam Whistles: The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam
whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to
begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper
city authorities.
   F.   Discharge Of Exhaust: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of
any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
   G.   Defective Vehicle Or Load: The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
   H.   Vehicle Loading; Opening Boxes: The creation of a loud and excessive
noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and
destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
   I.   Building Construction: The erection, including excavating, demolition,
alteration or repair of any building, other than between the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on weekdays except in case of
urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety and then only with
a permit from the director of health and inspectional services, which permit
may be granted for a period not to exceed three (3) days or less while the
emergency continues. If the director of health and inspectional services should
determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the
erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of
streets and highways within the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and if he shall further determine that loss or
inconvenience would result to any person in interest, he may grant permission
for such work to be done within the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. upon application being made at the time the permit for the
work is awarded or during the progress of the work.
   J.   Noise Near Schools, Churches And Hospitals: The creation of any
excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church or court while the same are in use or adjacent to any hospital which
unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which
disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital; provided, that conspicuous
signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school,
hospital or court street.
   K.   Hawkers And Peddlers: The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and
vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
Except in amusement grounds, parks, halls and other places duly licensed in
accordance with this code 1 , no person shall make or cause, permit or allow to
be made any noise of any kind by crying, calling or shouting or by means of any
whistle, bell, gong, clapper, hammer, drum, horn or similar mechanical device
for the purpose of advertising any goods, wares or merchandise or of attracting
the attention or inviting the patronage of any person to any business
whatsoever prior to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M
of any day or on a state or national holiday.
   L.   Drums: The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show
or sale.
   M.   Transporting Metal And Steel: The transportation of rails, pillars or
columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other
public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner when so
loaded as to cause loud noises or disturb the peace and quiet of such streets
or other public places.
   N.   Operation Of Machinery: The operation between the hours of six o'clock
(6:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of any pile driver, steam shovel,
pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use
of which is attended by loud or unusual noise.
   O.   Blowers: The operation of any noise creating blower or power fan or any
internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the
explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or
fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffling device sufficient to
deaden such noise.
   P.   Sound Amplification Systems: No driver of any motor vehicle within this
city shall operate or permit operation of any sound amplification system which
can be heard outside the vehicle from fifty (50) or more feet when the vehicle
is being operated upon any roadway within the city, unless such system is being
operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation. This
subsection does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. (1976 Code § 20-3-
2; amd. Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; Ord. O-05-2001, 2-5-2001; Ord. O-11-2010, 4-
5-2010; Ord. O-10-2023, 6-12-2023; Ord. O-11-2023, 7-17-2023)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 3, chapter 4 of this code.
4-4C-3: NOISY PREMISES:
No person shall use nor any person owning or in possession or control of any
building or premises shall permit or rent the same to be used for any business
or employment or for any purpose of pleasure or recreation if such use shall,
by its boisterous nature, disturb or destroy the peace of the neighborhood in
which such building or premises is situated or be dangerous or detrimental to
health. (1976 Code § 20-3-4)
4-4C-4: SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL; PUBLIC WAY:
No person except a person participating in a parade or public assembly for
which a permit has been issued by the city shall, for purposes of entertainment
or communication, generate any sound by any means so that: a) the sound
pressure level on the public way measured at a distance of ten feet (10') or
farther from the source exceeds eighty (80) dB, or is more than ten (10) dB
above the ambient noise level, or b) the sound is louder than an average
conversational level at a distance of two hundred feet (200') or more, measured
either horizontally or vertically from the point of generation. (Ord. O-16-
2008, 4-7-2008)
4-4C-5: SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL; TIME RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no person on the public
way, in a public or private open space, or in a vehicle shall generate any
sound by any means so that the sound pressure level exceeds fifty five (55) dB
within any residential unit between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. O-16-2008, 4-7-2008)
4-4C-6: EXEMPTED ACTS:
The provisions of sections
4-4C-4 and
4-4C-5 of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following acts:
   A.   Use of a sound amplification device as an alarm or emergency warning
device;
   B.   Sounds generated in construction, demolition or repair work of an
emergency nature or in work on public improvements authorized by a governmental
body or agency;
   C.   Sounds generated at any stadium or in connection with any festival,
parade or street fair conducted pursuant to a valid permit. (Ord. O-16-2008, 4-
7-2008)
4-4C-7: MOTOR VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor of a motor vehicle
with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) greater than ten thousand (10,000)
pounds for a consecutive period longer than two (2) minutes while such vehicle
is standing on private property and located within forty five meters (45 m) of
any property zoned and used for residential purposes, except where such vehicle
is standing within a completely enclosed structure. (Ord. O-16-2008, 4-7-2008)
4-4C-99: PENALTY:
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
100 hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. O-10-2023, 6-12-2023; amd. Ord. O-11-2023, 7-17-2023; Ord. O-12-
2023, 7-17-2023)
ARTICLE D. POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES
SECTION:
4-4D-1: Applicability
4-4D-2: Definitions
4-4D-3: Notice Requirement And Filing Fee
4-4D-4: Content Of Application
4-4D-5: Filings By The Applicant
4-4D-6: Participants
4-4D-7: Filings By Other Than The Applicant
4-4D-8: Hearing Procedures
4-4D-9: Record Of Proceedings
4-4D-10: Decision By The City
4-4D-1: APPLICABILITY:
This article applies to applications for site location approval for new
pollution control facilities (as defined by section 3.330 of the act and
herein). To the extent a facility described in an application proposes to
manage material which is not "waste" (as defined by section 3.535 of the act),
or proposes to conduct an activity which is not within the definition of a
pollution control facility (as defined by section 3.330 of the act and herein),
or proposes to conduct an activity which does not require a permit from the
Illinois environmental protection agency ("IEPA"), this article does not apply.
(Ord. O-38-2005, 12-21-2005)
4-4D-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions under the act, as amended from time to time, apply herein. The
following definitions apply regardless of where the defined term appears in
this article:
ACT: The Illinois environmental protection act, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/1 et seq.
AGENCY: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
APPLICANT: Any person, group of persons, partnership, firm, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind that files an application for
local siting approval for a new pollution control facility as defined in the
act pursuant to this article.
APPLICATION: The document(s) filed by the applicant requesting local siting
approval for a facility. The application shall be admitted into evidence at the
hearing.
CITY: The city of Northlake, Illinois, an Illinois home rule municipal
corporation.
CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Northlake, Illinois.
FACILITY: A pollution control facility as defined in the act.
HEARING OFFICER: The attorney appointed by the mayor of the city to preside
over the public hearing(s) associated with a siting application.
IEPA: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
MUNICIPAL WASTE 1 : Garbage, general household and commercial waste, industrial
lunchroom or office waste, landscape waste, and construction or demolition
debris.
SPECIAL WASTE: Including, but not limited to, potentially infectious medical
waste, hazardous waste, industrial process or pollution control waste, and
empty containers in which special waste has been stored, and as specifically
defined in section 3.475 of the act 2  shall be excluded from the definition of
"municipal waste".
TRANSFER STATION: A site or facility that accepts waste for temporary storage
or consolidation, and further transfers to a waste disposal, treatment or
storage facility, as defined in section 3.500 of the act 3 . (Ord. O-38-2005,
12-21-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 5/3.290.
2 2. 415 ILCS 5/3.475.
3 3. 415 ILCS 5/3.500.
4-4D-3: NOTICE REQUIREMENT AND FILING FEE:
   A.   Not later than fourteen (14) days prior to submittal of an application
for site location approval, the applicant shall cause written notice of intent
to submit such an application to be served either in person or by registered
mail, return receipt requested to all owners of property within two hundred
fifty feet (250') in each direction of the lot line of the site, and to all
members of the general assembly from the legislative district in which the site
is located. Notification must be in conformance with the provisions of section
39.2 of the act.
Such notice shall state the name and address of the applicant, the location of
the proposed facility, the nature and size of the development, the nature of
the activity proposed, the probable life of the proposed activity, the date
when the request for siting approval will be submitted, and a description of
the right of persons to comment on such request. Proof of compliance with the
above stated notification requirements must be submitted with the application.
   B.   Each application for a new pollution control facility to be processed
pursuant to this article shall include a one hundred thousand dollar
($100,000.00) application fee.
The application fee is intended to defray the reasonable and necessary costs of
addressing and processing all aspects of the application, including, but not
limited to, prefiling review matters, cost of site inspections, clerical
expenses, copying costs, space rental, hearing officer compensation, court
reporter expenses, transcription costs, public notice expenses, staff review
time, the review time of the city engineer (which shall be capped at
$25,000.00) and reasonable attorney fees, as well as all other reasonable costs
and expenses incurred by the city staff in review and evaluation of the
application, the costs incident to the appeal of a grant of site location
approval including, but not limited to, preparing the record for appeal, and
the cost of representing the city on appeal (the "city's costs").
Any portion of the application fee that remains unexpended upon final
resolution of the siting process (including appeals to the Illinois pollution
control board, appellate courts, Illinois supreme court, federal courts and any
other administrative review) shall be returned to the applicant. Should there
be any additional fees or costs incurred by the city in excess of the
application fee, the applicant shall bear any and all such additional fees or
costs, and shall promptly pay the same within thirty (30) days following
written notice thereof. The applicant shall further be responsible to reimburse
the city for expenses and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city as a
result of any collection activity or litigation necessarily instituted by the
city to collect such additional costs.
The city council may, by adoption of appropriate resolution, reduce the
application fee upon petition by the applicant setting forth the reasons why a
reduction is justified. The city must make a finding that the reduced fee will
not jeopardize the ability of the city to conduct a complete and impartial
public hearing. The applicant will be responsible for any fees or costs
incurred above the reduced fee. (Ord. O-38-2005, 12-21-2005)
4-4D-4: CONTENT OF APPLICATION:
   A.   An executed host agreement must be appended to, and included as part
of, any application filed with the city for site location approval.
   B.   The city requests that application address each of the criteria set
forth in section 39.2 of the act and generally conform to the following:
   I.   The facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of the area it
is intended to serve.
   A.   Introduction
   B.   Proposed service area
   C.   Demographics of service area
   D.   Waste disposal rates of service area
   E.   Discussion of waste disposal system for service area
   F.   Economic benefits of facility
   G.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
   II.   The facility is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that
the public health, safety and welfare will be protected.
   A.   Introduction
   B.   Site location
      1.   Facility location
      2.   Historical property uses and existing site conditions
         a.   Plat of survey with existing structures
         b.   Identification of property owners
         c.   Existing topography of site (minimum two foot contours)
      3.   Existing utilities
      4.   Location standards
         a.   Residential properties
         b.   100-year floodplain limits
         c.   Wetland location documentation
   C.   Site design
      1.   Site access
      2.   Proposed transfer building
      3.   Access roads and interior traffic circulation
      4.   Facility scale area
      5.   Parking facilities
      6.   Office or other facility structures
      7.   Security measures to be implemented
      8.   Stormwater management features
   D.   Operations
      1.   Hours of operation
      2.   Quantity of waste accepted
      3.   Identification of acceptable waste types
      4.   Facility staffing
      5.   Waste transfer operational plan
      6.   Waste volume throughput analysis
      7.   Overnight storage of waste on site
      8.   Identification of disposal sites and permits
      9.   Identification of proposed railroad activities
      10.   Waste screening/load checking procedures
      11.   Equipment requirements
      12.   Facility cleaning procedures
      13.   Fueling procedures
      14.   Litter control procedures
      15.   Vector control procedures
      16.   Odor control procedures
      17.   Noise control procedures
      18.   Record keeping procedures
      19.   Wastewater generation and handling
      20.   Final closure
         a.   Waste removal
         b.   Equipment cleaning
         c.   Equipment removal
         d.   Cost estimate
   E.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
III.   The facility is located so as to minimize incompatibility with the
character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the value of
the surrounding property.
   A.   Introduction
   B.   Land use/zoning/planning study
      1.   Site zoning
      2.   Adjacent and surrounding zoning
      3.   Adjacent and surrounding land uses
      4.   Landscape plan
   C.   Real estate impact study
      1.   Proposed improvements
      2.   Transfer site area study
      3.   Property value impact study
   D.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert(s)
IV.   For a facility other than a sanitary landfill or waste disposal site, the
facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year floodplain or the site
is flood-proofed; for a facility that is a sanitary landfill or waste disposal
site, the facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year floodplain,
or if the facility is a facility described in subsection (b)(3) of section
22.19a, the site is flood-proofed.
   A.   Introduction
   B.   Demonstration of facility location relative to the 100-year floodplain
   C.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
   V.   The plan of operations for the facility is designed to minimize the
danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills, or other operational
accidents.
   A.   Introduction
   B.   Fire control and prevention measures
   C.   Spill control and prevention measures
   D.   Accident prevention/employee training
   E.   Operational contingency plan
   F.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
VI.   The traffic patterns to or from the facility are so designed as to
minimize the impact on existing traffic flows.
   A.   Introduction
   B.   Methodology
      1.   Traffic characteristics of the facility
      2.   Traffic assignment and analysis
      3.   Roadway and site access
   C.   Site accessibility
      1.   Site location
      2.   Area roadways
      3.   Proposed roadway improvements
      4.   Existing traffic volumes
   D.   Existing traffic characteristics
      1.   Estimated site traffic generation
      2.   Directional distribution
      3.   Projected future traffic growth
   E.   Traffic impact analysis
   F.   Identification of anticipated routes to disposal facility
   G.   Gap study
   H.   Accident data of intersections in study area for the last 5 years
   I.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
VII.   If the facility will be treating, storing or disposing of hazardous
waste, an emergency response plan exists for the facility which includes
notification, containment and evacuation procedures to be used in case of an
accidental release.
   A.   Introduction
   B.   Certification precluding hazardous waste
   C.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
VIII.   The proposed facility must be consistent with the Cook County solid
waste management plan.
   A.   Introduction
   B.   Consistency with the Cook County solid waste management plan
   C.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
IX.   If the facility will be located within a regulated recharge area, any
applicable requirements specified by the board for such areas have been met.
   A.   Introduction
   B.   Demonstration of facility location relative to regulated recharge areas
   C.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
   X.   Operator history and experience
   A.   Articles of incorporation or formation of the applying entity
   B.   Financial statements of the applicant, if any, for the last three (3)
years
   C.   Transfer station experience of the applicant and related entities
within Illinois
   D.   Resume of proposed facility manager
   (Ord. O-38-2005, 12-21-2005)
4-4D-5: FILINGS BY THE APPLICANT:
   A.   The applicant, for site location approval, shall file ten (10) copies
of the application, including five (5) full sized copies of exhibits and ten
(10) reduced copies of all exhibits, with the city clerk.
   B.   The clerk, upon receiving said application, shall do the following:
      1.   Accept for filing, and promptly date stamp as filed, any application
that is tendered for filing. The date on the date stamp of the clerk shall be
considered the official filing date for all time limit purposes. Receipt and
acceptance of an application by the clerk is pro forma, and does not constitute
an acknowledgment that the applicant has complied with the act or this article.
      2.   Upon the filing of an application, the clerk shall distribute copies
of the application to each member of the city council then holding office, a
copy to the mayor and a copy to the city attorney.
      3.   The clerk shall make a copy of the application and public record
concerning the application available for public inspection during the normal
business hours of the clerk's office. Additionally, the clerk shall provide to
any person so requesting, copies of the application or the public record, upon
such person's payment of the actual cost of reproduction. (Ord. O-38-2005, 12-
21-2005)
4-4D-6: PARTICIPANTS:
   A.   The applicant is a participant.
   B.   The city, by and through its staff, is a participant. To the extent the
city officials, employees or staff wish to participate in the public hearings
outside of their roles of employment with the city, they must submit an
appearance and proceed as do other members of the public.
   C.   Any person other than described in subsection A or B of this section
may appear as a participant. Such person must file a written appearance with
the clerk not less than ten (10) business days prior to the date scheduled for
commencement of the hearing on the application. Such appearance shall state, at
a minimum, the name, address, and daytime phone and facsimile numbers of the
person filing the appearance and whether that participant will provide oral
testimony or introduce other evidence during the public hearing. Such person
may appear pro se or be represented by an attorney during the public hearings.
   D.   Any person, legal entity or any informal group or association may be
represented by an attorney. An appearance as required in subsection C of this
section must be filed. Such an appearance must include the name and address of
the participant as well as the name, address, phone and facsimile numbers of
the attorney. The appearance must further state whether the attorney will
present any oral testimony or other evidence during the hearing.
   E.   Participants have the right to present sworn testimony, other evidence
and, subject to the discretion of the hearing officer, cross examine witnesses
as otherwise provided in this article.
   F.   Any attorney representing a participant must be licensed and in good
standing to practice law in the state of Illinois, or if licensed and in good
standing to practice law in another state that is part of the United States,
shall be allowed to serve as an attorney for a participant upon motion being
made to and granted by the hearing officer.
   G.   A person may not become a participant without first having timely filed
a complete and accurate written appearance as provided herein. Consistent with
the principles of fundamental fairness, for good cause shown, the hearing
officer may exercise discretion to allow persons to become a late participant.
Except in the sound discretion of the hearing officer, no late participant
shall be entitled to present oral testimony or introduce other evidence at the
hearing, and may not cross examine a witness who has previously testified.
   H.   Any person may provide unsworn public comment during the hearing
subject to the hearing officer's discretion and consistent with fundamental
fairness. (Ord. O-38-2005, 12-21-2005)
4-4D-7: FILINGS BY OTHER THAN THE APPLICANT:
   A.   Three (3) copies of all reports, studies, exhibits or other evidence,
other than oral testimony, which any person other than the city and applicant
desires to submit for the record to be used at the public hearing, along with a
list identifying the witnesses to be called to testify at the public hearing,
must be filed with the city clerk no later than ten (10) business days before
the public hearing commences.
   B.   Three (3) copies of all reports, studies, exhibits or other evidence,
other than oral testimony, which the city, its consultants, if any, any city
department and any participant desires to submit for the record to be used at
the public hearing, along with a list identifying the witnesses to be called to
testify at the public hearing and a brief summary of the proposed testimony of
each witness, must be filed with the city clerk no later than ten (10) business
days before the public hearing commences. (Ord. O-38-2005, 12-21-2005)
4-4D-8: HEARING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Prior to the date of the first public hearing, the mayor shall appoint
a hearing officer for the public hearing on the application. The hearing
officer shall be an attorney, licensed to practice in Illinois. The hearing
officer shall preside over the public hearing, and shall make decisions
concerning the admission of evidence and the manner in which the hearing is
conducted subject to this section and the law concerning such applications. The
hearing officer shall make all rulings in accordance with fundamental fairness
and statutory and constitutional requirements. The hearing officer may exclude
irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious testimony. All testimony and all
public meetings concerning the application shall be in the presence of a
certified court reporter who shall report all proceedings regarding
consideration of the application. The hearing officer shall have the following
powers or duties:
      1.   Administer oaths and affirmations;
      2.   Hold a prehearing conference, not less than five (5) business days
prior to the date established for commencement of the hearing. At that time,
the applicant, the city and any other participants of record shall participate.
The purpose of the prehearing conference shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to, the following: a) determination of the criterion which will be
placed in issue by any of the parties to the hearing; b) to the extent
necessary and practicable, address any prehearing issues which may have arisen;
and c) address any prehearing motion which has been filed or any motions which
will be presented on the first day of the hearing prior to the commencement of
evidentiary testimony.
      3.   Regulate the course of the hearing including, but not limited to,
controlling the order of proceedings, consistent with this article;
      4.   Require a witness or person presenting unsworn public comment to
state his or her position either for, against or undecided with respect to the
proposed facility.
      5.   Examine a witness and direct a witness to testify.
      6.   Establish reasonable limits on the duration of public hearing
consistent with the act and this article, including, but not limited to, the
reasonable limitation of sworn testimony, unsworn public comment, direct and
cross examination of any witnesses, and the limitation of repetitive or
cumulative testimony and questioning.
      7.   Rule upon objections and evidentiary questions, with the
understanding that such rulings must be consistent with fundamental fairness,
but need not be in strict compliance with the Illinois supreme court, Illinois
code of civil procedure, or any local rules of evidence governing a civil
judicial trial in the state of Illinois, county of Cook.
      8.   The applicant and the city's attorney shall be allowed to cross
examine witnesses as of right, subject to such reasonable limitation as may be
set by the hearing officer. Other participants represented by attorneys may be
allowed to cross examine in the discretion of the hearing officer.
      9.   The hearing officer shall have, consistent with fundamental
fairness, the discretion to reasonably limit cross examination. The hearing
officer may require the pro se participants to submit questions to the hearing
officer who may ask the question, rephrasing, modifying or otherwise changing
the question as reasonably necessary. The hearing officer may refuse to ask any
question consistent with the principles of fundamental fairness.
      10.   Allow the introduction of late filed evidence, be it written or
testimonial, on behalf of any participant, provided good cause is shown for the
late filing, and the evidence is relevant and not unduly prejudicial to the
applicant or to another participant so that fundamental fairness to all parties
is preserved.
      11.   Exercise discretion to allow public comment at each hearing or may
set one time for public comment.
      12.   At the conclusion of the public hearing and after consideration of
all public comments, the hearing officer shall submit written findings of fact
and conclusions of law to the city council, and file a copy of such findings
with the city clerk.
      13.   Prepare the record for appeal with the assistance of the city
clerk.
      14.   Authority to waive the requirements of this article in the interest
of fundamental fairness.
      15.   Accept the filing pleadings and other written material related to
the hearing, provided that copies thereof are also provided to the clerk.
   B.   The mayor may remove and/or replace the hearing officer at will. If the
hearing officer is replaced, a new hearing officer shall be appointed. In the
interim, the hearing may be adjourned or continued, with the mayor or an
alderman as presiding officer.
   C.   Within thirty (30) days of the filing of the application, the city
council shall, by resolution, schedule a public hearing on the application.
   D.   Within thirty five (35) days of the receipt of the application, the
city clerk shall notify the applicant, in writing, of scheduled public hearing
date(s), location and time and request the applicant to cause notice of such
hearing to be made as required by the act.
   E.   No sooner than ninety (90) days, but not longer than one hundred twenty
(120) days, from the date of receipt of the application, a public hearing shall
commence.
   F.   At any time prior to completion by the applicant of the presentation of
the applicant's factual evidence and an opportunity for cross examination by
the city and any participant, in accordance with the provisions of this
article, the applicant may file not more than one amended application. In such
a case, the time limitation for final action set forth in the environmental
protection act, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/39.2(e), as amended, shall be
extended for an additional period of ninety (90) days. The hearing officer
shall, in the hearing officer's discretion and to the extent reasonably
practicable, permit the city, the applicant and any other formal participant
(party) to file proposed findings of fact and conclusion of law.
   G.   Members of the public who participate in public comment shall submit
any exhibits to the city clerk they expect to use prior to the time designated
for the public to speak. At least three (3) copies of all such exhibits shall
be submitted. The applicant shall promptly be provided with one of the three
(3) copies.
   H.   Any additional exhibits used by the applicant that in any way
materially change the proposed design, location and/or operation of the
facility shall be considered an amendment to the application, and all sections
of this article pertaining to amendments shall take effect. (Ord. O-38-2005,
12-21-2005)
4-4D-9: RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   The city clerk shall receive all filings related to the hearings under
this article and, in cooperation with the hearing officer, shall collect and
maintain the record of proceedings. The record of proceedings shall include the
following documents:
      1.   The original application and any amendments filed with the city
clerk;
      2.   All written comments filed with the city clerk within the required
time frame;
      3.   All appearances, lists of witnesses, and other documents required to
be filed with the city clerk;
      4.   All exhibits entered into evidence at the time of the public
hearing;
      5.   All transcripts of testimony during the public hearing;
      6.   Any motions filed during the course of, or prior to, the public
hearing;
      7.   The hearing officer's written findings to the city council;
      8.   The resolutions scheduling the public hearing and containing the
final decision of the city council on the petition;
      9.   Such other documents reasonably deemed by the hearing officer to be
necessary.
   B.   The city clerk shall be responsible for certifying all copies of the
public record.
   C.   Although late filed public comments are not part of the public record
pursuant to this article, they shall be retained by the city clerk with any
evidence of its date of filing, such as the city clerk's date stamp copy or the
postmark, if the written comment was mailed. (Ord. O-38-2005, 12-21-2005)
4-4D-10: DECISION BY THE CITY:
   A.   The city council shall make a decision based upon the record from the
public hearing and its review of the findings and recommendations. The decision
of the city council shall be by duly adopted resolution, in writing, specifying
the reasons for the decision, such reasons to be in conformity with section
39.2(a) of the act. In granting site location approval, the city council may
impose such conditions as may be reasonable and necessary to accomplish the
purposes of the act. Such decision shall be available for public inspection at
the office of the city clerk, and may be copied upon payment of the actual cost
of reproduction. If there is no final action by the city council within one
hundred eighty (180) days (or 270 days if an amended application has been
filed) after the filing of the application for site location approval, the
applicant may deem the application approved.
   B.   Within seven (7) days after the city council approves or denies the
application, the decision, and basis for the decision, shall be provided to the
applicant in writing, and shall be further forwarded to the agency by the city
clerk.
   C.   An applicant may not file an application for site location approval
which is substantially the same as a request which was disapproved, pursuant to
a finding against the applicant under any criteria of section 39.2(a) of the
act, within two (2) years of the time of the disapproval. (Ord. O-38-2005, 12-
21-2005)
CHAPTER 5
SMOKING RESTRICTIONS 1
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Smoking In Public Places, Places Of Employment And Governmental Vehicles
Prohibited
4-5-3: Posting Of Signs; Removal Of Ashtrays
4-5-4: Smoking Prohibited In Student Dormitories
4-5-5: Designation Of Other Nonsmoking Areas
4-5-6: Exemptions
4-5-7: Entrances, Exits, Windows, And Ventilation Intakes
4-5-8: Enforcement; Complaints
4-5-9: Violations
4-5-10: Injunctions
4-5-11: Discrimination Prohibited
 
Notes
1 1. Per the smoke free Illinois act, 410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for
consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than ten percent
(10%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises.
"Bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges,
adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
DEPARTMENT: The department of public health.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE: Any electronically actuated device which in operation
causes the user to exhale any smoke, vapor or other substance other than those
produced by unenhanced human exhalation. "Electronic cigarette" includes any
such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an
electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an
electronic pipe, an electronic hookah or under any other product name or
descriptor. The term "electronic cigarette" does not include any asthma inhaler
or other device that has been specifically approved by the United States food
and drug administration.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct
or indirect monetary wages or profits, or a person who volunteers his or her
services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or
partially enclosed with: a) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, or
b) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that
extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies
and corridors.
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium,
gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink,
bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or
other events.
GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES: Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the
Illinois gaming board rules of the Illinois administrative code.
GAMING FACILITY: An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of gaming
and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of
accruing business revenue.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of
diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes,
homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists
within these professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms,
hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare
facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer
that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during the course
of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of
employment, including a minimum distance, as set forth in section
4-5-7 of this chapter, of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows
that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms;
breakrooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or home
based business, unless used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, adult
care, or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a "place of
employment".
PRIVATE CLUB: A not for profit association that: a) has been in active and
continuous existence for at least three (3) years prior to the effective date
of the act, whether incorporated or not, b) is the owner, lessee, or occupant
of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all
times, c) is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic,
political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and d)
only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of
this definition, "private club" means an organization that is managed by a
board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members
at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution or both to govern
its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal
income tax as a club under 26 USC 501.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a
hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be
considered a private residence.
PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the
public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or in
part by private persons or entities, the state of Illinois, or any other public
entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a
minimum distance, as set forth in section of
4-5-7 of this chapter, of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows
that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited. A "public place" does not include a private residence unless the
private residence is used to provide licensed childcare, foster care or other
similar social service care on the premises. A "public place" includes, but is
not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial
establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls,
public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums,
enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools,
exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming
facilities, all government owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings
and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the state or state subcontract,
healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service
establishments, financial institutions, education facilities, ticket areas,
public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars,
taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than
seventy five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel,
resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodations
that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.
RESTAURANT:
   A.   An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops,
cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, that
gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, and
   B.   A kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere.
"Restaurant" includes a bar area within the restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than eighty
percent (80%) of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or
herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for buying
tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products
is merely incidental. "Retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco
department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment
with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling or exhaling of any
kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herb or the use of any
kind of electronic cigarette.
STATE AGENCY: Has the meaning formerly ascribed to it in subsection (a) of
section 3 of the Illinois purchasing act (now repealed).
UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Has the meaning ascribed to it in section 1 of
article VII of the Illinois constitution of 1970. (Ord. O-02-2008, 2-4-2008;
amd. Ord. O-13-2014, 4-21-2014)
4-5-2: SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES, PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT AND GOVERNMENTAL VEHICLES
PROHIBITED:
No person shall smoke in a public place or in any place of employment or within
fifteen feet (15') of any entrance to a public place or place of employment. No
person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the state or a
political subdivision of the state. Smoking is prohibited in indoor public
places and workplaces unless specifically exempted by section
4-5-6 of this chapter. (Ord. O-02-2008, 2-4-2008)
4-5-3: POSTING OF SIGNS; REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS:
   A.   "No Smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol, consisting
of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle
with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in each
public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this
chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that
place.
   B.   Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited
by this chapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly
stating that smoking is prohibited.
   C.   All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited
by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control
of the area. (Ord. O-02-2008, 2-4-2008)
4-5-4: SMOKING PROHIBITED IN STUDENT DORMITORIES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is prohibited in
any portion of the living quarters, including, but not limited to, sleeping
rooms, dining areas, restrooms, laundry areas, lobbies, and hallways, of a
building used in whole or in part as a student dormitory that is owned and
operated or otherwise utilized by a public or private institution of higher
education. (Ord. O-02-2008, 2-4-2008)
4-5-5: DESIGNATION OF OTHER NONSMOKING AREAS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any employer, owner,
occupant, lessee, operator, manager, or other person in control of any public
place or place of employment may designate a nonenclosed area of a public place
or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is
also prohibited provided that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall
conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in
subsections
4-5-3A and B of this chapter. (Ord. O-02-2008, 2-4-2008)
4-5-6: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is allowed in the
following areas:
   A.   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a childcare,
adult daycare, or healthcare facility or any other home based business open to
the public.
   B.   Retail tobacco stores as defined in section
4-5-1 of this chapter in operation prior to the effective date of the act. The
retail tobacco store shall annually file with the department by January 31 an
affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar
year that was derived from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and
cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and
related smoking accessories. Any retail tobacco store that begins operation
after the effective date of this chapter may only qualify for an exemption if
located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the business and smoke
from the business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited.
   C.   Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care
facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking
is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing
home.
   D.   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may
be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking
or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional
nonsmoking rooms. (Ord. O-02-2008, 2-4-2008)
4-5-7: ENTRANCES, EXITS, WINDOWS, AND VENTILATION INTAKES:
Smoking is prohibited within a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from
entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under this chapter so as to ensure
that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, exits, open
windows, or other means. (Ord. O-02-2008, 2-4-2008)
4-5-8: ENFORCEMENT; COMPLAINTS:
   A.   The Northlake police department shall enforce the provisions of the
act.
   B.   Any person may register a complaint with the Northlake police
department for a violation of this chapter. In addition any person may register
a complaint with the department of public health or a state certified local
public health department for a violation of this chapter. (Ord. O-02-2008, 2-4-
2008)
4-5-9: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who
violates section
4-5-2 of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to this section. Each day that a
violation occurs is a separate violation.
   B.   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under
section
4-5-2 of this chapter shall be fined in an amount that is not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or
place of employment that violates section
4-5-2 of this chapter shall be fined: 1) not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for the first violation, 2) not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for the second violation within one year after the first
violation, and 3) not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
for each additional violation within one year after the first violation.
   C.   Proceedings to enforce violations of this chapter may be initiated and
conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of this code
providing for administrative adjudication of code violations or by any other
means provided by law. (Ord. O-02-2008, 2-4-2008)
4-5-10: INJUNCTIONS:
The city of Northlake or any individual personally affected by repeated
violations may institute, in a circuit court of Cook County, an action to
enjoin violations of the act or this chapter. (Ord. O-02-2008, 2-4-2008)
4-5-11: DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED:
No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the
exercise of any rights afforded by the act or this chapter. (Ord. O-02-2008, 2-
4-2008)
CHAPTER 6
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Definition
4-6-2: Fireworks Restricted
4-6-3: Advertising Fireworks
4-6-4: Exemptions from Provisions
4-6-1: DEFINITION:
The term "fireworks" shall mean and include any explosive composition or any
substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by
explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation and shall include blank
cartridges, toy cannons in which explosives are used, the type of balloons
which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes,
skyrockets, Roman candles, sparklers, bombs or other fireworks of like
construction and any fireworks containing any explosive compound or any tablets
or other device containing any explosive substances or containing combustible
substances producing visual effects; provided, however, that the term
"fireworks" shall not include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices
in which paper caps containing twenty five one-hundredths (.025) grain or less
of explosive compound are used, providing they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion and toy
pistol paper caps which contain less than twenty one-hundredths (.020) grain of
explosive mixture. (Ord. 0-08-82, 5-14-82)
4-6-2: FIREWORKS RESTRICTED:
No person shall have, keep, store, use, manufacture, assemble, mix, sell,
handle or transport any fireworks; provided, however, that nothing in this
Chapter shall be held to apply to the possession or use of signaling devices
for current daily consumption by railroads, vessels and others requiring them
or to the possession, sale or use of normal stocks of flashlight compositions
by photographers or dealers in photographic supplies, and provided further,
that the City Council may issue permits for the display of fireworks under the
supervision of the Fire Inspector or of some person designated by him. (Ord. 0-
08-82, 5-14-82)
4-6-3: ADVERTISING FIREWORKS:
No person shall advertise, print, publish or cause to be advertised, printed or
published in any newspaper or other publication having a general circulation in
the City or which is sold or offered for sale within the City or by means of
any handbill, circular or poster any advertisement or notice of sale or
delivery within the City of any fireworks except to a person to whom a permit
has been issued. (Ord. 0-08-82, 5-14-82)
4-6-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Nothing contained in this Chapter dealing with fireworks shall be construed as
applying to the transportation of any article or thing shipped in conformity
with the regulations prescribed by the Interstate Commerce Commission nor as
applying to the military or naval forces of the United States. (Ord. 0-08-82,
5-14-82)
CHAPTER 7
HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
SECTION:
4-7-1: Definitions
4-7-2: Public Accommodations
4-7-3: Housing
4-7-4: Terms Defined
4-7-5: Solicitation Prohibited
4-7-6: Broker Responsibility
4-7-7: Nonsolicitation List
4-7-8: Human Rights Commission Established
4-7-9: Powers
4-7-10: Penalty
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this chapter, unless otherwise defined herein:
AGE: Chronological age of not less than forty (40) years.
DISABILITY:
   A.   A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more
of the major life activities of an individual;
   B.   A record of such an impairment; or
   C.   Being regarded as having such an impairment.
Excluded from this definition is an impairment relating to the illegal use,
possession or distribution of "controlled substances" as defined in schedules I
through V of the controlled substances act (21 USC 812).
GENDER IDENTITY: The actual or perceived appearance, expression, identity, or
behavior of a person as being male or female, whether or not that appearance,
expression, identity or behavior is different from that traditionally
associated with the person's designated sex at birth.
HOUSING STATUS: The type of housing in which individual resides, whether
publicly or privately owned; an individual's ownership status with respect to
the individual's residence; or the status of having or not having a fixed
residence.
MARITAL STATUS: The status of being single, married, divorced, separated or
widowed.
MILITARY DISCHARGE STATUS: The fact of having been discharged from the armed
forces of the United States, their reserve components or any national guard or
naval militia other than by a "dishonorable discharge".
NATIONAL ORIGIN: The place in which an individual or one of his or her
ancestors was born.
PARENTAL STATUS: The status of living with one or more dependent minors or
disabled children.
PERSON: One or more individuals; partnerships, associations or organizations;
labor organizations, labor unions, joint apprenticeship committees, or union
labor associations; corporations; recipients of city funds; legal
representatives, trust, trustees in bankruptcy or receivers; state governments
other than that of Illinois; or commercial operations or entities controlled by
governments other than those of Illinois or of the United States.
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: A person, place, business establishment or agency that
sells, leases, provides or offers any product, facility or service to the
general public in the city, regardless of ownership or operation: a) by a
public body or agency; b) for or without regard to profit; or c) for a fee or
not for a fee. "Public accommodation" also means an institution, club,
association or other place of accommodation in the city, whether or not open to
the general public, that has more than four hundred (400) members and provides
regular meal service and regularly receives payment for dues, fees,
accommodations, facilities or services from or on behalf of nonmembers for the
furtherance of trade or business. "Public accommodation" also means any
products, facilities or services of a nonpublic accommodation that are made
available in the city to the general public or to the customers or patrons of
another establishment that is a public accommodation.
RELIGION: All aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief,
or the actual identification with or perceived identification with a religion.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION: The status or expression, whether actual or perceived, of
heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality.
SOURCE OF INCOME: The lawful manner by which an individual supports himself or
herself and his or her dependents.
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION: Discrimination against a person because of the actual
or perceived status, practice or expression of that person's race, color, sex,
age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation,
marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income,
gender identity or housing status; or the actual or perceived association with
such a person. (Ord. O-12-2010, 4-5-2010)
4-7-2: PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS:
   A.   Prohibition: No person that owns, leases, rents, operates, manages, or
in any manner controls a public accommodation in the city shall withhold, deny,
curtail, limit, or discriminate concerning the full use of such public
accommodation by any individual on the basis of unlawful discrimination.
   B.   Exceptions: The human rights commission as defined in this chapter may
adopt rules specifying any additional exceptions to the prohibition contained
in this section based on bona fide considerations of public policy.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, nothing
contained in this section shall require any person who does not participate in
the federal section 8 housing assistance program (42 USC 1437f) to accept any
subsidy, payment assistance, voucher, or contribution under or in connection
with such program or to lease or rent to any tenant or prospective tenant who
is relying on such a subsidy, payment assistance, contribution, or voucher for
payment of part of the rent for such place of accommodation.
   C.   Sexual Harassment: No person who owns, leases, rents, operates,
manages, or in any manner controls a public accommodation shall engage in
sexual harassment affecting access to, participation in, or the full use of
such public accommodation. "Sexual harassment" means any unwelcome sexual
advance, request for sexual favors, or conduct of a sexual nature when: 1)
submission to such conduct is an explicit or implicit term or condition of an
individual's access to, participation in, or full use of a public
accommodation; or 2) submission to or rejection of such conduct by an
individual is used as the basis for any decision affecting the individual's
access to, participation in, or full use of a public accommodation; or 3) such
conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an
individual's access to, participation in, or full use of any public
accommodation or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
with respect thereto. (Ord. O-12-2010, 4-5-2010)
4-7-3: HOUSING:
   A.   Definitions: Whenever used in this section:
PERSON: Any person that is also an owner, lessor, sublease, assignor, managing
agent, or other individual, firm, or corporation having the right to sell,
rent, lease, or sublease any housing unit within the city, or any agent,
broker, or other individual working on behalf of any such individual, firm, or
corporation.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION: The sale, exchange, rental, occupancy, lease,
sublease, or lease renewal of real property for residential purposes in the
city or the provision of services or utilities in connection with such sale,
exchange, rental, occupancy, lease, sublease, or lease renewal. "Real estate
transaction" also means with respect to activity conducted or property located
in the city, the brokering or appraising of residential real property in the
city and the making, purchasing, or guaranteeing of loans or mortgages or
providing any other financial assistance either: 1) for purchasing,
constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling or 2) secured by
residential real property.
   B.   Prohibitions:
      1.   Terms And Conditions: No person shall make any distinction,
discrimination, or restriction in the price, terms, conditions, or privileges
of any real estate transaction, including the decision to engage in or renew
any real estate transaction, on the basis of unlawful discrimination.
      2.   Discriminatory Communications: No person shall publish, circulate,
issue, or display, or cause to be published, circulated, issued, or displayed,
any communication, notice, advertisement, sign or other writing of any kind
relating to a real estate transaction which will indicate or express any
unlawful limitation or discrimination on the basis of unlawful discrimination.
      3.   Listings: No person shall deliberately and knowingly refuse
examination of any listing of residential real property within the city to any
individual because of unlawful discrimination.
      4.   Representations: No person shall deliberately and knowingly
represent to an individual that residential real property is not available for
inspection, sale, rental, or lease in the city when in fact it is available, or
fail to bring a residential real estate listing in the city to an individual's
attention, or refuse to permit a person to inspect residential real property in
the city because of unlawful discrimination.
      5.   Blockbusting: No person shall solicit for sale, lease, or listing
for sale or lease, residential real property within the city on the grounds of
loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of
any individual or individuals of any particular race, color, sex, age,
religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital
status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, gender
identity, or housing status.
      6.   Encouragement Of Blockbusting: No person shall distribute or cause
to be distributed written material or statements designed to induce any owner
of residential real property in the city to sell or lease his, her, or its
property because of any prospective change in the race, color, sex, age,
religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital
status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, gender
identity, or housing status of individuals in the neighborhood.
      7.   Creating Alarm: No person shall intentionally create alarm among
residents of any community within the city by transmitting communication in any
manner, including a telephone call whether or not conversation thereby ensues,
with a design to induce any person within the city to sell or lease his or her
residential real property within the city because of the present or prospective
entry into the vicinity of the property of any individual or individuals of any
particular race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin,
ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, military
discharge status, source of income, gender identity, or housing status.
   C.   Exceptions: The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to any of
the following:
      1.   Age: Restricting rental or sale of a housing accommodation to an
individual of a certain age group: a) when such housing accommodation is
authorized, approved, financed, or subsidized in whole or in part for the
benefit of that age group by a unit of state, local, or federal government; or
b) when the duly recorded initial declaration of a condominium or community
association limits such housing accommodations to individuals fifty (50) years
of age or older, provided that an individual or members of the household of an
individual owning or renting a unit in such housing accommodation prior to the
recording of the initial declaration shall not be deemed to be in violation of
the age restriction as long as the individual or household member continues to
own or reside in the housing accommodation.
      2.   Religion: Limitation by a religious organization, association, or
society, or any not for profit institution or organization operated,
supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, of the sale, rental, or occupancy of a dwelling which
it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to individuals of the
same religion, or from giving preference to such individuals.
      3.   Single Sex: Restricting the rental of rooms in a housing
accommodation to individuals of one sex. The determination of an individual's
sex or gender shall be based upon the sex or gender of that individual as
reflected on any official identification of that individual recognized by the
state of Illinois, including a driver's license or state identification card.
      4.   Private Rooms: Rental of a room or rooms in a private home by an
owner if he or she or a member of his or her family resides therein or, while
absent for a period of not more than twelve (12) months, if he or she or a
member of his or her family intends to return to reside therein.
      5.   Housing Assistant Program: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in this chapter, nothing contained in this section shall require any
person who does not participate in the federal section 8 housing assistance
program (42 USC 1437f) to accept any subsidy, payment assistance, voucher, or
contribution under or in connection with such program or to lease or rent to
any tenant or prospective tenant who is relying on such a subsidy, payment
assistance, contribution, or voucher for payment of part of the rent for such
housing accommodation.
   D.   Sexual Harassment: No person shall engage in sexual harassment in any
real estate transaction. "Sexual harassment" means any unwelcome sexual
advance, request for sexual favors, or conduct of a sexual nature when: 1)
submission to such conduct is an explicit or implicit term or condition of an
individual's real estate transaction; or 2) submission to or rejection of such
conduct by an individual is used as the basis for any decision affecting the
individual's real estate transaction; or 3) such conduct has the purpose or
effect of substantially interfering with an individual's real estate
transaction or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment with
respect thereto. (Ord. O-12-2010, 4-5-2010)
4-7-4: TERMS DEFINED:
The following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them for the purposes
of this section to section
4-7-7 of this chapter:
ABSOLUTE LIABILITY: A person may be guilty of an offense in this chapter
without acting with intent, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence.
AGENT: Any person acting or attempting to act on behalf of another person.
BROKER: The meaning ascribed to it in the real estate license act of 1983, as
amended 1 .
OCCUPANT: Any person who lives, dwells, or resides at any real estate.
OWNER: Any person having any legal or equitable title to all or a portion of
any real estate. It shall be sufficient for purposes of this chapter that one
owner of any real estate take an action, and nothing herein shall require or
imply that all owners of any real estate must take an action.
PERSON: The meaning ascribed to it in the criminal code of 1961, as amended 2 .
REAL ESTATE: The meaning ascribed to it in the real estate license act of 1983,
as amended 3 .
SALESPERSON: The meaning ascribed to it in the real estate license act of 1983,
as amended 4 .
SOLICIT: Any communication by or on behalf of an agent with an owner or
occupant of real estate:
   A.   Which is intended to induce the sale, rental, or listing for sale or
rental of real estate, or which is intended to offer or promote services in
connection with the sale, rental, or listing for sale or rental of real estate
(including market analysis); and
   B.   Which is carried out by means of:
      1.   In person contacts; or
      2.   Written material mailed or delivered, such as direct mail, leaflets
or pamphlets; or
      3.   Telephonic contacts.
For the purposes of this chapter, the term solicit shall not refer to
communication carried out by means of print or electronic media or general
circulation, such as newspaper, radio, television or yellow pages which is not
intended for or targeted at any specific real estate or area of real estate.
(Ord. O-12-2010, 4-5-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 455/1 et seq.
2 2. 720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
3 3. 225 ILCS 455/1 et seq.
4 4. 225 ILCS 455/1 et seq.
4-7-5: SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any agent to solicit the owner or occupant of real
estate at any time after an owner of that real estate has filed with the clerk
a notification that he does not desire to be solicited. An agent shall be
absolutely liable for any violation of this section. (Ord. O-12-2010, 4-5-2010)
4-7-6: BROKER RESPONSIBILITY:
A broker shall be absolutely liable for and responsible for the actions of any
employee or salesperson who is affiliated with, employed by, or has a contract
(written or unwritten) as an independent contractor with the broker. In the
event that such an employee or salesperson is guilty of any violation of this
chapter, then the broker shall also be guilty of the same and may be prosecuted
therefor. (Ord. O-12-2010, 4-5-2010)
4-7-7: NONSOLICITATION LIST:
The clerk shall prepare a list of all owners filing a notification not to be
solicited and shall make such list available without charge to any person. At
least annually the clerk shall make available and send the current list, or
updates of old lists, to all persons who have filed their name and address with
the clerk requesting a copy of the same. It shall not be any defense to a
violation of section
4-7-5 of this chapter that the person has not obtained a list from the clerk.
It shall be the responsibility of all persons to make themselves aware of the
current list maintained by the clerk. (Ord. O-12-2010, 4-5-2010)
4-7-8: HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
   A.   There is hereby established a human rights commission which shall
consist of three (3) members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent
of the city council. One or more members of the city council may serve on the
commission.
   B.   The term of office shall be three (3) years, except that the first
appointments shall be appointed for a term of one, two (2) and three (3) years.
   C.   Members shall receive such compensation as is provided by the city
council; however, no elected official shall receive additional compensation for
serving as a member. (Ord. O-12-2010, 4-5-2010)
4-7-9: POWERS:
The commission shall have the following powers:
   A.   To employ such personnel as authorized by the city council.
   B.   To adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   To hear and decide by majority vote complaints filed before it.
   D.   To approve settlements of violations.
   E.   To cooperate with public and private organizations, including the
Illinois human rights commission and the department of human rights.
   F.   To hold public hearings to obtain information from the general public
on the effectiveness of protection against unlawful discrimination afforded by
this chapter and to accept public recommendations concerning the implementation
of this chapter.
   G.   To revoke the city license of any violator.
   H.   To terminate any public contract of the city with a violator and to bar
a violator from any future public contract with the city. (Ord. O-12-2010, 4-5-
2010)
4-7-10: PENALTY:
Any person guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense. (Ord. O-12-2010, 4-5-2010)
CHAPTER 8
TREE REMOVAL
SECTION:
4-8-1: Removal Of Dead Or Dying Tree
4-8-1: REMOVAL OF DEAD OR DYING TREE:
   A.   Cost Sharing Program: Subject to the terms and conditions established
in this section, a property owner who meets the eligibility standards of this
section may apply to the city for reimbursement of a portion of the costs
associated with the removal of dead or dying trees located on the owner's
property.
   B.   Terms And Conditions Of The Program:
      1.   Participants must meet the eligibility standards established by this
section.
      2.   The maximum reimbursement for the removal of a dead or dying tree
shall be fifty percent (50%) of the cost of removing a tree not to exceed two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per tree. The city shall record a lien providing
for the repayment of the amount of the reimbursement upon the sale of the
owner's residence.
      3.   Only those costs associated with the removal of a dead or dying tree
shall be eligible for reimbursement.
      4.   Reimbursements shall be available only if the city has allocated
funds for such purpose in the annual budget. The city retains the sole and
exclusive discretion to determine, for each fiscal year, whether and to what
extent the program shall be funded.
      5.   The cost sharing program is a voluntary undertaking of the city.
      6.   The city reserves the right and shall be entitled to terminate or
suspend the cost sharing program at any time for any reason.
      7.   The cost sharing program shall not be construed as an assumption of
responsibility for, or legal liability arising from the removal or failure to
move any tree.
      8.   The cost sharing program shall not be construed as a waiver of any
statutory or common law defense or immunity the city may be entitled to raise
in response to any action or claim of liability for damage to property or
injury to person arising from the removal or failure to remove any tree.
   C.   Eligibility Standards: No person shall be eligible for reimbursement
under this cost sharing program unless all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The applicant must be the owner(s) of record of a single- family
home.
      2.   The reimbursement request must be for the removal of a dead or dying
tree as determined by the city in its sole discretion.
      3.   The property owner, or a qualified contractor acting on the owner's
behalf, shall procure all necessary permits to remove the dead or dying tree.
The work shall comply with all applicable provisions of this code. The property
owner, or the owner's contractor, shall be responsible for scheduling all
necessary inspections. No reimbursement will be made for work that does not
pass all required inspections.
      4.   The application for reimbursement shall be submitted with the permit
application for the removal of the dead or dying tree.
      5.   The application for reimbursement shall include a waiver, signed by
the owner of record, waiving any and all claims against the city for damage to
property or injuries to persons of any kind arising from the removal of the
dead or dying tree. The form of the waiver shall be prescribed by the city.
      6.   No reimbursement shall be made until the work has been completed and
has passed the final inspection.
      7.   No reimbursement shall be made unless the property owner provides
the city with evidence, in the form of a signed and sworn contractor's
statement, certifying that the contractor has been paid in full for the
completed work by the property owner and the property owner has executed the
notice and acknowledgment of lien prescribed by the city requiring the owner to
repay the money advanced by the city to the owner pursuant to this section.
(Ord. O-14-2016, 10-3-2016)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Department Created; Members
5-1-2: Chief Of Police
5-1-3: Qualifications Of Police Officers
5-1-4: Bonds
5-1-5: Duties And Conduct Of Department Members
5-1-6: Serving Process
5-1-7: Witness Fees
5-1-8: Rules And Regulations
5-1-8-1: Chief Of Police Rules And Regulations
5-1-8-2: Department Rules And Regulations
5-1-9: Resisting, Impersonating Police
5-1-10: Police Dogs
5-1-11: Shift Commander
5-1-12: Part Time Police Officers
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; MEMBERS:
There is hereby created the Police Department of the City. The department shall
consist of Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of Police, Commanders and such other
sworn and nonsworn personnel as shall be determined by the City Council in the
Annual Budget Ordinance. (Ord. O-20-2013, 10-7-2013)
5-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Appointment: The Police Department shall be under the charge of the
Chief of Police who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council.
   B.   Duties:
      1.   Generally: The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the
performance by the Police Department of all its functions and all persons who
are members of the department shall serve subject to the orders of the Chief of
Police. He/she shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the
activities of the Police Department as may be required by statute or by the
City Council.
      2.   Custodian Of Stolen Property: The Chief of Police shall be the
custodian for the City of all lost and abandoned or stolen property and shall
deal with the same in accordance with the ordinances of the City and Statutes
of the State. (Ord. O-20-2013, 10-7-2013)
   C.   Deputy Chiefs Of Police, Commander And Administrative Assistant:
      1.   Positions Created: There is created within the Police Department the
positions of two (2) Deputy Chiefs of Police, Commander, Administrative
Commander and Administrative Assistant to the Chief of Police. One Deputy Chief
of Police and the Administrative Commander shall be a sworn or nonsworn
position at the discretion of the Chief of Police.
      2.   Appointment: The Deputy Chiefs of Police, Commander, Administrative
Commander and Administrative Assistant positions shall be appointed by the
Chief of Police with the approval of the Mayor.
      3.   Duties: The Deputy Chiefs of Police, Commander, Administrative
Commander and the Administrative Assistant shall perform such duties as
prescribed by ordinance and the Chief of Police. (Ord. O-06-2019, 4-1-2019)
5-1-3: QUALIFICATIONS OF POLICE OFFICERS:
   A.   Residency: Police officers shall establish residency in Illinois upon
their starting date with the City Police Department.
   B.   Starting Salary: The starting salary for a police officer shall be
equal to ninety percent (90%) of the salary paid to a police officer with one
year of experience. However, any applicants who have completed three (3) or
more years of full time employment as a police officer shall be hired at a
salary equal to the salary paid to a police officer with three (3) years'
experience.
   C.   College Requirement: An applicant for the position of police officer
shall have sixty (60) hours of college credit from an accredited college or
university at the time the application is submitted. This requirement is
subject to the exceptions contained in subsections D, E and F of this section.
   D.   Previous Full Time Officer: The college requirement is waived if the
applicant has previously completed two (2) years as a full time police officer
with another department. (Ord. O-23-2000, 7-17-2000)
   E.   Part Time Eligibility: Part time police officers and community service
officers who have been employed by the Northlake Police Department for six (6)
months or who have six hundred (600) hours of work with the Northlake Police
Department are eligible to have the college requirement waived upon the
recommendation of the Police Chief. (Ord. O-15-2003, 4-21-2003)
   F.   Military Preference: The college requirement is waived for those
applicants having two (2) years of full time military service and an honorable
discharge.
   G.   Age: An applicant must be twenty one (21) years of age at the time of
submitting an application, and must be no more than thirty five (35) years of
age at the time of hiring.
   H.   Employment Contract: Police officers must sign an employment contract
of the City upon receipt of a conditional offer of employment.
   I.   Extra Points: A total of five (5) extra points shall be awarded to
applicants to be added to their final point total on officer eligibility list
for any of the following:
Two (2) year criminal justice degree.
Bachelor degree, any field.
Completion of two (2) years of full time employment as a police officer.
Six hundred (600) hours completed as a part time officer for the Northlake
Police Department. (Ord. O-23-2000, 7-17-2000)
5-1-4: BONDS:
Before entering upon their respective duties, members of the Police Department
shall execute a surety company bond to the City in the following amounts 1 :
 
Chief of Police   $2,000.00
All other members 500.00
 
(Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-
2014)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-10-2 of this Code.
5-1-5: DUTIES AND CONDUCT OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
   A.   Duties: Members of the Police Department, unless otherwise provided,
shall enforce the ordinances of the City and all applicable statutes and shall
preserve the order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators
thereof.
   B.   Conduct: Every member of the Police Department shall conduct himself/
herself in a proper and law abiding manner, at all times, avoid the use of
unnecessary force and shall obey the orders and directions of his/her superior.
(Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-
2014)
5-1-6: SERVING PROCESS:
No member of the Police Department shall serve any process except on command of
the Chief of Police. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993;
Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
5-1-7: WITNESS FEES:
Members of the Police Department shall appear as witnesses whenever necessary
in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any State or Federal
law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service as witness in any
action or suit to which the City is a party and fees paid for such services
shall be turned over to the Chief of Police who shall deposit the same with the
Finance Director. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord.
O-06-2014, 3-3-2014; Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
5-1-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
5-1-8-1: CHIEF OF POLICE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the
conduct and guidance of the members of the Police Department as he/she shall
deem advisable. All such rules established by the Chief of Police must be
approved by the City Council. Such rules shall be binding on such members. The
respective rank and grade of the members, as to superiority within the
department, may be prescribed by regulation. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd.
1992 Code; Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
5-1-8-2: DEPARTMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following "Rules and Regulations of the Police Department of the City of
Northlake, Illinois", are hereby adopted and approved by the City Council:
(Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
   A.   Goals Of Department: The goals of department members are:
      1.   Maintenance of the highest standards of integrity and ethics.
      2.   Excellence in the performance of duty.
   B.   General Rules Of Conduct:
Rule 1. State Law To Govern: In the event any of the rules and regulations
adopted herein by the Mayor and City Council shall be in conflict with any
Statutes of the State of Illinois, the Statutes of the State of Illinois shall
govern, and such rules and regulations as may be in conflict are to be read and
interpreted in accordance with the State Statutes. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971)
Rule 2. Knowledge Of Rules: Members of the Police Department shall acquaint
themselves with all State laws, City ordinances and rules and regulations of
the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners 1  and rules of the Chief of Police
pertaining to the Police Department and shall strictly comply with same.
Ignorance of the rules of the Police Department or Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners shall be no excuse for violation of same.
Rule 3. Conduct: No member of the Police Department shall conduct himself/
herself in a manner unbecoming a police officer or employee of the Police
Department. All members of the Police Department shall at all times conduct
themselves as ladies and gentlemen and shall be courteous in their conversation
and actions with citizens, and no member of the Police Department shall conduct
himself/herself in a careless or malicious manner whereby a citizen is injured
or damage caused to his property. No police officer will associate with or keep
company with a known criminal or ex-convict. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971; amd. Ord.
O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
Rule 4. Obey Orders: All police officers shall promptly and speedily obey and
execute all orders of a superior officer and strictly adhere to the chain of
command whenever possible. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971)
Rule 5. Obey Aides: All members of the Police Department shall observe and
enforce the order of an acting superior officer in charge.
Rule 6. Courtesy: Subordinates shall recognize the authority vested in superior
officers and shall observe such authority on all occasions. All members of the
Police Department, when addressing one another, shall use the full title and at
no time shall use abbreviations.
Rule 7. Police Officers Always On Duty: Members of the Police Department shall
be considered as being on duty at all times. They shall be subject to special
calls and special details, upon the order of a superior officer, at any time of
the day or night, whether on or off duty; provided, however, that certain hours
shall be designated as the working hours for each member of the Police
Department for the performance of police duty. It shall be the duty of all
members of the Police Department to respond and perform police duty at any time
of the day or night, whether on or off duty, where he/she has the knowledge
that an emergency exists and his/her services are required, whether notified by
a superior officer or not.
Rule 8. Absence From Duty: When a police officer is absent from his/her
regularly assigned duty, he/she shall, in all cases, fill out the absentee
report and file same with his/her commanding officer upon returning to duty. If
absence is due to illness, notice of such illness shall be given by telephone
to the police department not less than two (2) hours before regularly assigned
tour of duty, and a doctor's report, if required, shall be attached to the
absentee report. When disability prevents the absent person from making out
this report, the chief of police shall be responsible for the completion and
filing of this report, stating in detail the reasons for the inability of the
absent person. Trading of days off shall not be permitted except upon consent
of the chief of police.
Rule 9. Unauthorized Absence: If no proper notification of absence is given,
and a member of the police department is absent for five (5) successive
calendar days, he/she shall be deemed to have resigned and shall forfeit all of
his/her rights and privileges as a member of the police department. At the
conclusion of the fifth day of absence, the chief of police shall notify the
board of fire and police commissioners, in writing, and the board, after due
consideration, shall notify the person involved, and he/she shall be dropped
from the payroll of the city.
Rule 10. Furlough Requests: A furlough is an authorized absence from duty by a
police officer, without pay, for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, for
reasons of health and welfare to himself/herself or his/her immediate family.
Requests for furloughs shall be considered by the board of fire and police
commissioners upon receipt of a written request (3 copies) giving full details
and properly approved by the chief of police. A man/woman on furlough shall not
engage in any other employment and shall notify the chief of police for
reassignment three (3) days before the expiration of his/her furlough. If he/
she shall fail to return to his/her duty at the expiration of his/her furlough
for five (5) consecutive calendar days, he/she shall be dropped from the police
department after due consideration by the board of fire and police
commissioners.
Rule 11. Leaving Post: No member of the police department shall leave his/her
post without being regularly relieved or without permission.
Rule 12. Attention To Duty: All members of the police department shall be
attentive to their duties.
Rule 13. Negligence: No member of the police department shall neglect his/her
duty or duties, perform them in an inefficient or careless manner, ever mindful
that such carelessness or inefficient performance of duty may cause serious
results.
Rule 14. Asleep While On Duty: No member of the police department shall sleep
while on duty under any conditions.
Rule 15. False Report: No member of the police department shall make a false
report, either verbal or written.
Rule 16. Reasons For Discipline: Members of the police department shall be
subject to disciplinary procedure for the excessive or habitual: (Res. R-2-71,
1-12-1971; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
      1.   Use of drugs, such as:
         a.   Narcotics
         b.   Sedatives in excess
         c.   Antihistamines in excess
         d.   Stimulants - excessive or chronic use of benzedrine or dexedrine
         e.   Drug sensitivity
      2.   Alcohol - chronic or excessive use. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971)
Rule 17A. Driving Of Police Motor Vehicle; Accidents: No member of the police
department shall drive any motor vehicle in a careless, reckless or malicious
manner. In case of an accident, he/she shall, as soon as possible, make out a
written report to the officer in charge of his/her shift, stating the nature of
business at the time of the accident, giving the date, time, place and cause,
the names and addresses of all people involved, the names and addresses of all
witnesses, what disposition was made of the injured and what damage there was
to his/her assigned vehicle or to any other property involved. In case the
driver of the police vehicle is unable to make out this report, then the
officer in charge of the shift shall be responsible for investigating and
making out this report.
Rule 17B. Investigation Of Accidents: Commanding officers of the shift where a
police accident takes place shall immediately put into action a separate
personal investigation, and this written report shall be personally put before
the chief of police as soon as possible with all pertinent information thereof
and what action was taken, if any.
Rule 18. Residence And Telephone: All members of the police department shall
notify the chief of police of their address and telephone number. They shall
notify the chief of police and the board of fire and police commissioners of
any change in their residence address or telephone number. All members are
required to have a telephone.
Rule 19. Discipline: Members of the police department shall not use coarse,
profane or insolent language in their conversation with citizens or members of
the police department, shall at all times be clean and neat in their
appearance, shall be punctual and shall promptly comply with all the rules and
regulations of the police department. Superior officers shall be responsible
for the bad conduct of their subordinates and shall be responsible for
instituting corrective and disciplinary action and shall report all violations
of the rules and regulations of the police department to the chief of police in
writing.
Rule 20. Interference Of Discipline: No member of the police department shall
affiliate himself/herself with a clique or group of members of the department,
the result of which activity or whose purpose is to disturb and interfere with
the orderly procedure of department business.
Rule 21. Insubordination: Members of the police department shall not be
insubordinate or disrespectful to a superior officer. In all cases of
insubordination, it shall be mandatory of the superior to immediately file a
written report (3 copies) with the chief of police. All members of the police
department shall be subject to the orders of the their superior officers and
shall observe and comply with the same.
Rule 22. Criticizing: Members of the police department shall not discuss or
criticize, publicly or in private, the personal habits, religious beliefs,
character or conduct or the official actions of other members of the police
department. Constructive criticism is welcomed by your chief of police.
Rule 23. Daily Bulletin: All members of the police department shall carefully
read the duty book daily and shall observe the instructions therein contained
relating to the duties of their positions. Special attention shall be given to
the descriptions of criminals wanted and of missing persons and property.
Rule 24. Loitering In Police Station: No persons other than those transacting
police business shall be permitted in or about the police station or building
of the police department. Police officers shall not lounge or appear to sleep
in or about the police station or squad cars at any time.
Rule 25. Name And Number: Members of the police department shall give their
name, rank and star number when requested.
Rule 26. Not To Give Out Information: No member of the police department shall
give out or release any information concerning the affairs or business of the
police department without the consent of the chief of police.
Rule 27. Communications To Other Departments Prohibited: No member of the
police department shall communicate, in any manner whatsoever relative to work
manners, with any city officials without first receiving permission from the
chief of police.
Rule 28. Correspondence Requests: A copy of all correspondence or requests to
the board of fire and police commissioners by any member of the police
department shall be first channeled through the chief of police, and the chief
of police shall sign the letter to be presented to the board of fire and police
commissioners. He/she may also note his/her comments if he/she so desires.
Rule 29. Leaving City: No member of the police department shall leave the city
limits during duty hours except on official business. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971;
amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
Rule 30. Use Of Police Motor Vehicles For Personal Business: The use of police
motor vehicles for personal business is prohibited under any conditions. Police
motor vehicles must be used strictly for police business, and no riders shall
be permitted who are not in the performance of official police duties.
   C.   Police Vehicles And Crews:
Rule 31. Care Of Vehicles: Police officers in charge of automobiles shall be
responsible for keeping vehicles in a neat and clean condition and fully
supplied at all times with the required equipment and if same is not found in
perfect condition, shall at once report to their commanding officer. They shall
see that caution is exercised by chauffeurs while on the street and report
recklessness. They shall make the required reports without delay.
Rule 32. Duties Of Officers In Charge Of Automobile And Crew: Police officers
in charge of automobile crews patrolling zones or districts shall be
responsible for the proper performance of patrol duty, and the senior regular
police officer shall be in charge.
Rule 33. Accidents: Whenever vehicles or other property are damaged or persons
are injured by police vehicles, the police officer in charge shall designate a
police officer to remain and render assistance, ascertain the exact extent of
the damage to property and the injury to persons and submit a full report of
same to his/her commanding officer. The commanding officer shall make a
thorough investigation and file charges where police chauffeurs are at fault.
Rule 34. Duties Of Drivers: Drivers shall be responsible for the proper working
condition of police vehicles during their tour of duty. Drivers shall respond
to calls promptly and expediently as safety will permit. They shall not drive
faster than the legal speed limit, except in the immediate pursuit of criminals
or other cases of urgent necessity. They shall be governed by orders relating
to the proper care of police vehicles and submit the required reports. (Res. R-
2-71, 1-12-1971)
Rule 35. Special Training: It shall be the duty of all members of the police
department to fully cooperate and submit themselves for further training as
prescribed by their superior officers, such as first aid, civilian defense
programs and such other training that may be considered necessary.
Rule 36. Neglect Of Duty: No member of the police department shall neglect any
duty or fail to perform the duties required of the police department in the
rules and regulations contained herein. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971; amd. Ord. O-
06-2014, 3-3-2014)
Rule 37. Radio Communications: Radio communications shall be used for official
business only. Radio conversation shall be in a direct, business like manner.
The use of disrespectful slurring or profane language is prohibited. (Res. R-2-
71, 1-12-1971)
Rule 38. Appear As A Witness: Members of the police department, subpoenaed or
requested to appear for the defense or in the prosecution in any court
proceeding, shall immediately report to the chief of police for appropriate
action.
Rule 39. Accept Rewards: No member of the police department shall receive or
accept any reward or gift from any person, firm, corporation, association,
society, lodge, political party or other body of persons for service rendered
or to be rendered as a member of the police department except regularly posted
rewards which shall, in all cases, be approved first by the chief of police
before their acceptance. Should rewards or gifts come into your possession
under conditions beyond your control, the chief of police shall immediately be
notified and he/she shall make such disposition as he/she shall see fit.
Rule 40. Accept Presents: No member of the police department shall accept any
fee, reward or gift of any kind from persons arrested or from any friend in his
behalf while he is in custody or after his release or discharge. Members of the
police department shall not accept presents or gifts from groups, clubs,
associates, societies, citizens, lodges or political parties.
Rule 41. Bribes: No member of the police department shall accept bribes of
money, gifts or other articles of apparent or actual value.
Rule 42. Soliciting Of Funds; Donations; Gifts: No member of the police
department shall solicit funds, donations, gifts, etc., or cause his/her name
to be used or authorize any organization or person to solicit funds, donations
or gifts in his/her behalf, for any purpose whatsoever, without first getting
the written permission of the chief of police and the written approval of the
board of fire and police commissioners.
Rule 43. Debts: Members of the police department shall honor all just
obligations and indebtedness owed by such members, and said member shall not
incur or become liable for obligations which he/she, in the reasonable course
of events, could not contemplate meeting at maturity.
Correspondence regarding nonpayment of debts may be forwarded to the board of
fire and police commissioners at the discretion of the chief of police. (Res.
R-2-71, 1-12-1971; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
Rule 44. Wage Assignment: Wages of any police officer shall not be assignable
by wage assignment or otherwise. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971)
Rule 45. Use Of Intoxicants: Members of the police department shall not drink
intoxicating liquor while on duty or while they have firearms or weapons in
their possession.
Rule 46. Intoxication: No member of the police department shall become
intoxicated while off duty or drink excessively which may lead to improper
conduct before the public or any time while in uniform.
Rule 47. Altercations: Members of the police department shall refrain from
physical altercations, except in line of duty, and shall not maltreat any
person or prisoner.
Rule 48. Political Activity: No member of the police department shall engage in
political activity contrary to the provisions of the United States Code or
during regular working hours or while wearing the uniform or any part of the
uniform of a police officer of the police department. No member of the police
department shall use or threaten to use the influence or authority of his/her
position to coerce or persuade any course of political action. No member of the
police department shall be required to work or make contributions in behalf of
any political party or any candidate for political office.
Rule 49. Promotion: No officer or member of the police department shall
directly or indirectly solicit the support of any person or persons in order to
effect his/her promotion. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-
2014)
Rule 50. Game Of Chance: Police officers shall not engage in any games of
chance for stakes or wagers while on or off duty. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971)
Rule 51. Uniform: Police officers shall dress in full uniform during their tour
of duty and when attending to police business such as court hearings, trial
board cases, etc., unless excused by the chief of police. Uniforms shall be
worn in a clean, neat appearance at all times.
Rule 52. Uniforms And Specifications: The chief of police shall, from time to
time, supply members of the police department with the specifications and the
requirements for uniforms and other police equipment. Socks shall be solid
black unless otherwise specified by the chief of police. All uniforms shall be
inspected and approved by the chief of police.
Rule 53. Purchase Of Uniform From Other Police Officers: Police officers shall
not purchase or wear police uniforms of other officers without the approval of
the chief of police.
Rule 54. Firearms Purchased And Registered: Police officers, before purchasing
firearms, shall procure at headquarters a permit as required by law. Firearms
shall be of the official type recommended by the chief of police and after
purchase, shall be registered with the police department. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-
1971; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
Rule 55. Wearing Of Firearms: Firearms shall be carried in a holster and must
be worn in a police manner. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971)
Rule 56. Loss Of Firearms: The loss of firearms by police officers shall
immediately be reported, in writing, to headquarters and to the chief of
police, giving full details of loss thereof.
Rule 57. Wearing Of Stars; Loss: Police officers, when in uniform, shall wear
their star upon the left side of the chest on the outer garment of such
uniforms. No shield or unauthorized badge shall be worn on the uniform at any
time. Officers shall not trade stars or cap devices with one another, either
permanently or temporarily. All members of the police department shall
immediately report, in writing, to headquarters and the chief of police, giving
full details, the loss of any star or shield, and the same procedure shall be
followed in the loss of police commission identification cards.
Rule 58. Equipment Upon Separation: All police officers leaving the police
department shall return all department property to the chief of police.
Rule 59. Equipment In Case Of Death: Commanding officers, in case of death of
members of the police department, shall take up all city property held by such
deceased officer and forward same to the chief of police.
Rule 60. Smoking While In Uniform: Members of the police department shall not
smoke while performing official police duties.
Rule 61. Vacations: Each and every member of the police department may be
entitled to a vacation from duty according to the vacation schedule as adopted
by the city council which shall be known as the "annual vacation". The chief of
police shall designate when such vacations shall be taken; provided, however,
the chief of police shall have the power to refuse or cancel any vacation
absence in the event of any emergency.
Rule 62. Resignation: All members of the police department shall give fifteen
(15) days' notice, in writing, to the chief of police, with a copy to the board
of fire and police commissioners, of their intention to resign. Any member
withdrawing from the police department without proper notice to the chief of
police shall be thereafter deemed disqualified to again become a member of the
police force.
Rule 63. Other Occupations: Members of the police department shall devote their
entire time to the business of the police department if so required. However,
other part time occupations might be authorized:
      1.   Providing part time employment does not interfere in any way with
his duties in the police department.
      2.   That such part time employment shall first be fully explained in
writing and approved by the chief of police and the board of fire and police
commissioners.
      3.   Each member in other occupations shall fill out a part time
employment questionnaire required by the chief of police and file same with the
chief of police as may be required by the board of fire and police
commissioners. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
Rule 64. Care Of City Property: Police officers shall exercise diligence in
their use of city property and shall not, through their carelessness, cause the
loss of or do damage to any city property. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971)
Rule 65. Civil Defense: Every member of the police department shall give full
cooperation and assistance to our civilian defense program when required by
that department or ordered by a superior officer of the police department.
Any member of the police department who, through neglect or any action is
guilty of being uncooperative, shall be subject to the disciplinary procedure
as defined in the rules and regulations of the board of fire and police
commissioners.
Rule 66. Other Rules: In addition to the rules and regulations herein set
forth, all laws of the state of Illinois, ordinances of the city, federal
statutes and police department rules and regulations pertaining to and
affecting police officers and the general rules of the board of fire and police
commissioners shall be by this reference rules and regulations of the board of
fire and police commissioners and all police officers shall be subject thereto.
   D.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   Generally:
Rule 67. General Duties: It shall be the duty of all police officers to enforce
all federal and state laws and the ordinances of the city and to perform all
duties imposed upon them by the laws of the United States Of America, the state
of Illinois, ordinances of the city, rules and regulations of the police
department, and rules and regulations of the board of fire and police
commissioners of the city.
Rule 68. Duties And Power To Arrest: All members of the police department, when
on duty, shall devote their entire time and attention to discharging the duties
of a police officer, according to the laws and ordinances of the city and the
rules and regulations of the police department. Police officers shall preserve
the peace, order and quiet and enforce the laws and ordinances throughout the
city. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
Rule 69. Force; Exercise Of Discretion: Police officers shall discharge their
duties in a discreet and orderly manner. No more force shall be used than is
necessary to make arrests. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971)
Rule 70. Prisoners To Court: Police officers shall, without delay, book and
arrange to take before a judge all persons arrested by them except where such
persons are being held on orders of the chief of police or the commanding
officer for investigation.
Rule 71. Notifying Friends: When persons are booked and held, the desk operator
shall, when requested, notify prisoner's relatives or friends so that they may
obtain bail. Under no circumstances shall police officers or employees of the
police department make any charge or accept any fee money or reward for
conveying or sending messages of any nature. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971; amd. Ord.
O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
Rule 72. Females In Care Of Matrons Or Policewomen: Female prisoners shall, as
soon as possible, be placed in the care of matrons or policewomen and shall,
while in custody of a police officer, be chaperoned by matrons or policewomen.
Rule 73. Juveniles: Children who come within the jurisdiction of the juvenile
law 2  and under the age of twelve (12) shall, under no circumstances, be
placed in any cell, prison or other place of confinement. Such children shall
be brought to the attention of the police juvenile officer as quickly as
possible so that they may be disposed of according to the provisions of the
juvenile law.
Rule 74. Searching Prisoners: Police officers shall, before placing persons in
a cell, thoroughly search and take all personal property from them and turn
same over to the desk clerk who shall give such prisoner a receipt therefor.
The arresting officer shall inventory the property taken from the prisoner in
the presence of said prisoner. Receipts shall not be given for concealed
weapons or property alleged to have been stolen which may be used as evidence.
It shall be the duty of the police officer making the search to require the
prisoner to sign said receipt. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971)
Rule 75. Property Recovered Not Held As Evidence: All recovered, lost and
stolen property shall at once be inventoried on forms provided for that purpose
and filed with the chief of police without delay except when held as evidence.
(Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
Rule 76. Property Held As Evidence: Property held as evidence shall be
inventoried, as required in the previous paragraph. Such property shall be held
at police headquarters until the case is disposed of in the courts. (Res. R-2-
71, 1-12-1971)
Rule 77. Warrants For Assault Upon Police Officer And Against Police Officer:
Police officers shall not apply for warrants for assault upon themselves
without reporting the case to the chief of police. Police officers detailed to
make warrants shall not draw up complaints or warrants against police officers
without first informing the chief of police. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971; amd. Ord.
O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
Rule 78. Police Officers: Police officers governed by the rules and regulations
of the board of fire and police commissioners shall have such authority as may
be granted them by the laws of the state of Illinois, ordinances of the city
and federal statutes.
Rule 79. Establish Fire Lines, Protect Recovered Property: Police officers in
command at fires shall cause streets, alleys and other places in the vicinity
of such fires to be cleared of persons and obstructions. They shall allow no
one except firemen, reporters and officials to pass. A space inside of the fire
lines shall be reserved for the deposit of salvaged property, and police
officers in command shall cause the property to be properly protected.
Rule 80. Ascertain Location And Origin Of Fire: Police officers first arriving
at a fire shall, if possible, in all cases, be particular to ascertain the
exact location where fires originate. If they believe fires to be incendiary,
they shall at once note in their memorandum book all information concerning the
origin of the fire which would aid in the investigation thereof and in the
prosecution of persons responsible.
Rule 81. Reporting Accidents: When police officers are at the scene of an
accident or their attention is called to an accident, they shall, after
rendering first aid, apprehend the person or persons who are responsible for
the accident. Such officer shall obtain the necessary information concerning
said accident and make a full report to headquarters. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971)
Rule 82. Promptness: Members of the police department shall be prompt in
reporting for duty assignment including roll call and court appearance.
      2.   Commanding Officers:
Rule 83. Subordinates To Be Sustained: Commanding officers shall sustain their
subordinates when they have acted within the scope of their authority.
Commanding officers shall not censure, ridicule or discipline subordinates in
the presence of other members of the police department. When it becomes
necessary to criticize or discipline a subordinate, the commanding officer
shall notify said subordinate to report at his/her office. Commanding officers
shall not be tyrannical in their conduct or use abusive or profane language to
subordinates. Commanding officers shall be firm, kind and just, always being
mindful that their duties are to enforce the law and not to punish violators.
In all cases of insubordination, it shall be mandatory of the superior officer
to immediately file a detailed report with the chief of police (3 copies).
Failure of a superior officer to comply with this rule shall be considered
gross neglect of duty.
Rule 84. Deaths: Commanding officers, in case of death of members of the police
department, shall submit to the chief of police a written report stating the
time, place, date and cause of death and all circumstances connected therewith
listing names and addresses of all witnesses. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971; amd.
Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
Rule 85. Property Accountability: Commanding officers shall be held accountable
for the care and condition of all fixed and movable property under their
control and for the economical use of supplies. Waste shall not be tolerated.
(Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971)
      3.   Chief Of Police; Leaves:
Rule 86. Office: The chief of police shall be appointed in accordance with the
ordinances of the city 3 . He/she shall supervise the work of the police
department, its officers and members. He/she shall have charge of the police
station, equipment, books, records and all other property of said police
department. Public safety officers 2  shall be under the complete jurisdiction
of the chief of police. They shall be subject to all rules and regulations
governing the police department.
Rule 87. Duty To Preserve Peace: The chief of police shall enforce all federal
laws, laws of the state of Illinois and the city. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971; amd.
Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
Rule 88. General Orders, Special Orders And Personnel Orders: The chief of
police may prescribe and establish such general orders, special orders and
personnel orders as he/she may deem necessary; provided, however, that all such
general orders, special orders and personnel orders must be in accord with
these rules and the rules and regulations of the board of fire and police
commissioners, and a copy of such general orders, special orders and personnel
orders be sent to the board of fire and police commissioners at the time of
issuance of same and to the mayor and committee on public safety of the city
council.
Rule 89. Instructions: The chief of police shall be responsible for instructing
members of the police department in police work. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971; amd.
1992 Code; Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
Rule 90. Disciplinary Power: The chief of police shall have full power and
authority to reprimand or suspend, without pay, any department member for
disciplinary purposes for a period of time not to exceed five (5) calendar days
in length. The board of fire and police commissioners and the person suspended
shall be advised, in writing, by the chief of police of any suspension from
duty. Any person so suspended, may appeal to the board of fire and police
commissioners for a review of the suspension in writing within five (5)
calendar days after such suspension. The board shall be given three (3) copies
of the appeal giving full details, and the board shall set a hearing date
within thirty (30) days after receipt of such appeal. Upon such appeal, the
board may sustain the action of the chief of police, may reverse it with
instructions that the officer receive his/her pay for the period involved, or
may suspend the officer for an additional period of not more than thirty (30)
days or discharge him/her, depending upon the facts presented. (Ord. O-01-94,
2-7-1994; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
Rule 91. Absence: In cases of absence of the chief of police from the city or
in cases of his/her inability to act, then the next officer in command shall
have and be permitted, in such cases, to exercise the powers and duties, in
discretion, as hereinbefore contained.
Rule 92. Discharge Of Probationers: Probationers in the police department may
be recommended for discharge by the chief of police, subject to the approval of
the board of fire and police commissioners, at any time during their
probationary period which shall be one year from the date of appointment. The
chief of police shall make quarterly reports on probationers to the board of
fire and police commissioners.
Rule 93. Annual Report: The chief of police shall file an annual report with
the mayor and city council and furnish a copy to the board of fire and police
commissioners.
Rule 94. Register Of Members: The chief of police shall keep a register of all
members of the police department with complete information as to the date of
birth, nativity, former occupation, dates of appointment and promotion,
commendations, reprimands, suspensions, reinstatements, resignation and death
and other data as may be required.
Rule 95. Inventory Of Property: The chief of police shall be responsible for
maintaining an inventory of all station furniture, equipment and supplies in
the police department.
Rule 96. Annual Estimates: The chief of police shall prepare, annually, an
estimate of police department requirements and recommendations for the ensuing
fiscal year for the mayor and city council.
Rule 97. Absentee Record: Time allowed and lost by members of the police
department shall be placed in a file with members' names arranged in order on
the form prescribed by the chief of police. This report is to be filled out in
all cases of absenteeism regardless of cause. Report shall be made out and sent
to the chief of police. If injury or illness is caused in the line of duty, the
commanding officer of the officer involved shall also sign the report. If
disability prevents absentee from making this report, then the chief of police
shall see that this report is forwarded.
Rule 98. Sick Leave: Sick leave with pay shall be credited to all members of
the police department at the rate of one work day for each full month of
service and shall be accumulated to a maximum sixty (60) working days for one
employee.
Rule 99. Efficiency: Efficiency records of members of the police department
shall be kept under the supervision of the chief of police. He/she shall
evaluate the efficient performance of each member of the police department
every six (6) months, and a copy shall be sent to the board of fire and police
commissioners.
All acts of commendation shall also be reported to the board of fire and police
commissioners and shall remain a part of their permanent record for future
reference in promotional examinations, etc.
      4.   Commander:
Rule 100. General Duties: The commander shall be in command of all police
activities while he/she is on duty, subject, however, to the orders of the
chief of police. He/she shall be held strictly accountable for the enforcement
of all laws, ordinances, police rules and regulations and for the efficient
performance of his/her duties prescribed for the subordinates working under
him/her.
Rule 101. Discipline And Appearance: The commander shall be held responsible
for the discipline and personal appearance of the members of the police
department working under him/her.
Rule 102. Police Station: The commander shall be responsible for the
cleanliness and sanitary conditions of the police station. Members of the
police department shall report to him/her regarding any missing article and he/
she shall forward a report to the chief of police in writing giving full
details.
Rule 103. Books And Records: The commander shall be held responsible for the
proper keeping of all books, records and equipment of the police department.
He/she shall promptly forward all reports to the chief of police when requested
to do so. He/she shall, from time to time, personally inspect such books and
records to familiarize themselves with the contents thereof.
Rule 104. Prisoners And Court Documents: The commander shall be responsible for
promptly conveying all prisoners to the court in which they are to be tried.
He/she shall have court documents prepared and forward them to the proper
persons.
Rule 105. Absence: The duties of the commander shall be performed by the senior
sergeant on duty in the absence of the commander. When on leave of absence,
his/her duties shall be performed by a sergeant designated by the chief of
police as an acting commander.
      5.   Police Sergeants:
Rule 106. General Duties: Sergeants shall be charged with the enforcement of
all laws, ordinances and orders, the prevention of crime and the arrest of
offenders. They shall constantly patrol posts with men/women under them as
often as possible and enforce the performance of duty. They shall instruct and
assist police officers in the performance of their duties.
Rule 107. Bulletin: Sergeants shall familiarize themselves with the contents of
the daily bulletin. They shall see that all police officers under their command
read a copy of said bulletin and keep posted on all matters contained therein.
Rule 108. Inspection: Sergeants shall inspect all officers going on duty,
paying particular attention to their personal appearance, uniforms, revolvers
and other police equipment. They shall observe the personal appearance of all
officers reporting off duty.
Rule 109. Complaints: Sergeants shall check upon all complaints given to police
officers on post duty and see that same are given proper attention.
Rule 110. Daily Reports: Sergeants shall, at the conclusion of their tour of
duty, check the police blotter as to its correctness relating to crimes and
complaints in their district. They shall report all violations of orders, rules
and regulations of the department on the part of police officers working under
them.
      6.   Members Of Special Assignments; Plain Clothes Officers:
Rule 111. General Duties: Patrol officers assigned to citizen's dress or
detective duty shall be charged with the enforcement of all laws and
ordinances, the prevention of crime and the arrest and prosecution of
criminals.
Rule 112. Investigations; Reports: Police officers in citizen's dress shall
give prompt and diligent attention to all cases assigned to them and shall
report to their commanding officer such information as they secure pertaining
to same. They shall keep a memorandum book of all the details of such cases.
Rule 113. Youth Officers: The chief of police is hereby authorized to designate
any member of the department as a youth officer. He/she shall have charge of
all juvenile offenders or juveniles charged with an offense and shall be under
the direction of and subject to all orders of the chief of police.
Rule 114. Police Matrons: Police matrons shall have charge of all female
prisoners and shall be under the direction of and subject to all orders of the
chief of police.
      7.   Desk Personnel:
Rule 115. The chief of police shall have the right to hire civilian radio
personnel and clerk, by and with the consent of the mayor. Radio operators and
other police officers assigned to desk duty shall wear their uniforms and shall
remain at the desk during their hours of duty. They shall personally attend to
all police business to be transacted at the police desk and shall see that all
police business is given prompt attention. They shall familiarize themselves
with the state laws and city ordinances.
Rule 116. Records: The desk operator shall make the proper entries in all
books, records and reports required to be kept by the orders, rules and
regulations of the department. Said records and reports shall be neatly and
legibly kept, indexed and promptly filed by said desk operator in such manner
as to make them readily obtainable when necessary.
Rule 117. Radio Log: It shall be the duty of the desk operator to keep a radio
log on a form prescribed by the chief of police and in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the federal communications commission and which shall
show the description and location of offenses and the time of such offenses
during his/her hours of duty. The desk operator shall enter all complaints
received by him/her which require the attention of the police department. Such
record shall be a current record and shall contain such other information as
may be required by order of the chief of police.
Rule 118. Prisoners: The commanding officer shall at all times have full
knowledge of all arrests made and all persons held, whether booked or not. He/
she shall be responsible for the safeguarding, care and comfort of prisoners in
custody.
Rule 119. Property: The commanding officer shall take charge of and be
responsible for the safekeeping of all property turned over to him/her by
police officers as well as all property taken from prisoners.
Rule 120. Telephones: Desk operators shall have supervision of all telephone
communications. Calls shall be promptly answered and communication transmitted
without delay. When answering telephone calls, the name of the desk operator
shall be stated.
Rule 121. Complaints: All persons making complaints shall be treated in a
courteous and a civil manner. Desk operators shall receive and record
complaints and reports submitted to them by all persons. Complaints shall be
given to the proper police officers for immediate attention and investigation
after proper record has been made in the books of the police department
provided for that purpose. Time received and disposition of complaint shall be
recorded.
Rule 122. Solicit And Loiter: Desk operators shall not permit persons to
solicit business or loiter in or about the police station.
Rule 123. Time Record: Absence from duty shall be posted daily on the desk
operator's records, noting the period of time any police officer was absent
from duty.
   E.   Disciplinary Action:
Rule 124. Police Officers: Members of the police department who are found
guilty of the violation of any of the rules and regulations of the police
department, federal laws, the laws of the state, city ordinances or rules and
regulations of the board of fire and police commissioners shall be subject to
any of the following penalties to be imposed after a hearing and trial of the
charges by the board of fire and police commissioners.
      1.   Reprimand.
      2.   Suspension without pay not to exceed thirty (30) days.
      3.   Demotion (by agreement).
      4.   Discharge from the police department and the service of the city.
Rule 125. Members To Report Violations: Members of the police department shall
report to their commanding officer the violation of any of the rules and
regulations of the police department by any other member. Failure to report
such violators shall make them accessories to the violation of such rules.
Rule 126. Preferring And Continuance Of Charges: Superior officers shall prefer
charges against members of the police department for the violation of the rules
and regulations and police orders. All charges shall contain the names and
addresses of witnesses, the name and address of the respondent and the charge,
the hour, date and location of said violations, all of which shall be in
writing. The respondents shall be notified and furnished a copy of said charges
and may file an answer to same. Charges, together with the respondent's
statements or answer, shall be filed with the secretary of the board of fire
and police commissioners.
Rule 127. Attendance At Trial: Commanding officers preferring charges shall be
present when charges are heard by the board of fire and police commissioners.
Rule 128. Service Of Charges: A copy of the charges shall be served upon the
respondent by the board of fire and police commissioners, not less than five
(5) days prior to the date set for trial. The respondent shall sign his/her
name on the duplicate copy of said charges when same are served upon him/her.
If he/she cannot be found, a copy of said charges shall be forwarded to him/her
by registered or certified mail, and an affidavit shall be made by the party
mailing said charges as to how service was made on said defendant. It shall be
the duty of all charged officers to acknowledge and make return of signed copy
thereof without delay.
Rule 129. Subordinates May Make Complaints: Any member of the police department
having a complaint to make against other members of the police department for
violation of the rules and regulations as set forth herein by the rules of the
fire and police commissioners shall make a signed statement thereof. He/she
shall state the rule violated, the date, time and place of said violation and
the names of all witnesses and shall file same with the board of fire and
police commissioners with a copy to the chief of police.
Rule 130. Complaints Of Citizens Against Members Of The Police Department: All
complaints made by citizens against members of the police department for the
violation of any of the police rules or regulations or for the violation of any
of the rules of the board of fire and police commissioners may be filed in a
signed statement with the chief of police. (Res. R-2-71, 1-12-1971; amd. 1992
Code; Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 4 of this Code.
2 1. 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.
3 1. See subsection
  5-1-2A of this chapter.
2 2. See chapter 2 of this title.
5-1-9: RESISTING, IMPERSONATING POLICE:
   A.   Resisting Or Interfering With Police: No person shall knowingly resist
or obstruct the performance by one known to the person to be a peace officer of
any authorized act within his official capacity or shall knowingly interfere or
prevent a peace officer from discharging his duty as such officer and/or in any
manner knowingly assist any person in the custody of any member of the police
department to escape or attempt to escape from such custody.
For the purposes of this subsection, "resist" shall mean passive as well as
active resistance.
   B.   Impersonating A Police Officer 1 :
      1.   No person shall falsely assume or pretend to be a police officer or
a member of the police department of this city or, without being a member of
the police department of this city, wear in public the uniform adopted as the
police uniform.
      2.   No person shall counterfeit or imitate, or cause to be counterfeited
or imitated, any badge, sign, signal or device adopted by the police department
nor shall any person use or wear any badge, sign, signal or device adopted or
used by the police department or any similar in appearance without authority so
to do from the city council. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-
4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section
shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. 1992 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-9-9 of this code.
5-1-10: POLICE DOGS:
No person shall tease, hit, injure or kill any dog used by the police
department. (1976 Code § 19-1-15; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014,
3-3-2014)
5-1-11: SHIFT COMMANDER:
   A.   There shall be created within the police department of the city the
exempt position of shift commander. (Ord. O-28-95, 6-5-1995; amd. Ord. O-06-
2014, 3-3-2014)
   B.   The number of commanders appointed, from time to time, shall be from
the current full time police personnel of the city.
   C.   The duties and responsibilities of those commanders appointed shall
have such administrative and supervisory functions as may be from time to time,
necessary. (Ord. O-28-95, 6-5-1995)
   D.   The position of shift commander shall be appointed by the chief of
police. (Ord. O-28-95, 6-5-1995; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
   E.   The position of shift commander shall be paid the same as and an amount
equal to that of sergeant of police. (Ord. O-28-95, 6-5-1995)
5-1-12: PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
   A.   The city may employ part time police officers from time to time as the
mayor and city council deem necessary.
   B.   A part time police officer shall have all the responsibilities of a
full time police officer and such specific duties as delineated in the general
orders of the Northlake police department but the number of hours a part time
officer may work within a calendar year is restricted. Part time police
officers shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full time police
officers. Part time police officers shall be trained in accordance with the
Illinois police training act 1  and the rules and requirements of the Illinois
law enforcement training and standards board.
   C.   Any person employed as a part time police officer by the city shall
meet the following standards:
      1.   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health and
physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
      2.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      3.   Pass a medical examination.
      4.   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      5.   Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
      6.   Possess no prior felony convictions.
      7.   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been
honorably discharged.
   D.   Part time officers shall be under the disciplinary jurisdiction of the
chief of police. Part time police officers serve at the discretion of the chief
of police, shall not have any property rights in said employment and may be
removed by the chief of police in the sole discretion of the chief of police.
Part time police officers shall comply with all applicable rules and general
orders issued by the Northlake police department. (Ord. O-10-2012, 3-5-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICERS 1
(Rep. by Ord. O-23-2000, 7-17-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. Article A of this Chapter is not repealed by Ordinance O-23-2000 and is
  still in effect.
ARTICLE A. EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
SECTION:
5-2A-1: Establishment
5-2A-2: Deputy Director
5-2A-3: Functions
5-2A-4: Service As Mobile Support Team
5-2A-5: Agreements With Other Public Subdivisions
5-2A-6: Emergency Action
5-2A-7: Compensation
5-2A-8: Reimbursement By State
5-2A-9: Purchases And Expenditures
5-2A-10: Oath
5-2A-11: Office
5-2A-12: Amounts Budgeted; Levy Of Taxes
5-2A-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the city of Northlake emergency services and disaster
agency, hereinafter called the ESDA, to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate
injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or
other hostile action or from natural or manmade disaster in accordance with
"The Illinois emergency services and disaster act of 1975 1 ".
This ESDA shall consist of the deputy director and such additional members as
may be selected by the deputy director. (Ord. O-15-76, 10-12-1976; amd. 1992
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
5-2A-2: DEPUTY DIRECTOR:
   A.   Appointment And Term: The deputy director of the city ESDA shall be
appointed by the chief of police and shall serve until removed by same.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The deputy director shall have direct responsibility
for the organization, administration, training and operation of the ESDA,
subject to the direction and control of the chief of police.
   C.   Vacancy In Office: In the event of the absence, resignation, death or
inability to serve as the deputy director, the chief of police or any person
designated by him/her shall be and act as deputy director until a new
appointment is made as provided in this chapter. (Ord. O-15-76, 10-12-1976;
amd. 1992 Code; Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
5-2A-3: FUNCTIONS:
The city ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the city as shall be
prescribed in and by the state ESDA plan and program prepared by the governor
and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor
and, in addition, shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may
be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political
subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by
"the state ESDA act of 1975". (Ord. O-15-76, 10-12-1976)
5-2A-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the city organization may be designated as members of a
mobile support team created by the director of the state ESDA as provided by
law.
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the deputy
director of the city ESDA organization.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a city employee or officer while
serving on call to duty by the governor or the state director shall receive the
compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to
such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the city, while so serving, shall receive from the state reasonable
compensation as provided by law. (Ord. O-15-76, 10-12-1976; amd. 1992 Code)
5-2A-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER PUBLIC SUBDIVISIONS:
The deputy director of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other
political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be effective
until it has been approved by the city council and by the state director of
ESDA. (Ord. O-15-76, 10-12-1976; amd. 1992 Code)
5-2A-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state
of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the city
ESDA to cooperate fully with the state ESDA and with the governor in the
exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. (Ord. O-15-76, 10-12-1976)
5-2A-7: COMPENSATION:
Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the city, if called
for training by the state director of ESDA, shall receive for the time spent in
such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members
who are not such city employees or officers shall receive for such training
time such compensation as may be established by the city council. (Ord. O-15-
76, 10-12-1976)
5-2A-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The city treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any
reimbursement by the state to the city for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA prescribed by the state director of ESDA, compensation for
services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside
the city in response to a call by the governor or state director of ESDA, as
provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to ESDA
activities as provided by law. (Ord. O-15-76, 10-12-1976)
5-2A-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The city council may, on recommendation of the deputy director of ESDA,
authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the city in a position
to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear
or other bomb or missile and to protect the public health and safety, protect
property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such
disaster or from manmade or natural disaster.
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the deputy director of ESDA is
authorized on behalf of the city to procure such services, supplies, equipment
or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency,
without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed
by law pertaining to city contracts or obligations, as authorized by "the state
ESDA act of 1975"; provided, that if the city council meets at such time, he
shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.
(Ord. O-15-76, 10-12-1976; amd. 1992 Code)
5-2A-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the city ESDA organization
shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe the following oath, which
shall be filed with the deputy director:
"I,           , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend
and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and
the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and
facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and
domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or
purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties
upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do
not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am
affiliated with the Northlake ESDA organization, I will not advocate nor become
a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence".
(Ord. O-15-76, 10-12-1976)
5-2A-11: OFFICE:
The mayor is authorized to designate space in a city building, or elsewhere, as
may be provided for by the city council for the city ESDA as its office. (Ord.
O-15-76, 10-12-1976; amd. 1992 Code)
5-2A-12: AMOUNTS BUDGETED; LEVY OF TAXES:
The city council may budget amounts for ESDA purposes in the manner provided by
law and may levy, in addition, for ESDA purposes only, a tax not to exceed five
cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value of all
taxable property in addition to all other taxes as provided by the "state ESDA
act of 1975"; however, that amount collectible under such levy shall in no
event exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita. (Ord. O-15-76, 10-12-1976;
amd. Ord. O-24-90, 5-21-1990)
CHAPTER 3
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: Declaration Of Emergency; Procedures
5-3-3: Interpretation Of Provisions
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CIVIL EMERGENCY:
   A.   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or
violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to
execute by three (3) or more persons acting together without authority of law;
or
   B.   Any natural disaster or manmade calamity, including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion, within the corporate
limits of the city resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing
or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises
within the corporate limits of the city, except officials of any governmental
unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to such civil
emergency. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
5-3-2: DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY; PROCEDURES:
   A.   Whenever a civil emergency exists, the mayor shall declare the
existence by means of a written declaration setting forth the facts which
constitute the emergency.
   B.   Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the chief of police
shall notify the news media and shall cause three (3) copies of the
proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the
following places within the city: the city hall, the police station and the
post office.
   C.   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the mayor, he may order a
general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the city or to the city
as a whole as he deems advisable and applicable during such hours of the day or
night as he deems necessary in the interests of the public safety and welfare.
   D.   After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the mayor may also, in the
interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following orders:
      1.   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores including taverns and
private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating
liquor and beer is permitted;
      2.   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer;
      3.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
      4.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever;
      5.   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the
protection of life and property.
   E.   The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of
forty eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the mayor
indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The mayor shall have the
power to reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the end of each forty
eight (48) hour period during the time the civil emergency exists. (Ord. O-23-
79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
5-3-3: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to impair the powers
contained in this code giving powers to the police and fire departments but
shall be construed together with existing ordinances now in effect for the
safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd.
Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
CHAPTER 4
NEIGHBORHOOD WATCH PROGRAM
SECTION:
5-4-1: Program Adopted
5-4-2: Purpose
5-4-3: Organization
5-4-4: Programs Offered
5-4-5: Publicity
5-4-6: Program Review
5-4-1: PROGRAM ADOPTED:
The neighborhood watch program as set forth herein is hereby adopted. (Ord. O-
15-87, 11-10-1987)
5-4-2: PURPOSE:
The primary purpose of the neighborhood watch program is to help the city
police in their efforts to reduce crime in Northlake. The program will promote
education and awareness on the part of the citizens of Northlake.
The program will be a passive one, with education being the largest part of
what the city has to offer. This will be done with basic training concerning
the neighborhood watch concept and following up with more intensive training
aimed at specific problems that the citizens encounter.
All program participants will be cautioned never to intercede in police matters
but merely to call the police about any and all suspicious happenings in the
community. (Ord. O-15-87, 11-10-1987)
5-4-3: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Supervision: The Northlake chief of police will oversee the functioning
of the neighborhood watch program. The chief of police will appoint a Northlake
police officer to perform the functions of the crime prevention officer. (Ord.
O-15-87, 11-10-1987; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
   B.   Administrative Structure:
      1.   The administrative structure will consist of a commission of six (6)
members, as follows: one member from each ward to serve as ward coordinators;
one member selected at large; and one member as city coordinator to oversee and
assist the ward coordinators. (Ord. O-48-98, 9-21-1998)
      2.   These positions will be filled by mayoral appointment, for one year
terms, subject to city council approval. Individuals may serve more than one
term who, in turn, will appoint, by wards, block captains, recruited to be the
program representatives on each block. Blocks will be considered operative and
entitled to street signs upon fifty percent (50%) registration of a block.
(Ord. O-15-87, 11-10-1987; amd. Ord. O-12-89, 5-9-1989)
      3.   The duties of these six (6) members will be specified in subsection
C of this section. (Ord. O-15-87, 11-10-1987; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993;
Ord. O-48-98, 9-21-1998)
   C.   Job Titles And Descriptions:
      1.   Crime Prevention Officer (CPO): The crime prevention officer will
advise and direct the neighborhood watch program how to best assist the police
in reducing crime in Northlake. The following duties are specific duties, but
do not limit the crime prevention officer's ability to use his discretion in
dealing with situations that arise. The crime prevention officer shall:
         a.   Be the liaison between the watch program and the chief of police
on the day to day running of the program.
         b.   Review crime reports on a daily basis and notify ward
coordinators of problems in their wards.
         c.   Meet monthly with the city coordinator and ward coordinators to
discuss the month's problems, the general program functioning and any new ways
the program can help the police department.
         d.   When possible, attend any neighborhood watch or civic functions
where neighborhood watch shall be in attendance.
         e.   Provide assistance to individual ward coordinators to deal with
problems in their wards.
         f.   Provide training for program personnel so they may best help the
program succeed. (i.e., training for identification techniques, explaining
police procedure so people know what to expect in crime cases.)
         g.   In coordination with the chief of police, review performance of
program personnel and offer guidance or assistance. If necessary, recommend
removal of program personnel.
         h.   Assist in setting up programs on topics of interest to the
public.
         i.   Offer home security checks to help residents better protect their
homes.
         j.   Order neighborhood watch supplies when needed.
         k.   Supply a listing of AV and written materials available to
neighborhood watch from various sources. (i.e., I-Search, Cook County, McGruff,
etc.)
      2.   Ward Coordinator: The ward coordinator is the primary administrative
person for the watch program on the ward level. The ward coordinator has the
overall responsibility for operation of the neighborhood watch program in his/
her ward. Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Meet with the CPO on a monthly basis to discuss all aspects of
the operation of the program. Absence from three (3) consecutive meetings
without having a representative present shall constitute resignation from the
position.
         b.   Recruit and train area coordinators and block captains. (Ultimate
goal: one captain per block.)
         c.   Maintain registration information and update as often as
possible.
         d.   Upon receiving crime reports from the CPO, notify the respective
area and/or block captains in the areas involved.
         e.   Communicate with local media to inform them of specific ward
events, programs, meetings, etc.
         f.   Submit any newsletters, letters or any material needing to be
printed to the CPO or chief of police for printing.
         g.   Obtain any preprinted material (i.e., McGruff pamphlets) from the
city coordinator.
         h.   Arrange for distribution of any information or material to the
ward.
         i.   In coordinating with the CPO, prepare and present programs
dealing with crime prevention or safety.
         j.   Assist block captains in any way to implement and publicize
programs or pertinent public information.
         k.   Chair ward and/or block meetings (preferably on a regular basis).
         l.   Represent neighborhood watch at community events when the CPO
cannot attend.
         m.   Keep the city coordinator and CPO informed of all ward
activities.
The ward coordinator shall be evaluated on a yearly basis by the chief of
police, crime prevention officer and block captains.
      3.   Area Coordinator: The area coordinator is to assist the ward
coordinator in any way needed. The specific duties shall be assigned by the
ward coordinator.
      4.   Block Captain: The block captain is probably the most important
position in the neighborhood watch program. As the program is an information
and education program, the block captain is the essential information source on
each block. The block captain's duties include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Door to door registration and explanation of the program.
         b.   Inform the block when a crime report has been received affecting
the area.
         c.   Distribute newsletters and any other neighborhood watch
educational materials.
         d.   Be the contact person to direct questions from the block to the
appropriate source.
         e.   Assist in planning programs requested by the residents on the
block.
         f.   Attend meetings of the neighborhood watch program when possible
to be able to keep the block informed of the program events and operation.
         g.   Visit new residents and inform them of the program.
         h.   Inform the ward coordinator of changes in registration.
         i.   Keep the ward coordinator informed of any comments, questions,
complaints, etc., concerning the neighborhood watch program.
         j.   May plan events or put out his own block newsletter after
consultation with the ward coordinator and/or CPO.
         k.   Evaluate the ward coordinator on a yearly basis.
      5.   City Coordinator: The city coordinator is a new position intended to
bring some general coordination in order to unify some aspects of the
neighborhood watch program. Although each ward coordinator must be free to
tailor the program for his ward's particular circumstances, the following
general duties will help to promote the complete neighborhood watch program in
Northlake:
         a.   Meet monthly with the CPO and ward coordinators to discuss the
program progress. Absence from three (3) consecutive meetings without prior
notice and cause shall constitute resignation from the position.
         b.   Initiate an ongoing public relations program with the local media
to increase the public awareness concerning neighborhood watch, crime
prevention and general safety.
         c.   Plan periodic citywide neighborhood watch programs.
         d.   Represent neighborhood watch at community events and meetings.
         e.   Offer assistance and direction to the ward coordinators in an
effort to keep an active program in all four (4) wards.
         f.   Get any educational material (i.e., McGruff) from the CPO and
distribute to the ward coordinators.
         g.   Inform the CPO when supplies are needed and distribute supplies
to ward coordinators (i.e., signs, window stickers, new registration packets).
         h.   Compile citywide information concerning program personnel and
activities (i.e., number of block captains, streets covered, total
registration, meetings, events, etc.).
         i.   Recruit ward coordinators when a position becomes vacant.
         j.   Be evaluated by the chief of police, crime prevention officer and
ward coordinators on a yearly basis. (Ord. O-15-87, 11-10-1987; amd. Ord. O-30-
93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
5-4-4: PROGRAMS OFFERED:
The key to any neighborhood watch program is what the program has to offer the
residents. In the case of Northlake, the key element is education. The program
needs to offer education concerning the neighborhood watch concept but can also
go further into related subjects. The following are programs the original
writers of Northlake's program believed could and should be offered whenever
needed or requested. This is by no means a limit on what information we can
offer but just a brief beginning:
   A.   Children:
      1.   Fingerprinting, which is often offered by other sources, but
neighborhood watch should be ready to participate.
      2.   Support of "helping hand" program offered through area schools by
alerting neighborhood watch participants of school walking routes and times.
      3.   A program (like Officer Friendly) for parents and children which
allows for parental input and follow up after programs rather than just
literature sent home with the child.
      4.   "Stranger danger" alerts could be handled on a trickle down theory
from school principals/police department to the ward coordinators for
transmission to the block captains and residents. This would allow all
neighbors near the school to be on an extra lookout for the offending stranger
and give children and parents a safer feeling.
      5.   Promotion of the I-Search program through presentation of the
various I-Search materials available.
   B.   Senior Citizens:
      1.   Vial of life/medicalert bracelets.
      2.   Senior citizen check - disabled or seniors alone, notify block
captain or ward coordinator. In turn, neighbors are recruited to check
periodically to see that the senior is ok and offer whatever assistance
possible.
      3.   Transportation assistance.
      4.   Whistle stop.
      5.   Youth escort service.
   C.   General Population:
      1.   Rape prevention and self protection.
      2.   Home security checks.
      3.   Gang prevention and awareness.
      4.   Operation identification.
As stated earlier, these are only suggestions. The only limitation is
imagination. (Ord. O-15-87, 11-10-1987; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-
06-2014, 3-3-2014)
5-4-5: PUBLICITY:
It has been proven that publicity is essential to any neighborhood watch
program. The more visibility, the better. To reach this goal, the city
coordinator and ward coordinators should strive to develop a working
relationship with the local media. In the past, the local media has been very
cooperative in relation to neighborhood watch.
All avenues of publicity should be utilized including: newspapers, cable
television, radio, "What's New In Northlake", newsletters, announcements in
local community group meetings and in local churches and the use of Northlake
Bank sign for community messages. (Ord. O-15-87, 11-10-1987)
5-4-6: PROGRAM REVIEW:
The neighborhood watch program will undergo a constant process of effectiveness
review. Whenever there is need for changes, the CPO and the coordinators will
discuss the changes and make proposals to the chief of police who will then
present the changes to the city council if necessary. The program is always
open to comments and suggestions from any citizen of Northlake as this program
is for the people of Northlake. (Ord. O-15-87, 11-10-1987; amd. Ord. O-30-93,
10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
CHAPTER 5
ANIMALS AND ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-5-1: Definitions
5-5-2: Animal Control Officer
5-5-3: Certain Animals Prohibited
5-5-4: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
5-5-5: Dangerous, Vicious Animals
5-5-6: Diseased Animals
5-5-7: Animal Wastes
5-5-8: Impoundment Procedures
5-5-9: Dead Animals
5-5-10: Animals Struck By Vehicles
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ANIMALS: Any and all types of animals, domesticated and wild, male and female,
except man.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner or custodian of the animals and not
under the immediate control of the owner or custodian.
CAT: Any cat, male or female.
DOG: Any dog, male or female.
DOG LICENSE: A license and registration tag required to be issued annually for
each individual dog.
KEEP OR HARBOR: Maintain, possess, control and use.
OWNER: Any person owning, controlling, keeping or harboring a dog or cat or
other animal or fowl.
POUND: An establishment for the confinement of dogs or cats seized either under
the provisions of this chapter or otherwise. (1976 Code §
4-1-1; amd. 1992 Code)
5-5-2: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
The town of Leyden animal control officer is the animal control officer for the
city through an intergovernmental agreement. Said animal control officer shall
have the duties described in this chapter. (1992 Code)
5-5-3: CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
No person shall keep any live swine, poultry, rabbits, cattle, horses, sheep,
goats in the City provided that this prohibition shall not apply to hens. (1976
Code § 4-1-7; amd. Ord. O-06-2023, 3-6-2023)
5-5-4: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Running At Large; Picketing For Grazing: No person shall permit any
cattle, horse, swine, sheep, goats or poultry to run at large in the city; any
such animal running at large in any public place in the city shall be impounded
in the manner provided in this chapter. It shall further be unlawful to picket
or tie any such animal in any of the streets of the city for the purpose of
grazing or feeding. (1976 Code § 4-1-8)
   B.   Cruelty To Animals: No person shall cruelly beat or otherwise cruelly
mistreat any animal or wilfully and wantonly kill, maim, wound, poison or
disfigure or overdrive, override or overload or unnecessarily confine or in any
manner oppress the same or unnecessarily fail to provide the same with proper
food, drink or shelter or drive or work or use the same if such animal is
maimed, wounded, sick, lame or otherwise unfit for labor or wilfully abandon
the same to die or carry or cause the same to be carried, hauled or forced
along in a cruel or inhumane manner or leave any animal tied up or confined
anywhere, day or night, for more than six (6) hours at a time, exposed to
inclement weather or without proper feeding, watering and caring for the same.
This subsection shall not be construed as preventing police officers or other
persons from killing animals when lawfully entitled to do so. (1976 Code § 4-1-
2)
   C.   Animal Noises: No person shall harbor or keep any animal, including,
without limitation, dogs and cats, which disturbs the peace of the neighborhood
by loud noises at any time of the day or night. (1976 Code § 4-1-5; amd. 1992
Code)
   D.   Animal Premises: No person shall cause or allow any stable or place
where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome. (1976 Code
§ 4-1-9)
   E.   Feeding Fowl In Parks Or Public Areas: No person shall offer any food
to, provide any food for, or feed any fowl in any park or other public area, at
any time. Any person, firm or corporation who violates this subsection shall
upon conviction be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. O-14-2003, 4-21-
2003)
5-5-5: DANGEROUS, VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Dangerous, Vicious Animals Prohibited: No person shall permit any
dangerous animal or any vicious animal of any kind to run at large within the
city. (1976 Code § 4-1-3; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993)
   B.   Exhibitions And Parades: Exhibition or parade of animals which are
ferae naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon obtaining a
permit from the chief of police. (1976 Code § 4-1-3; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-
1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
   C.   Killing Dangerous Animals: The members of the police department or any
other person in the city are authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any
kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property. (1976
Code § 4-1-4; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
5-5-6: DISEASED ANIMALS:
No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be
allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place whereby the health
of man or beast may be affected nor shall such diseased animal be shipped or
removed from the premises of the owner thereof except under the supervision of
the chief of police or the director of health and inspectional services.
It is hereby made the duty of the director of health and inspectional services
to secure such disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of the
affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread of the contagion
or infection except in cases where the state veterinarian is empowered to act.
(1976 Code § 4-1-6; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
5-5-7: ANIMAL WASTES:
   A.   No person shall harbor or keep any cat or other animal which causes a
nuisance by defecating or urinating upon any public street, sidewalk or any
other public place or upon any premises not owned or occupied by the person
owning or keeping such cat or other animal. (1976 Code § 4-1-8)
   B.   The owner of every animal within the city shall be responsible for the
removal and sanitary disposal of that animal's bodily waste product and excreta
so as to maintain owner's premises and all and any other property in the city
in a clean and sanitary condition. The owner, attendant or other person in
charge of any animal outside the premises to which the animal is licensed shall
have on his person a suitable and appropriate means for removal and sanitary
disposal of that animal's body waste product and excreta.
Any person convicted of violating this subsection shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. O-36-90, 7-2-1990; amd.
1992 Code)
5-5-8: IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Authority To Impound; Procedures: The animal control officer or his
authorized representative shall have the power and authority to take possession
of such dogs and other animals as are authorized to be picked up by ordinance.
He shall capture all such animals as humanely as possible and deliver such
animals to an authorized pound. He shall submit a report to the director of
health and inspectional services with copies to the chief of police on the same
day that the animals are picked up containing the description of the animals
and the names, if known, of the owners thereof. (1976 Code § 4-2-6; amd. Ord.
O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
   B.   Notice Of Impoundment: It shall be the responsibility of the animal
control officer or his authorized representative to notify the owners of such
animals taken into possession, when names and addresses are known. (1976 Code §
4-2-7; amd. 1992 Code)
5-5-9: DEAD ANIMALS:
The owner or keeper, other than a veterinarian, of any animal which dies within
the city limits or the owner, occupant or person having control of any premises
within the city on which any animal dies or is found dead shall give immediate
notice to the department of health and inspectional services.
The department of health and inspectional services shall cause the dead animal
to be removed within twelve (12) hours after receiving such notice. (1976 Code
§ 4-1-10)
5-5-10: ANIMALS STRUCK BY VEHICLES:
Every person who wilfully or negligently strikes any animal with an automobile
and injures or kills such animal shall notify the department of health and
inspectional services immediately after the occurrence giving the time and
place of the injury or death together with a description of the animal and the
name and address of the person making the report. (1976 Code § 4-1-11)
ARTICLE A. DOGS AND CATS
SECTION:
5-5A-1: Licensing Provisions (Rep. by Ord. O-01-2015, 2-9-2015)
5-5A-2: Rabies Control
5-5A-3: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
5-5A-4: Impoundment And Redemption Procedures
5-5A-5: Killing Vicious Animals
5-5A-6: Dangerous And Vicious Dogs
5-5A-1: LICENSING PROVISIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. O-01-2015, 2-9-2015)
5-5A-2: RABIES CONTROL:
   A.   Inoculation Required: No person shall keep or harbor any dog or cat
over the age of six (6) months in the city unless such dog or cat has been
inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian with either a one year
vaccination within the preceding year or three (3) year vaccination within the
preceding three (3) years. (1976 Code § 4-3-6; amd. 1992 Code)
   B.   Biting Dogs And Cats: Whenever any dog or cat bites a person, the owner
of such dog or cat shall immediately notify the director of health and
inspectional services, who shall order the dog or cat held on the owner's
premises or shall have it impounded for a period of two (2) weeks. The dog or
cat shall be examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and again at the
end of the two (2) week period. If at the end of two (2) weeks a veterinarian
is convinced that the dog or cat is free from rabies, the dog or cat shall be
released from quarantine or from the pound, as the case may be. If the dog or
cat dies in the meanwhile, its head shall be sent to the state department of
health for examination for rabies. (1976 Code § 4-3-10; amd. 1992 Code; Ord. O-
36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
   C.   Dogs And Cats To Be Muzzled: Whenever the mayor, by proclamation, shall
declare that danger from rabies is great, no person shall permit any dog or cat
owned by him or in his possession to go upon any public street, alley or
sidewalk or other public place, unless such dog or cat is securely muzzled.
(1976 Code § 4-3-8; amd. 1992 Code)
5-5A-3: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Running At Large: No person shall permit any dog or cat to run at large
in the city. A dog or cat within the automobile of its owner or of any person
having custody of the dog or cat shall not be considered running at large.
(1976 Code § 4-3-7; amd. 1992 Code)
   B.   Noisy Dogs And Cats; Nuisance Acts: No person shall harbor or keep any
dog or cat which constitutes a nuisance. It is a nuisance for any dog or cat to
bark, cry or meow so as to disturb the peace; to molest or annoy any person
away from the property of its owner or custodian; to damage or destroy public
property or private property not owned or occupied by the person owning or
keeping such dog or cat. (Ord. O-07-2001, 2-5-2001)
   C.   Trespassing: No person shall permit any dog or cat owned, possessed or
harbored by him:
      1.   To trespass upon any private property which he does not own or
control; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to any person who takes
a dog or cat upon private property not owned by him or under his control if he
does it with the consent of the person who owns or controls such property and
if the dog or cat is either confined in a vehicle or under control by means of
a chain or leash.
      2.   To trespass upon any street or other public place unless the dog or
cat is under the control of the owner or other person in a vehicle or is
controlled by a chain or leash of sufficient strength and length to control the
actions of the dog or cat. (1976 Code § 4-3-12; amd. 1992 Code)
   D.   Dogs And Cats At Food Establishments: No person shall cause or permit
any dog or cat, at any time, with the exception of seeing eye dogs, to enter
any establishment where food is prepared or sold. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979;
amd. 1992 Code)
   E.   Maximum Number Of Dogs Kept: No more than three (3) dogs age three (3)
months or older shall be housed or kept at any residence within the city. This
limitation shall not apply to duly licensed pet shops, animal hospitals or
grooming establishments. (Ord. O-07-2001, 2-5-2001)
   F.   Dog Bites: No person shall permit or allow a dog in his possession or
control to bite a person or another animal. A person shall be held strictly
liable for any bite inflicted by a dog in his possession or control. (Ord. O-
12-2007, 3-19-2007)
      1.   First Offense: A person shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00)
the first time a dog in his possession or control bites a person or another
animal. Additionally, that dog shall have to wear a muzzle and a tag as
required by the city at all times and the owner shall be required to post a
placard, as prescribed by the city, in the front window or door of their
residence warning of the presence of said dog. After a police investigation, a
determination shall be made by the chief of police or his designee, based on
the totality of the circumstances, whether the dog in question will be
considered a vicious or dangerous dog as defined in this article. (Ord. O-21-
2013, 10-21-2013)
      2.   Second Offense: A person shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) the second time a dog in his possession or control bites a person or
another animal. If the dog is not wearing a muzzle and a tag as required in
subsection F1 of this section, the fine shall be increased to five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
      3.   Third Offense: A person shall be fined five hundred dollars
($500.00) the third time a dog in his possession or control bites a person or
another animal. If the dog is not wearing a muzzle and a tag as required in
subsection F1 of this section, the fine shall be increased to one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). Additionally, that dog will no longer be allowed on any
property owned or controlled by the city.
      4.   Additional Offenses: Any person who owns or controls a dog that is
required to wear a muzzle and a tag (as described in subsection F1 of this
section), but is not wearing the required muzzle and tag, shall be fined five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense. Additionally, any person who owns or
controls a dog that is prohibited from being present on property owned or
controlled by the city (as described in subsection F3 of this section), but is
present on such property, shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
offense. (Ord. O-12-2007, 3-19-2007)
5-5A-4: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION PROCEDURES:
The animal control officer, his authorized representative or other police
officers shall capture and impound in a pound, to be furnished by the city,
every dog or cat found at large without a collar, badge or muzzle, as is in
this article provided. The animal control officer or his authorized
representative shall notify the owner of such dog or cat so taken, if the name
of the owner can be ascertained, and such owner shall be permitted to redeem
such dog or cat within three (3) days by paying all licenses and other fees,
together with the sum as provided in section
3-1A-1 of this code, per day, for the cost of keeping such animal and the cost
of advertising, if any. If no redemption is made of any animal thus impounded
after three (3) days, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer or his
authorized representative to dispose of such animal by delivering same to any
state licensed humane society or animal adoption society. (1976 Code § 4-3-13;
amd. 1992 Code)
5-5A-5: KILLING VICIOUS ANIMALS:
It shall be lawful for the animal control officer, his authorized
representative, or other police officer to kill any vicious dog or cat at large
within the limits of the city which cannot be safely taken up and impounded.
(1976 Code § 4-3-13; amd. 1992 Code)
5-5A-6: DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS:
   A.   Definitions:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The person appointed, or hired, by the city to properly
apprehend, handle and care for animals.
AT LARGE: A dog off the premises of the owner and not under the control of a
leash by the owner, a member of the owner's family or an authorized person.
BITE: To seize or cut with the teeth.
CONFINEMENT STRUCTURE: A securely locked pen, kennel, structure or fence
capable of containing a dangerous dog and shall be designed, constructed and
maintained to prevent the animal's escape and prevent the entry of young
children. The pen, kennel, structure or fence must have secure sides and any
gaps or spaces present in the structure must not allow the dog to escape or
place its head through such gap or space. All structures used to confine a
dangerous dog must be securely locked when such an animal is within the
structure. Any fence used to contain a dangerous dog must have a minimum height
of six feet (6'). All structures erected to house a dangerous dog must comply
with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All structures must be
adequately lighted, ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. For
the purpose of this section, voice control or electronic fencing shall not be
considered as a means of control.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog, other than a police dog, which when either unmuzzled,
unleashed or unattended by its owner or keeper: 1) approaches any person or any
other controlled domestic animal in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an
apparent attitude of attack upon streets, sidewalks, or any public ground or
places, or on private property other than the owner's or 2) has been used
primarily or in part for the purpose of dogfighting, or is trained for
dogfighting.
DOG: All members of the canine family.
FIGHT: A prearranged conflict between two (2) or more animals but does not
include a conflict that is accidental.
LEASH: A cord, rope, strap or chain which shall be securely fastened to the
collar or harness of a dog and shall be of sufficient strength to keep such dog
under control.
MUZZLE: A device constructed of strong, soft material or a metal muzzle. The
muzzle must be made in a manner which will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent it from biting any
person or animal.
NIP: To pinch or squeeze with the teeth with no breaking of skin or tissue.
OWNER: Any person having a right of property in a dog, or who keeps or harbors
a dog, or who has in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly
permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by the owner.
PERSON: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, society, association or
other entity.
POLICE DOG: A trained dog used by law enforcement officers for law enforcement
purposes and activities.
POUND: Any facility used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned,
or unwanted dogs or other animals.
VICIOUS DOG:
      1.   Any individual dog that when unprovoked inflicts bites or attacks a
human being or other animal either on public or private property;
      2.   Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition
to attack, without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the
safety of human beings or domestic animals;
      3.   Any individual dog that has a trait or characteristic and a
generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked attacks
upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a particular manner or
with special equipment;
      4.   Any individual dog which has been found to be a "dangerous dog" upon
three (3) separate occasions.
   B.   Dangerous Dog Determination:
      1.   Dangerous Dogs Leaving Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person
to knowingly or recklessly permit any dangerous dog to leave the premises of
its owner when not under control by a leash.
      2.   "Dangerous Dog" Determination: The administrative hearing officer,
after an investigation by the city, including sending, within fourteen (14)
days of becoming aware of an alleged infraction, notification to the owner of
the dog of the alleged infraction, the initiation of an investigation, and
affording the owner an opportunity to meet with the designated city employee
(s), gathering of any medical or veterinary evidence, interviewing witnesses,
and making a written report, may deem a dog to be a dangerous dog. A dog shall
be deemed a dangerous dog by a preponderance of the evidence. The owner shall
be sent immediate notification of the determination by certified mail that
includes a description of the appeal process.
      3.   Appeal: The owner of a dog found to be a dangerous dog pursuant to
this section may file an appeal in the circuit court within thirty five (35)
days of receipt of notification of the determination, for review of the
determination pursuant to the administrative review law, 735 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3-101 et seq.
      4.   Justified Conduct: A dog shall not be declared a dangerous dog if
the administrative hearing officer determines the conduct of the dog was
justified because:
         a.   The threat, injury, or death was sustained by a person who at the
time was committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog,
or upon the property of the owner or custodian of the dog, or was committing a
wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises or property owned or occupied
by the owner of the dog;
         b.   The injured, threatened, or killed person was tormenting,
abusing, assaulting, or physically threatening the dog or its offspring, or has
in the past tormented, abused, assaulted, or physically threatened the dog or
its offspring; or
         c.   The dog was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting
itself, its owner, custodian, or member of its household.
      5.   Exceptions: No dog shall be deemed a dangerous dog if it is a police
dog. Dangerous dogs shall not be classified in a manner that is specific to
breed. Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the
physically handicapped and guard dogs are exempt under this section; provided,
an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is performing its duties
as expected. To qualify for an exemption, each such dog shall be currently
inoculated against rabies. It shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted
dog to notify the city of changes of address. In the case of a guard dog, the
owner shall keep the city advised of the location where such dog will be
stationed.
   C.   Licensing Of Dangerous Dogs:
      1.   License: No person shall possess any dangerous or vicious dog for a
period of more than forty eight (48) hours without having first obtained a
license for the dog from the city.
      2.   Application: An application for a license to possess a dangerous or
vicious dog shall be filed with the city clerk on a form prescribed and
provided by the city clerk and shall be accompanied by all of the following:
         a.   Verification of the identity of the owner and current address by
providing a copy of the owner's driver's license;
         b.   Proof of ownership of the dog;
         c.   A copy of the current immunization and health record of the dog
prepared by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state of Illinois;
         d.   Two (2) photographs of the dog to be licensed taken not less than
one month before the date of the application. One photograph shall show a front
view and one photograph shall show a side view of the dog;
         e.   An animal licensing fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00); and
         f.   Such other information as may be required by the city clerk.
      3.   Inspection: Upon receipt of any application, the city clerk shall
forward such application to the police department, or that city employee
designated by the mayor to perform the duties of animal control, which shall
inspect the premises on which the dog shall be kept to determine that all
provisions of this section relating to confinement and posting of signs have
been complied with by the applicant. Upon completion of the inspection, the
police department shall notify the city clerk in writing of the results of its
inspection.
      4.   Approval Or Denial Of License: Upon receipt of the results of the
police department inspection, the city clerk shall notify the applicant of the
approval or denial of the license.
      5.   Verification By Owner: Within ten (10) business days following the
determination that the dog is a dangerous dog, the owner shall provide the city
with the following:
         a.   Verification that an identifying microchip has been installed
under the dog's skin by a veterinarian;
         b.   Verification that the dog has been sterilized; and
         c.   Verification of liability insurance, including coverage of claims
arising from the conduct of the dangerous dog, in an amount not less than one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each dog declared dangerous. The
insurance shall include a provision whereby the insurer notifies the city not
less than thirty (30) days prior to cancellation or lapse of coverage.
      6.   Revocation Of License: A license granted pursuant to this section
shall be automatically revoked upon any violation by the licensee of any
provision hereof. Upon revocation, the owner shall be required to remove the
dog from the city. In the event of a revocation of the license, the city shall
retain the licensing fee.
   D.   Confinement Of Dangerous Dogs:
      1.   No person shall possess any dangerous dog unless the dog is confined
in accordance with this section.
         a.   Confinement Indoors: No dangerous or vicious dog may be kept on a
porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to
exit the structure on its own.
         b.   Confinement In An Exterior Yard: No person shall confine a
dangerous dog in an exterior area unless the dog is confined in a confinement
structure constructed and maintained in accordance with this section.
         c.   Confinement On Leash: No person shall permit a dangerous or
vicious dog to go outside a confinement structure, house or other structure
unless the dog is securely restrained with a leash no longer than three feet
(3') in length and fitted with a muzzle. No person shall permit a dangerous dog
to be kept on a leash unless a person is in physical control of the leash. No
leash restraining a dangerous dog shall be attached to any inanimate object,
including, but not limited to, trees, posts, stakes and buildings.
   E.   Reporting Requirements Of Licensee: Any person holding a license
pursuant to this section shall report the incidence of any of the following
events to the police department:
      1.   The sale, barter, exchange, gift or death of any dangerous dog shall
be reported within forty eight (48) hours.
      2.   The escape from confinement or theft of any dangerous dog shall be
reported upon discovery of the escape or theft.
      3.   The biting or nipping of any person or animal by a dangerous dog
shall be reported upon occurrence.
      4.   The birth of any offspring of a dangerous dog shall be reported
within forty eight (48) hours of the birth of the offspring.
      5.   The permanent removal of any dangerous dog from the territorial
limits of the city shall be reported within forty eight (48) hours of such
removal by surrender of the license of the owner to the city clerk.
   F.   Sign Required: All persons possessing a dangerous dog shall display in
a prominent place on the premises where the dog is to be kept a sign, which is
legible from a distance of not less than one hundred feet (100'), stating
"DANGEROUS DOG". A similar sign shall be posted on any confinement structure.
   G.   Fighting Prohibited: No person shall fight or bait, conspire to fight
or bait, or keep, train or transport for the purpose of fighting or baiting any
dog.
   H.   Vicious Dogs:
      1.   Keeping Of Vicious Dog Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person to knowingly maintain, house, permit, or in any way keep on any property
within the city any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog.
      2.   "Vicious Dog" Determination: The administrative hearing officer,
after an investigation, including sending, within fourteen (14) days of
becoming aware of an alleged infraction, notification to the owner of the
alleged infraction, the initiation of an investigation, and affording the owner
an opportunity to meet with the designated city employee(s), gathering of any
medical or veterinary evidence, interviewing witnesses, and making a detailed
written report, may deem a dog to be a vicious dog. A dog shall be deemed a
vicious dog by a preponderance of the evidence. The owner shall be sent
immediate notification of the determination by registered or certified mail
that includes a complete description of the appeal process.
      3.   Appeal: The owner of a dog found to be a vicious dog pursuant to
this section may file an appeal in the circuit court within thirty five (35)
days of receipt of notification of the determination, for review of the
determination pursuant to the administrative review law, 735 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3-101 et seq.
      4.   Justified Conduct: A dog shall not be declared a vicious dog if the
administrative hearing officer determines the conduct of the dog was justified
because:
         a.   The threat, injury, or death was sustained by a person who at the
time was committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog,
or upon the property of the owner or custodian of the dog, or was committing a
wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises or property owned or occupied
by the owner of the dog;
         b.   The injured, threatened, or killed person was tormenting,
abusing, assaulting, or physically threatening the dog or its offspring, or has
in the past tormented, abused, assaulted, or physically threatened the dog or
its offspring; or
         c.   The dog was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting
itself, its owner, custodian, or member of its household.
      5.   Exceptions: No dog shall be deemed a vicious dog if it is a trained
police dog. Vicious dogs shall not be classified in a manner that is specific
to breed. Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the
physically handicapped, guard dogs and police dogs are exempt under this
section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is
performing duties as expected. To qualify for an exemption, each such dog shall
be currently inoculated against rabies. It shall be the duty of the owner of
such exempted dog to notify the city of changes of address. In the case of a
guard dog, the owner shall keep the city advised of the location where such dog
will be stationed.
   I.   Dogs Running At Large Prohibited: It is unlawful to permit any dog to
run at large or to be on any public right of way or property other than that of
such owner without being securely restrained by a leash. A dog may be allowed
on a property other than that of its owner without a leash if the property
owner gives permission. Dogs that are running at large within the city are
deemed to be in violation of this section and may be apprehended and impounded.
   J.   Impoundment And Redemption: When a dog is impounded by the city, the
owner, if known, shall be given notice not less than fourteen (14) days
thereafter. The notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the owner.
An affidavit or testimony of an authorized agent of the city, who mails such
notice shall be prima facie evidence of the receipt of such notice by the
owner. A reasonable attempt will be made to contact the owner. In case the
owner of any impounded dog desires to make redemption thereof, he or she may do
so on the following conditions:
      1.   Present proof of current rabies inoculation; or
      2.   Pay for the rabies inoculation of the dog; and
      3.   Pay for the board of the dog for the period it was impounded; and
      4.   If the incident is a first offense pay an administrative redemption
fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any
successive incidents.
When not redeemed by the owner within seven (7) days following notice, a dog
which has been impounded in accordance with this section shall be humanely
dispatched, offered for adoption, or otherwise disposed of by the pound as a
stray dog. (Ord. O-11-2015, 4-6-2015)
ARTICLE B. HENS
SECTION:
5-5B-1: Definitions
5-5B-2: Regulations
5-5B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
CHICKEN: An individual animal of the species Gallus gallus domesticus.
COOP: A structure that is designed to house hens which is enclosed on all sides
with a roof, door and windows.
DWELLING UNIT: A single family residence located in an R-1 residential district
on a lot of record consisting of at least 7,500 square feet.
HEN: The female of the species Gallus gallus domesticus or chicken.
ROOSTER: The male of the species Gallus gallus domesticus or chicken.
RUN: An outdoor area that is enclosed on all vertical sides by fencing. The run
must be attached to or must surround a coop with a doorway or hatch that allows
access into the space by hens. (Ord. O-06-2023, 3-6-2023)
5-5B-2: REGULATIONS:
   A.   No person shall possess a hen unless a license has been issued as set
forth in this article.
   B.   The number of hens allowed shall be a maximum of six (6) hens per
Dwelling Unit.
   C.   Roosters are prohibited within the City.
   D.   Licenses will only be granted to persons who reside in a single-family
Dwelling Unit.
   E.   Care for hens shall follow the following provisions:
      1.   No hen shall be permitted to run at large. Hens shall be kept in a
designated coop or run. Hens may be allowed to exercise in a rear yard with a
six foot (6') or higher fence with supervision.
         a.   If the coop and run are not within a fenced yard, hens must be
kept within the coop and run at all times.
         b.   Fences must meet the standards outlined in Title 9, Chapter 5 of
the City Code.
      2.   Feed must be stored in a fully enclosed, rodent proof container.
   F.   Housing for hens shall follow the following provisions:
      1.   The coop and run shall be located in the rear of the residential
structure. The coop and run are allowed in the rear yard, but not the side or
front yards.
      2.   The coop and run shall be located at least 10 feet (10') from all
property lines and at least twenty feet (20') from any neighboring dwelling.
      3.   Design. The coop must be built to provide ventilation, shade,
protection from precipitation, protection from cold weather and to be secure
from predators, wild birds and rodents.
         a.   Openings in windows and doors must be covered by wire mesh or
screens to deter predators.
         b.   Access doors must be sized and placed for ease of cleaning.
         c.   The enclosed run must be attached to the coop or must surround
the coop. The sides of the run must be made of fencing or wire mesh that
discourages predators.
         d.   The run must be enclosed on all sides, including the top or roof
plane.
      4.   Size. The coop shall provide a minimum of four (4) square feet of
floor area per hen. The run shall provide a minimum of eight (8) square feet of
floor area per hen.
         a.   Coops will be considered an accessory building as defined in
Section
8-8-1 of the City Code and must meet all standards outlined therein.
         b.   Coops shall not exceed 50 square feet in size shall require a
building permit prior to construction.
      5.   The coop and run shall be kept in a clean, dry and sanitary
condition at all times. Manure, uneaten and discarded feed, feathers and other
waste must be removed regularly and at a minimum of once per week.
         a.   Odors from hens, manure or related substances shall not be
detectable from any property line.
         b.   Manure must be stored and disposed of. Manure may be composted.
All manure not composted must be removed from property regularly and at a
minimum of once per week.
         c.   The sale of eggs shall be prohibited.
         d.   Breeding of chickens shall be prohibited.
   G.   No person shall maintain a coop without first obtaining a license from
the City.
      1.   The City may deny a license to any person who:
         a.   Owes money to the City; or
         b.   has, in the last five (5) years prior to application for a
license under this Section been convicted or plead guilty to any violation of
the City Code.
      2.   All licenses pursuant to this article shall be valid for one year
from the date of issuance. Licenses may be automatically renewed if the
licensee has been in compliance during the previous year.
      3.   Only persons residing in Dwelling Units are eligible for a license.
      4.   Only one coop license will be issued per zoning lot. A zoning lot
consisting of multiple platted lots shall be considered one lot.
      5.   Coop licenses are non-transferable.
      6.   Costs:
         a.   The coop license shall cost $25.00. This license shall renew
automatically if the licensee is in compliance with all standards set forth in
this article.
   H.   The owner of the coop is subject to the following additional penalties:
      1.   A person found to be keeping hens without a coop license will have
seven (7) days from notification to achieve compliance with this article.
      2.   A licensee found to be in violation of the standards outlined in
this article shall have seven (7) days from notification to achieve compliance.
If compliance is not achieved, the license shall be revoked. The licensee may
apply for a new license, subject to site inspection.
      3.   If a licensee is found to be in violation of these standards three
or more times, the license will be immediately and permanently revoked.
      4.   Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). Each day that a violation exists is a separate and separate
offense.
   I.   Hens, coops and runs not maintained according to this article shall be
deemed a public nuisance. (Ord. O-06-2023, 3-6-2023)
CHAPTER 6
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-6-1: Offenses Involving The Person
5-6-1-1: Assault
5-6-1-2: Battery
5-6-1-3: Reckless Conduct
5-6-1-4: Disorderly Person
5-6-1-5: Disorderly Conduct
5-6-1-6: Mob Action
5-6-1-7: Disturbing Places Of Worship
5-6-1-8: Possession Of Burglar's Tools
5-6-1-9: Loitering
5-6-1-10: Bribery
5-6-1-11: Fortunetelling
5-6-2: Offenses Involving Liquor
5-6-3: Offenses Involving Drugs
5-6-3-1: Possession Of Adult Use Cannabis In A Motor Vehicle - Prohibited
5-6-3-2: Possession Limit
5-6-3-3: Intoxicating Compounds
5-6-3-4: Controlled Substances
5-6-3-5: Legislative Intent; Inference Of Legitimacy
5-6-4: Offenses Involving Property
5-6-4-1: Trespasses
5-6-4-2: Damage To Property
5-6-4-3: Signs And Advertisements
5-6-4-4: Larceny
5-6-4-5: Possession Of Stolen Property
5-6-4-6: Shopping Carts
5-6-5: Offenses Against Public Health And Safety
5-6-5-1: Spitting
5-6-5-2: Burning Leaves
5-6-5-3: Poisons
5-6-5-4: False Fire Alarms
5-6-5-5: Throwing Stones, Glass, Etc.
5-6-5-6: Dangerous Sports
5-6-5-7: Residential Picketing
5-6-6: Offenses Against Morals And Decency
5-6-6-1: Disorderly Houses
5-6-6-2: Prostitution; Lewdness
5-6-6-3: Public Indecency
5-6-6-4: Public Indecency, Obscene Language (Rep. by Ord. O-43-97, 9-16-1997)
5-6-6-5: Indecent Exposure
5-6-6-6: Massage Establishments
5-6-7: Fighting
5-6-8: Retail Theft
5-6-9: Panhandling
5-6-1: OFFENSES INVOLVING THE PERSON:
5-6-1-1: ASSAULT:
No person shall commit an assault. A person commits an assault when, without
lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable
apprehension of receiving a battery. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
5-6-1-2: BATTERY:
No person shall commit a battery. A person commits a battery if he
intentionally or knowingly, without legal justification and by any means:
   A.   Causes bodily harm to an individual; or
   B.   Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an
individual. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
5-6-1-3: RECKLESS CONDUCT:
No person shall commit reckless conduct. A person who causes bodily harm to or
endangers the bodily safety of an individual by any means commits reckless
conduct if he performs recklessly the acts which cause the harm or endanger
safety, whether they otherwise are lawful or unlawful. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-
1979)
5-6-1-4: DISORDERLY PERSON:
As used herein, a "disorderly person" shall mean:
   A.   Any person who engages in an illegal occupation or business and any
person who attends, frequents, operates or who is an occupant of any place
where any illegal or immoral business or occupation is permitted or conducted;
   B.   Any person who shall be drunk or intoxicated in any public place or
under the influence of any narcotic drug in any public place in the City;
   C.   Any prostitute or any person found loitering in a house of ill fame or
prostitution or in a place where prostitution or lewdness is practiced,
encouraged or allowed or any person who frequents or is found present in such
places or any person soliciting for purposes of prostitution or is offering
himself, herself or others as subjects of prostitution;
   D.   Any person who shall collect or assemble in crowds and bodies for
unlawful or mischievous purposes in any place in the City to the annoyance or
inconvenience of other persons or who shall be involved in or incite or attempt
to incite, a riot, or who shall fail to disperse upon the command of a police
officer or other lawful authority;
   E.   Any person who shall collect or assemble and stand or sit in crowds or
loiter about or hinder, obstruct, impede or block the free and uninterrupted
passage of any sidewalk, street, alley or driveway or in front of any place of
business in the City or in any hall, stairway, office, courtroom or public hall
or building or any other public place in the City and who fails to disperse
upon the command of a police officer or other lawful authority;
   F.   Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly crowding people
unnecessarily in a public place by being offensive to public order or decency;
   G.   Any person who shall engage in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick
to obtain or who does obtain money or other things of value in any place in the
City or who shall aid or abet or in any manner be involved in such scheme,
device or trick;
   H.   Any person who shall keep or maintain a gaming room, gaming tables or
any policy or pool tickets used for gaming or knowingly permit a gaming room,
gaming tables or any policy or pool tickets to be kept, maintained, played or
sold on any premises occupied or controlled by him and any person knowingly
frequenting any of the aforementioned places and any person having such
paraphernalia in his possession, except state lotteries;
   I.   Any person who loiters, idles, is present or gathers with others in or
on any public property, private parking lot or other private property during
hours or times when such premises are posted as not being open to the general
public;
   J.   Any person who shall commit any indecent, lewd or filthy act in any
public place which is offensive to public order or decency;
   K.   Any person who shall utter any lewd or filthy words or use any
threatening language toward any other person or shall make any obscene gesture
to or about any other person in any public place which is likely to provoke the
average person to retaliation and thereby cause a breach of the peace. (Ord. O-
23-79, 11-20-1979)
5-6-1-5: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
   A.   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to provoke, make or aid in
making a breach of peace; or
   B.   Does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture or
display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and present danger of a
breach of peace or imminent threat of violence; or
   C.   Refuses or fails to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or activity
likely to produce a breach of peace where there is an imminent threat to
violence, and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to protect the
otherwise peaceful conduct and activity and have requested that said conduct
and activity be stopped and explained if there be time; or
   D.   Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by him to
be a peace officer under circumstances where three (3) or more persons are
committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are
likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm;
or
   E.   Assembles with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of using force
or violence to disturb the public peace; or
   F.   Goes about begging or soliciting funds on the public ways except as
provided in title 3, chapter 5 of this code; or
   G.   Appears in any public place manifestly under the influence of alcohol,
narcotics or other drug, not therapeutically administered, to the degree that
he may endanger himself or other persons or property or annoy persons in his
vicinity; or
   H.   Carries in a threatening or menacing manner, without authority of law,
any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto, knuckles,
slingshot, an object containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas or substance
or other dangerous weapon or conceals said weapon on or about the person or
vehicle; or
   I.   Pickets or demonstrates on a public way within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of any primary or secondary school building while the school is in
session and one-half (1/2) hour before school has been concluded; provided,
that this subsection does not prohibit the peaceful picketing of any school
involved in a labor dispute; or
   J.   Pickets or demonstrates on a public way within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of any church, temple, synagogue or other place of worship while
services are being conducted and one- half (1/2) hour before services are to be
conducted and one- half (1/2) hour after services have been concluded;
provided, that this subsection does not prohibit the peaceful picketing of any
church, temple, synagogue or other place of worship involved in a labor
dispute; or
   K.   With intent to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether or not
conversation thereby ensues; or
   L.   Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public
employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at
the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing
that such an offense has been committed; or
   M.   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose
deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in it; or
   N.   Transmits in any manner to the fire department of any city, town,
village or fire protection district a false alarm of fire knowing at the time
of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that
such fire exists; or
   O.   Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a
bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its
explosion would endanger human life knowing at the time of such transmission
that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such bomb or explosive
is concealed in any such place; or
   P.   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the "collection
agency act" or as an employee of such collection agency and while attempting to
collect an alleged debt makes a telephone call to the alleged debtor which is
designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor; or
   Q.   Collects or assembles and stands with crowds or loiters about or
hinders, obstructs, impedes or blocks the free and uninterrupted passage of any
sidewalk, street, alley or driveway or in front of any place of business in the
city or in any hall, stairway, office, courtroom or public hall or building or
any other public place in the city and who fails to disperse upon the command
of a police officer or other lawful authority; or
   R.   Loiters, idles, is present or gathers with others in or on any public
property, private parking lot or other private property during hours or times
when such premises are posted as not being open to the general public; or (Ord.
O-07-82, 5-14-1982)
   S.   Is in possession of an alcoholic beverage on a public street or other
public place, unless the alcoholic beverage is in its original container with
the seal unbroken or unless possession is in the premises of an establishment
with a valid City of Northlake liquor license. For purposes of this subsection,
a "public place" shall include, but not be limited to, all City streets, all
City rights-of-way, all City parking lots, and City owned properties, all
parking lots and common areas serving commercial "establishments" or multi-
family residential structures containing four (4) or more dwelling units,
provided this prohibition shall apply to such multi- family parking and common
area only if the owner, manager or owners' association has stated in writing
that it is the intent of the owners that the prohibition be applied. The
written statement may reserve the right of management to give one day permits
for residents or tenants to hold social gatherings in the common area, and with
a City of Northlake liquor license if required. (Ord. O-05-2006, 3-6-2006)
A person convicted of disorderly conduct shall be fined not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. O-07-82, 5-14-1982; amd. 1992
Code)
5-6-1-6: MOB ACTION:
Mob action consists of any of the following:
   A.   The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two (2) or
more persons acting together and without authority of the law; or
   B.   The assembly of two (2) or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
   C.   The assembly of two (2) or more persons, without authority of law, for
the purpose of doing violence to the persons or property of any one alleged to
have been guilty of any violation of the law, or for the purpose of exercising
correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by violence.
Any person convicted of mob action shall be fined in an amount not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned in a penal institution other than
a penitentiary for a term not to exceed six (6) months. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-
1979; amd. 1992 Code)
5-6-1-7: DISTURBING PLACES OF WORSHIP:
Any person who shall disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly met for
religious worship by making a noise or by rude and indecent behavior or profane
discourse within the place of worship or so near to the same as to disturb the
order and solemnity of the meeting shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. O-07-82, 5-14-1982; amd. 1992 Code)
5-6-1-8: POSSESSION OF BURGLAR'S TOOLS:
A person commits the offense of possession of burglary tools when he possesses
any key, tool, instrument, device or any explosive suitable for use in breaking
into a building, house trailer, watercraft, aircraft, motor vehicle, as defined
in the Illinois Vehicle Code, railroad car or any depository designed for the
safekeeping of property, or any part thereof, with intent to enter any such
place and with intent to commit therein a felony or theft. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-
20-1979)
5-6-1-9: LOITERING:
No person shall loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle, either alone and/or
in consort with others, in a public place in such manner so as to:
   A.   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians.
   B.   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or
any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or
interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business
lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such
public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or
building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and
regress therein, thereon and thereto.
When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated herein, a
police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop
causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person
who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this
section. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
5-6-1-10: BRIBERY 1 :
   A.   Committing Bribery: A person commits bribery when:
      1.   With intent to influence the performance of any act related to the
employment or function of any public officer, public employee or juror, he
promises or tenders to that person any property or personal advantage which he
is not authorized by law to accept; or
      2.   With intent to influence the performance of any act related to the
employment or function of any public officer, public employee or juror, he
promises or tenders to one whom he believes to be a public officer, public
employee or juror, any property or personal advantage which a public officer,
public employee or juror would not be authorized by law to accept; or
      3.   With intent to cause any person to influence the performance of any
act related to the employment or function of any public officer, public
employee or juror, he promises or tenders to that person any property or
personal advantage which he is not authorized by law to accept; or
      4.   He receives, retains or agrees to accept any property or personal
advantage which he is not authorized by law to accept knowing that such
property or personal advantage was promised or tendered with intent to cause
him to influence the performance of any act related to the employment or
function of any public officer, public employee or juror; or
      5.   He solicits any property or personal advantage which he is not
authorized by law to accept pursuant to an understanding that he shall
influence the performance of any act related to the employment or function of
any public officer, public employee or juror.
A person convicted of bribery shall be fined in an amount not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or both. (Ord. O-23-79,
11-20-1979; amd. 1992 Code)
   B.   Failure To Report A Bribe: No public officer, public employee or juror
shall fail to report forthwith to the proper authorities any offer of a bribe
made to him.
A public officer, public employee or juror who is convicted of failure to
report a bribe shall be fined in an amount not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) or imprisonment in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for
a term not to exceed six (6) months, or both. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd.
1992 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 1-9-8 of this Code.
5-6-1-11: FORTUNETELLING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain money or property from
another by practicing or assuming to practice or holding one's self out as
skilled in fortunetelling by means of card reading, palmistry, phrenology,
necromancy, clairvoyance, astrology, seership, spirit mediumship, character
reading or any craft science or by any other device or practice.
   B.   Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense. (Ord. O-23-2018, 11-5-2018)
5-6-2: OFFENSES INVOLVING LIQUOR 1 :
   A.   Consumption Outside Licensed Premises: No person shall consume any
alcoholic beverages on any premises on which alcoholic beverages are sold other
than inside the building structure or enclosed premises in which said alcoholic
beverages are sold. It is the intent of this subsection to limit consumption of
alcoholic beverages to the building in which the sale is made and to prohibit
such consumption in automobiles parked on the premises, parking areas, open
areas adjacent to the premises and similar open areas adjoining or near the
place of sale.
   B.   Consumption In Public: No person shall drink any alcoholic liquor, as
defined by law, on any public way or in or about any motor vehicle upon any
public way in the City.
   C.   Transporting Liquor: No person shall transport, carry, possess or have
any alcoholic liquor in or upon or about any motor vehicle upon any public way
in the City except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.
   D.   Public Intoxication: No person shall be drunk or shall be in a state of
intoxication in any street, avenue or public place or in any private house or
place to the disturbance of any person.
A person convicted of being intoxicated in public shall be fined in an amount
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; 1992
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 3, chapter 3 of this Code for licensing provisions.
5-6-3: OFFENSES INVOLVING DRUGS:
5-6-3-1: POSSESSION OF ADULT USE CANNABIS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE - PROHIBITED:
A.   No driver may use cannabis within the passenger area of any motor vehicle
upon a highway in the City of Northlake.
B.   No driver may possess cannabis within any area of any motor vehicle upon a
highway in the City of Northlake except in a sealed, odor proof, child
resistant container.
C.   No passenger may possess cannabis within any passenger area of any motor
vehicle upon a highway in the City of Northlake except in a sealed, odor proof,
child-resistant container. (Ord. O-18-2023, 10-3-2023)
5-6-3-2: POSSESSION LIMIT:
   A.   Except if otherwise authorized by the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act
(410 ILCS 705/) ("Act"), for a person who is twenty one (21) years of age or
older and a resident of the State of Illinois, the possession limit is as
follows:
      1.   Thirty (30) grams of cannabis flower;
      2.   No more than five hundred (500) milligrams of THC contained in
cannabis-infused product;
      3.   Five (5) grams of cannabis concentrate; and
      4.   For registered qualifying patients, any cannabis produced by
cannabis plants grown under subsection (b) of Section 10-5, provided any amount
of cannabis produced in excess of thirty (30) grams of raw cannabis or its
equivalent must remain secured within the residence or residential property in
which it was grown.
   B.   For a person who is twenty one (21) years of age or older and who is
not a resident of the State of Illinois, the possession limit is:
      1.   Fifteen (15) grams of cannabis flower;
      2.   Two and one half (2.5) grams of cannabis concentrate; and
      3.   Two hundred fifty (250) milligrams of THC contained in a cannabis-
infused product.
   C.   The possession limits found in subsections A and B of this section are
to be considered cumulative.
   D.   No person shall knowingly obtain, seek to obtain, or possess an amount
of cannabis from a dispensing organization or craft grower that would cause him
or her to exceed the possession limit under this section, including cannabis
that is cultivated by a person under this Act or obtained under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
   E.   Nothing in this section is intended to permit the transfer of cannabis,
with or without remuneration, to a person under twenty one (21) years of age,
or to allow a person under twenty one (21) years of age to purchase, possess,
transport, grow, or consume cannabis except where authorized by the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act or by the Community
College Cannabis Vocational Pilot Program.
   F.   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit his or
her residence, any other private property under his or her control, or any
vehicle, conveyance, or watercraft under his or her control to be used by an
invitee of the parent's child or the guardian's ward, if the invitee is under
the age of twenty one (21), in a manner that constitutes a violation of this
section. A parent or guardian is deemed to have knowingly permitted his or her
residence, any other private property under his or her control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under his or her control to be used in violation of
this section.
   G.   Smoking cannabis is prohibited in any place where smoking is prohibited
under the Smoke Free Illinois Act (410 ILCS 82/) as well as any retail tobacco
store as defined in the Smoke Free Illinois Act.
   H.   Smoking cannabis is prohibited in any public place. As used in this
section "public place means any place where a person could reasonably be
expected to be observed by others. "Public place" includes all parts of
buildings owned in whole or in part, or leased, by the State of Illinois or a
unit of local government "Public place" includes all areas in a park,
recreation area, wildlife area or playground owned in whole or in part, leased
or managed by the State of Illinois or a unit of local government. "Public
place" does not include the interior of a private residence unless the private
residence is used to provide licensed childcare, foster care or other similar
social service care on the premises of the private residence.
   I.   Except as otherwise provided in this section the terms used in this
section shall have the same definitions as contained in Section 1-10 of the
Act.
   J.   The provisions of this section shall not be considered to be a
limitation on the enforcement of the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/) or
any other statute regulating the sale, distribution or possession of cannabis
or cannabis infused product.
   K   Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00). Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. O-01-2020, 1-13-2020; amd. Ord. O-18-2023, 10-3-2023)
5-6-3-3: INTOXICATING COM-POUNDS 1 :
No person shall inhale, breathe or drink any compound, liquid or chemical
containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate,
methyl ethyl ketone, trichoroathane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone,
methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone or any other substance for the purpose
of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational
behavior or in any manner change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or
mental processes. For the purpose of this Section, any such condition so
induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition; provided, however, that
the provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
   A.   Any person who inhales, breathes or drinks such material or substance
pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, physician, surgeon,
dentist or podiatrist authorized to so direct or prescribe.
   B.   Any person who inhales, breathes, drinks or otherwise in any manner
uses any narcotic, dangerous drug or other material or substance or combination
thereof, which material or substance or combination thereof is defined by, and
the use of which is prohibited or regulated by any law of the State of
Illinois.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be fined not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. O-11-82, 5-14-
1982; 1992 Code)
 
Notes
1 See section
  5-9-2 of this title.
5-6-3-4: CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly possess any substance defined by 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes as a controlled substance, except as authorized by
law.
A person who violates this Section shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. O-10-80, 5-13-1980; 1992 Code)
5-6-3-5: LEGISLATIVE INTENT; INFERENCE OF LEGITIMACY:
Sections
5-6-3-4 through
5-6-3-7 of this chapter are intended to be used solely for the suppression of
the commercial traffic in and possession of items that, within the context of
the sale or offering for sale, or possession, are by a preponderance of the
evidence marketed for the illegal and unlawful use of cannabis or controlled
substances. To this end reasonable and common sense inferences may be drawn in
favor of the legitimacy of any transaction or item. Sections
5-6-3-4 through
5-6-3-7 of this chapter are modeled after and shall be interpreted in
consonance with the Illinois drug paraphernalia control act 1 . (Ord. O-41-97,
9-15-1997)
 
Notes
1 See section
  5-9-2 of this title.
5-6-4: OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY:
5-6-4-1: TRESPASSES:
   A.   Trespass Prohibited: No person shall commit a trespass within the city
upon either public or private property.
   B.   Specifically Enumerated Trespasses: A person commits trespass when he
knowingly:
      1.   Enters upon the land, or building, or any part thereof of another,
after receiving, prior to such entrance, notice from the owner's occupant that
such entry is forbidden, or remains upon the land or building of another, after
receiving notice from the owner, or occupant, or duly authorized
representative, to depart.
A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning of
the previous paragraph if he has been notified personally, either orally or in
writing, including a valid court order, or if printed or written notice
forbidding such entry or remaining on the premises has been conspicuously
posted or exhibited at the main entrance of such land or building of the
forbidden part thereof; or
      2.   Enters upon property open to the public, or any part thereof, and
remains thereon with a malicious and mischievous intent after receiving notice,
either oral or written, from the owner or occupant to depart; or
      3.   Wilfully defaces, mars, injures or destroys any building or part of
any building or any property of another with paint, tar, acid, grease, oil or
other such substance which would detrimentally alter the outer face or
substance of such building or any property of another or any fence, tree, shrub
or plant appurtenant thereto. (Ord. O-05-2006, 3-6-2006)
      4.   Enters into or upon any lot, block or tract of ground in the city
which is under cultivation unless such person is an owner, lessee or person
entitled so to enter or the duly authorized agent thereof. (Ord. O-09-2009, 4-
20-2009)
   C.   Rental Property Agreement: All owners of property who rent it for
residential purposes shall annually complete an agreement in a form to be
provided by the city and return it to the Northlake police department. (Ord. O-
05-2006, 3-6-2006)
   D.   Violation; Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating this section
shall be fined in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(Ord. O-09-2009, 4-20-2009)
5-6-4-2: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
   A.   Vandalism; Property Damage Generally: A person commits vandalism when
he or she engages in the wilful or malicious destruction, injury, disfigurement
or defacement of any public or private property, real or personal, without the
consent of the owner or person having custody of said property. Said offense
shall include, but is not limited to, actions by cutting, tearing, breaking,
marking, painting or drawing when such actions are intended to or have the
effect of causing damage to property.
   B.   Damage To City Property:
      1.   No person shall cut, injure, mark or deface any city building,
sewer, water pipe, hydrant or other city property or any tree, grass or shrubs.
      2.   No person shall carelessly, wilfully or maliciously break, deface,
move or carry away or in any way injure or destroy any public lamp or lamppost,
sidewalk, bridge, fence, public building, street sign, tree or any other public
property belonging to the city without proper authority.
   C.   Damaging Place Of Worship, Cemeteries: No person shall wilfully deface,
mar, injure, destroy or remove any vault, tomb, monument, gravestone, memorial
of the dead, church, synagogue or any other structure constituting a place of
worship of any religion, sect or group or any part of any contents thereof or
any fence, tree or shrub or plant appurtenant thereto.
   D.   Damage To Property Without Consent: It shall be unlawful for any person
to:
      1.   Knowingly damage any property of another without his consent; or
      2.   Knowingly start a fire on the land of another without his consent;
or
      3.   Knowingly deposit on the land or in the building of another without
his consent any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound, thereby
intending to interfere with the use by another of a land or building.
   E.   Violation; Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating this section
shall be fined in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(Ord. O-09-2009, 4-20-2009)
5-6-4-3: SIGNS AND ADVERTISEMENTS:
   A.   Certain Signs And Advertisements Prohibited: No person shall paste,
post, print, paint, nail or otherwise fasten any handbill, sign, poster,
advertisement or other notice of any kind whatsoever, or cause the same to be
done, on any curbstone, flagstone or any other portion or part of any sidewalk
or street or upon any tree, lamppost, hitching post, telegraph pole, hydrant,
bridge, pier or upon any structure within the limits of any street in the City
except such as may be required by this Code or the laws of the State or the
government of the United States.
   B.   Defacing Or Removing Poster Or Notice: No person shall wilfully or
maliciously tear down, mutilate and deface or render illegible any poster,
notice or handbill lawfully posted upon any street, alley or other place in the
City. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
5-6-4-4: LARCENY:
   A.   Larceny Prohibited: No person shall take the personal property of
another by fraud or stealth with the intent to deprive another thereof.
   B.   Larceny By False Pretense:
      1.   No person shall induce any person to give up or pay over any money
or other thing of value by any false representation or pretense or in exchange
for any false or bogus coin or check, draft or other false evidence of value or
in consideration of refraining from a lawful or unlawful arrest or in
consideration of refraining from reporting any unlawful act to any public
official.
      2.   No person shall act as a solicitor, capper or procurer for any of
the unlawful acts, games or businesses forbidden by this Code or in any manner
persuade or attempt to induce any person to play at or patronize in any of
these unlawful acts, games or business. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
5-6-4-5: POSSESSION OF STOLEN PROPERTY:
No person shall purchase, take in, receive, keep in his possession or dispose
of any stolen property or conceal such property or fail to promptly inform some
proper officer of the possession thereof upon circumstances arising or
calculated to indicate that such property had been stolen or the possession
unlawfully obtained. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
5-6-4-6: SHOPPING CARTS:
   A.   Abandoning Carts: No person shall abandon or leave unattended any
grocery cart or shopping cart upon any public street, sidewalk or public way
within the City other than the premises where such cart was originally
obtained.
   B.   Taking Carts: No person shall remove or perpetrate removal of a grocery
cart or shopping cart from the premises and parking lot of the establishment
which furnished such cart.
   C.   Provisions Posted: A copy of this section shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in every place of business or establishment which provides
carts or shopping carts for the use by its customers or patrons. (Ord. O-23-79,
11-20-1979)
5-6-5: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY:
5-6-5-1: SPITTING:
No person shall spit upon any public sidewalk or upon the floor of any public
conveyance or upon the floor of any assembly room or public building under the
penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord.
O-07-82, 5-14-1982; amd. 1992 Code)
5-6-5-2: BURNING LEAVES 1 :
No person shall make or cause a fire to be made for burning any leaves in any
public way or public space or upon any private property. Any person violating
this section shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense. (Ord. O-07-82, 5-14-1982; amd. 1992 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 3, article B of this Code for landscape waste
  regulations.
5-6-5-3: POISONS:
No poisonous medicine, concoction or substance shall be held for sale or sold
except for lawful purposes and with proper motives and by persons competent to
give the proper directions and precautions as to the use of the same nor shall
any bottle, box, parcel or receptacle thereof be delivered to any person unless
the same is marked "Poison" nor to any person whom the party delivering the
same has reason to think intends it for any illegal or improper use or purpose.
(Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
5-6-5-4: FALSE FIRE ALARMS:
No person shall, without reasonable cause, by outcry or otherwise make or
circulate, or cause to be made or circulated, any false fire alarm. Any person
violating this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
Thirty percent (30%) of any fines collected in connection with a false fire
alarm shall be paid to the fire protection district that responded to the false
alarm. (Ord. O-20-2017, 11-20-2017)
5-6-5-5: THROWING STONES, GLASS, ETC.:
   A.   No person shall throw or cause to be thrown, cast or put into or leave
in or on any street, alley or sidewalk, public place or any enclosed public
ground in the City any stone, missile, nails, tacks, ice, broken crockery or
china, iron or metal scraps, or any other article or thing by which persons,
animals or vehicles shall or may be injured or endangered.
   B.   No person shall cast or throw any stone or other missile upon or at any
building, railroad cars, tree or other public or private property or upon or at
any person in any street, avenue, alley, lane, public place or at any enclosed
or unenclosed ground in the City or aid or abet in the same.
   C.   No person shall throw, cast, lay or place upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the City any glass bottle, window glass or any other
article made of or containing glass, and in the case of the accidental breaking
of any glass upon any such street, sidewalk or public place, the owner or
person in charge of such glass, or the person responsible for such breakage,
shall at once remove the same from such street, sidewalk or public place. (Ord.
O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
5-6-5-6: DANGEROUS SPORTS:
No person shall, at any place in the City, fly kites, throw stones or other
hard substances, play ball or engage in any sport or exercise if such activity
is likely to impede the passage of vehicles and otherwise injure persons or
property or obstruct the business of other persons.
A person convicted of dangerous sports shall be fined not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.
O-23-79, 11-20-1979; 1992 Code)
5-6-5-7: RESIDENTIAL PICKETING:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before or about the
residence or dwelling of any individual in the City.
Violators of this Section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00), and each day a violation occurs or is permitted to
continue will be considered a separate violation. (Ord. O-28-93, 9-20-1993)
5-6-6: OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS AND DECENCY:
5-6-6-1: DISORDERLY HOUSES:
   A.   Definitions: As used herein, "disorderly house" shall mean any brothel,
bawdy house, house of ill fame 1 , gaming house 2 , house of assignation or a
house or place where persons congregate and engage in using narcotics, drugs or
other unlawful acts.
   B.   Maintaining A Disorderly House: No person shall keep or maintain or
aid, abet or assist in keeping and maintaining any disorderly house in the
City.
   C.   Leasing Property For Disorderly House: No person shall let or lease his
house or building for the purpose of keeping therein any disorderly house or
knowing or ascertaining that his house or building is so occupied and used,
fail or neglect to immediately oust the occupants.
   D.   Occupants And Visitors Of Disorderly Houses: No person shall knowingly
be an inmate of or resident of any disorderly house or be found in or visiting
any such house. This subsection shall not apply to physicians or officers in
the discharge of their professional or official duties. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-
1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  5-6-6-2C of this Chapter.
2 2. See Section
  5-7-3 of this Title.
5-6-6-2: PROSTITUTION; LEWDNESS:
   A.   Definitions: When used in this Section
5-6-6-2, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them
as follows:
LEWDNESS: The performance of an act of sexual intercourse or other sexual
activity with another person, except a spouse, for the purpose of obtaining an
orgasm or to offer to solicit or suggest to another person such activity.
PROSTITUTION: The giving or receiving of the body for sexual intercourse for
hire.
   B.   Prostituting; Lewd Behavior; Soliciting For Prostitution Or Lewdness:
      1.   No person, male or female, shall engage in or offer to engage in any
act of prostitution or other act of lewdness or solicit, induce, entice or
procure another to commit or engage in any act or prostitution or other act of
lewdness.
      2.   No person shall consort with any prostitute or other person of lewd
character.
      3.   No person shall consort with another of the opposite sex for the
purpose of engaging in an act of lewdness in any room, building, dwelling,
hotel, street, sidewalk or any other place, or occupy same for such purposes.
      4.   No person shall approach or speak to any other person of the same or
opposite sex or by any sign or suggestion indicate or attempt to persuade or
induce any other person to do or perform any act of lewdness. (Ord. O-23-79,
11-20-1979)
   C.   House Of Ill Fame Or Assignation 1 :
      1.   Nuisance Declared: Every house of ill fame or house of assignation
where men and women resort for the purpose of fornication, prostitution or
lewdness is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
      2.   Keeping A House Of Ill Fame Or Assignation: No person shall keep or
maintain a house of ill fame or assignation or a place for the practice of
fornication, prostitution or lewdness. Each twenty four (24) hours that such
house or place shall be kept or maintained for such purpose shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
      3.   Leasing A House For Prostitution Or Lewdness: No person shall lease
to another any house, room or other premises, in whole or in part, for any of
the uses or purposes set forth in this subsection or knowingly permit the same
to be used or occupied for such purposes.
      4.   Frequenting House Of Ill Fame Or Prostitution: No person shall
patronize, frequent, be found in or be an inmate of any such house or place
used for any of the purposes set forth in this subsection.
      5.   Penalty: Any person who shall violate the provisions of this
subsection shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense.
   D.   Directing Persons To Houses Of Ill Fame Or To Prostitutes: No person,
knowingly, shall direct, take, transport or offer to direct, take or transport
any person for immoral purposes to any other person or assist any person by any
means to seek or to find any prostitute or other person engaged in immoral
practices or any brothel, bawdy house or any other place of ill fame.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this subsection shall be fined
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. O-10-82,
5-14-1982; amd. 1992 Code)
 
Notes
  1. See Sections
1 5-6-6-1 and
  5-6-6-6 of this Chapter.
5-6-6-3: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
   A.   Indecency Committed: A person who knowingly or intentionally, in a
public place: 1) engages in sexual intercourse; 2) engages in deviate sexual
conduct; 3) appears in a state of nudity; or 4) fondles the genitals of himself
or another person commits a public indecency.
   B.   Definitions: For purposes of this Section the following meanings shall
apply:
NUDITY: The exposure of male or female genitals, pubic area, female breasts
with less than a full opaque covering of the nipples thereof, human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered,
or that portion of the buttocks which would be covered by a properly worn
"thong" type bikini bottom.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any location frequented by the public, or where the public is
present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected
to be observed by members of the public. Public places include, but are not
limited to, streets, sidewalks, pools, business and commercial establishments
(whether for profit or not for profit and whether open to the public at large
or where entrance is limited by a coverage charge or membership requirement),
hotels, motels, restaurants, nightclubs, country clubs, cabarets and meeting
facilities utilized by social, fraternal or similar organizations. Premises
used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or temporary in routine,
shall not be deemed a public place. Public places shall not include enclosed
single sex public restrooms, enclosed single sex functional showers, locker
and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms designed
and intended for sleeping accommodations, doctors' offices, churches,
synagogues or similar places when used for circumcisions, baptisms or similar
religious ceremonies, portions of hospitals or similar places in which nudity
or exposure is necessarily and customarily expected outside of the home; nor
shall it include a person appearing in a state of nudity in a modeling class
operated by: 1) a proprietary school licensed by the State; a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 2) a private
college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in
which credits are transferrable to a college, junior college or a university
supported entirely or partly by taxation or an accredited private college.
   C.   This Section is patterned after and shall be interpreted in the same
manner as the Indiana Public Indecency Statute held constitutional by the
United States Supreme Court in Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 111
S.Ct. 2456 (1991).
   D.   The definition of "public place" set forth above shall be interpreted
to be no more broad than the definition of "public place" set forth in 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9 as upheld by the Illinois Supreme Court in
People v. Garrison, 82 Ill.2d 444, 412 N.E.2d 483 (1980). (Ord. O-43-97, 9-16-
1997)
5-6-6-4: PUBLIC INDECENCY; OBSCENE LANGUAGE:
(Rep. by Ord. O-43-97, 9-16-1997)
5-6-6-5: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
Any person who shall appear, bathe, sunbathe, walk or be in any public park,
playground or school facility and the area adjacent thereto or any Municipal
building and the areas adjacent thereto or any public way within the City in
such a manner that the genitals, vulva, pubic, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum,
anus, anal region or pubic hair region of any person or any portion of the
breast at or below the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person is
exposed to public view or is not covered by an opaque covering shall be fined
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. O-07-82,
5-14-1982; amd. 1992 Code)
5-6-6-6: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   Definition: As used in this Section, "massage establishment" means any
premises, place of business or membership club where there is conducted the
business or activity of furnishing, providing or giving, for a fee or other
form of consideration, a massage, fomentation, bath, manipulation of the body,
electric magnetic treatment, alcohol rub or other similar massage service or
procedure.
   B.   Massage Establishments Prohibited: No person shall establish, maintain
or operate any massage establishment, except establishments licensed pursuant
to the Barber, Cosmetology, Esthetics, and Nail Technology Act of 1985 1 , the
Medical Practice Act of 1987 2 , the Illinois Physical Therapy Act 3 , the
Physician Assistant Practice Act of 1987 4 , or the Podiatric Medical Practice
Act of 1987 5 .
   C.   Penalties: Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be
fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense, and
every day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. O-38-98, 8-17-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 410/1-1 et seq.
2 2. 225 ILCS 60/1 et seq.
3 3. 225 ILCS 90/1 et seq.
4 4. 225 ILCS 95/1 et seq.
5 5. 225 ILCS 100/1 et seq.
5-6-7: FIGHTING:
No person shall instigate, cause or procure any dogfight, prizefight, cockfight
or any public or private fighting. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
5-6-8: RETAIL THEFT:
   A.   Offense Of Retail Theft: A person commits the offense of retail theft
when he or she knowingly:
      1.   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried
away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such
merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail
value of such merchandise; or
      2.   Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia
of value or any other markings which aid in determining value fixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment, and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in
consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of
depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
      3.   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which
such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of
depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
      4.   Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such cart.
   B.   Presumptions: If any person: 1) conceals upon his or her person or
among his or her belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or
offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment; and 2) removes that
merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving payments for that
merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment, such person shall be
presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such merchandise with
the intention of retaining it or with the intention of depriving the merchant
permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without
paying the full retail value of such merchandise.
   C.   Detention: Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a
person has committed retail theft may detain such person, on or off the
premises of a retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner and for a
reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:
      1.   To request identification;
      2.   To verify such identification;
      3.   To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his
possession unpurchased merchandise and, to make reasonable investigation of the
ownership of such merchandise;
      4.   To inform a police officer of the detention of the person and
surrender that person to the custody of a police officer;
      5.   In the case of a minor, to inform a police officer, the parents,
guardian or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of
this detention and to surrender custody of such minor to such person.
A merchant may make a detention as permitted herein off the premises of a
retail mercantile establishment only if such detention is pursuant to an
immediate pursuit of such person.
A merchant shall be deemed to have reasonable grounds to make a detention for
the purposes of this section if the merchant detains a person because such
person has in his possession either a theft detection shielding device or a
theft detection device remover.
   D.   Affirmative Defense: A detention as permitted in this section does not
constitute an arrest or an unlawful restraint, nor shall it render the merchant
liable to the person so detained.
   E.   Penalty: Retail theft of property, the full retail value of which does
not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00), shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or a period of community service.
(Ord. O-42-97, 9-15-1997)
5-6-9: PANHANDLING:
   A.   Defined: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires
"panhandling" is any solicitation made in person, requesting an immediate
donation of money or other thing of value. The purchase of an item for an
amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable person
would understand that the purchase is, in substance, a donation. Except as
specifically provided in this section, panhandling does not include passively
standing or sitting with a sign or other indication that one is seeking
donations, without addressing any solicitation to any specific person other
than in responses to any inquiry by that person.
   B.   Place Of Panhandling; Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to
panhandle, including passively standing or sitting with a sign or other
indication that one is seeking donations, when the person solicited is in any
of the following places within the city limits:
      1.   At any bus or train stop;
      2.   In any public transportation vehicle or facility;
      3.   In any vehicle on the street;
      4.   In a public park, fairground or sporting facility, including
entryways or exits thereto;
      5.   Within fifteen feet (15') of the site of any automated teller
machine (ATM);
      6.   On private property, unless the panhandler has permission from the
owner or occupant; or
      7.   In a parking lot or garage owned or operated by the city, including
entryways or exits and pay stations connected therewith.
   C.   Manner Of Panhandling; Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person
to panhandle in any of the following manners:
      1.   By blocking the path of the person solicited;
      2.   By using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation
or following a refusal;
      3.   By panhandling in a group of two (2) or more persons; or
      4.   By any statement, gesture or other communication which a reasonable
person in the situation of the person solicited would perceive to be a threat.
   D.   False Or Misleading Solicitation; Violation:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false or
misleading representation in the course of soliciting a donation. False or
misleading representations include, but are not limited to, the following:
         a.   Stating that the donation is needed to meet a specific need, when
the solicitor already has sufficient funds to meet that need and does not
disclose that fact;
         b.   Stating that the donation is needed to meet a need which does not
exist;
         c.   Stating that the solicitor is from out of town and stranded, when
such is not true;
         d.   Wearing a military uniform or other indication of military
service, when the solicitor is neither a present nor former member of the
service indicated;
         e.   Wearing or displaying an indication of physical disability, when
the solicitor does not suffer the disability indicated;
         f.   Use of any makeup or device to simulate any deformity; or
         g.   Stating that the solicitor is homeless, when he or she is not.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit a donation stating
that the funds are needed for a specific purpose and then spend the funds
received for a different purpose.
   E.   Penalty For Violation:
      1.   First Offense: Any person found guilty of violating any provision of
this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the
first offense.
      2.   Second Offense: Any person found guilty of violating any provision
of this section for the second time within any one year period shall be fined
not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
      3.   Third And Subsequent Offense: Any person found guilty of violating
any provision of this section for the third time, or any subsequent time
thereafter, within any one year period shall be fined not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. O-12-2009, 4-20-2009)
CHAPTER 7
GAMBLING
SECTION:
5-7-1: Gambling Prohibited
5-7-2: Horseraces
5-7-3: Gambling Places
5-7-4: Presence In Gambling Places
5-7-5: Gambling Devices
5-7-6: Enforcement
5-7-7: Electronic Sweepstakes Machines Prohibited
5-7-1: GAMBLING PROHIBITED:
No person shall:
   A.   Generally: Set up, keep or maintain, or permit to be set up, kept or
maintained, in any house or place within the corporate limits of the city,
occupied or controlled by him, any instrument, device or thing for the purpose
of gambling or with which money or property or anything representing money or
property or anything of value shall in any manner be wagered.
This subsection shall not apply to any state authorized lottery.
   B.   Games Of Chance:
      1.   Deal, play or engage in any device or game of chance or hazard
either as banker, dealer or otherwise nor bet on any game others may be playing
for the purpose of gambling.
      2.   Play for money or other valuable thing at billiards or at any game
with cards, dice or checks or with any instrument or other device whatsoever
which may be used for the purpose of playing or betting upon or winning or
losing money or anything of value nor bet on any game or thing or activity he
or others may be playing or taking part in within the corporate limits of the
city.
   C.   Lotteries: Keep, maintain or manage, or aid in keeping, maintaining,
directing or managing, any lottery or device whatsoever for the drawing or
disposing of money or any other property.
This subsection C shall not apply to any state authorized lottery or any
activity involving gaming authorized by the state under a permit.
   D.   Exposing Gambling Devices In Public Places: Expose in any of the
streets, avenues or other public places within the corporate limits of the city
any table or device of any kind whatsoever upon or by which any game of chance
or hazard specifically intended or designed to be used for playing. (Ord. O-23-
79, 11-20-1979)
   E.   Video Gaming: The prohibitions contained in this chapter shall not
apply to video gaming as authorized by title 3 of this code. (Ord. O-23-2012,
11-5-2012)
5-7-2: HORSERACES:
All betting, wagering, speculating, pool selling or bookmaking upon any
horserace or other races or the result thereof and all gambling within the city
is hereby prohibited. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
5-7-3: GAMBLING PLACES:
Every house, room, yard, boat, vessel or other structure or premises kept or
used for the purpose of permitting persons to gamble for any valuable thing
within the city are hereby declared to be common nuisances and shall be abated
1  as such upon the order of the chief of police. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979;
amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  4-2-3 of this code for abatement procedures.
5-7-4: PRESENCE IN GAMBLING PLACES:
No person shall be a frequenter, visitor, inmate, doorkeeper, solicitor,
runner, agent, abettor or pimp of or for any house, store, grocery, hall, room
or any other place where any instrument or device for gambling is kept, whereon
or with which money or property may be placed for wager. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-
1979)
5-7-5: GAMBLING DEVICES:
No person shall bring into the city or have in his possession in the city for
the purpose of gambling any table, thing or device of any kind or nature,
whereon or with which money, or any other thing of value may in any manner be
wagered. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
5-7-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Suppression Of Gambling: All members of the police department shall
give information to the chief of police of each house or other place within the
city wherein games, devices, tables, instruments or things for the purpose of
gambling are or may be set up or maintained, and the police officers shall take
all lawful means to suppress and prevent the playing at such tables, games or
devices, and for this purpose, when and as often as any of them shall have
reasonable cause to suspect that any such table, game or device is set up, kept
or maintained, they shall immediately make complaint thereof before the judge
and obtain a warrant authorizing them to enter such house or other place or any
room within the same, and the police officers shall thereupon have authority to
demand entry therein.
   B.   Seizure And Destruction Of Devices: Every member of the police
department shall seize any table, instrument, device or thing used for the
purpose of gambling, and all such tables, instruments, devices or things shall
be destroyed upon the order of the chief of police.
(Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-
2014)
5-7-7: ELECTRONIC SWEEPSTAKES MACHINES PROHIBITED.
   A.   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
      1.   ELECTRONIC MACHINE OR DEVICE means a mechanically, electrically or
electronically operated machine or device that is owned, leased or otherwise
possessed by a sweepstakes sponsor or promoter or any of the sweepstakes
sponsor's or promoter's partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors, that
is intended to be used by a sweepstakes entrant, that uses energy and that is
capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism.
      2.   Enter or entry means the act or process by which a person becomes
eligible to receive any prize offered in a sweepstakes.
      3.   Entertaining display means visual information capable of being seen
by a sweepstakes entrant that takes the form of actual game play or simulated
game play.
      4.   Prize means any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit or
anything else of value, which may be transferred to a person, whether
possession of the prize is actually transferred or placed on an account or
other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
      5.   Sweepstakes means any game, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion, which, with or without payment of any consideration, a person may
enter to win or become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of
which is based upon chance.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or place into
operation, an electronic machine or device to do either of the following in the
City:
      1.   Conduct a sweepstakes through the use of an entertaining display,
including the entry process or the reveal of a prize.
      2.   Promote a sweepstakes that is conducted through the use of an
entertaining display, including the entry process or the reveal of a prize.
   C.   Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $1,000.00. Every day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
(Ord. O-16-2019, 9-16-2019)
CHAPTER 8
WEAPONS
SECTION:
5-8-1: Definitions
5-8-2: Firearms
5-8-2-1: Sale Of Firearms By Licensed Dealers
5-8-2-2: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
5-8-2-3: Discharging Firearms
5-8-2-4: Keeping Firearms In Homes
5-8-3: Deadly Weapons
5-8-4: Possession Of Tear Gas Guns, Projectors Or Bombs
5-8-5: Air Guns
5-8-6: Throwing Stars
5-8-7: Enforcement
5-8-8: Penalty
5-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words and terms are used in this chapter, they shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
DEADLY WEAPONS: Those mentioned in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et
seq., and including firearms.
FIREARMS: Any device, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a
projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosion, expansion of gas or
escape of gas as defined by 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/1.1. (Ord. O-68-
90, 12-17-1990)
5-8-2: FIREARMS:
5-8-2-1: SALES OF FIREARMS BY LICENSED DEALERS:
   A.   State ID Card Required For Purchasers: No person shall be permitted to
purchase a firearm without first having secured a state of Illinois firearm
owner's identification card, except those exempted by 430 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 65/2.
   B.   Permit Required To Purchase: No person, having secured a license to
sell firearms, shall sell, loan or give away any firearm to any person who has
not first secured a permit from the chief of police to purchase such weapon.
Those exempted by 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/2 from the requirement of
possession of an Illinois firearms owner's identification card shall also be
exempted from the permit requirement of this subsection.
   C.   Restrictions On Sales: The following persons shall not be permitted to
purchase a firearm:
      1.   Any person under indictment for, or having been convicted of, a
crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year.
      2.   Any person who is an unlawful user of or addicted to cannabis or a
depressant, stimulant or narcotic drug.
      3.   No person who is a fugitive from justice.
      4.   No person who has been adjudicated mentally defective and has been
committed to a mental institution.
      5.   No person who has been discharged from the armed forces under
dishonorable conditions.
      6.   No person who is an alien illegally in the United States.
      7.   No person under twenty one (21) years of age, except as provided for
by 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4-2(i). (Ord. O-68-90, 12-17-1990; amd.
Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
5-8-2-2: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
No person shall:
   A.   Obliterate Identification Marks: Change, alter, remove or obliterate
the name of the maker, model, manufacturer's number or other mark of
identification on any firearm. Possession of any firearm upon which any such
mark shall have been changed, altered, removed or obliterated shall be prima
facie evidence that the possessor has changed, altered, removed or obliterated
the same. (Ord. O-42-90, 8-6-1990)
   B.   Sales To Minors 1 : No person shall sell or give to any minor under the
age of twenty one (21) years any firearms or firearms ammunition without the
written consent of his parent or legal guardian to possess and acquire firearms
and firearms ammunition and that he has never been convicted of a misdemeanor
other than a traffic offense or adjudged delinquent; provided, however, that
such parent or legal guardian is not an individual prohibited from having a
firearm owner's identification card and files an affidavit as required by 430
Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4. (Ord. O-68-90, 12-17-1990)
   C.   Carrying Firearms In Automobiles: Carry any firearm in a motor vehicle
with intent to use the same in the commission of any crime nor shall any person
who habitually frequents with thieves or who habitually frequents houses of ill
fame or gambling places carry any firearm in a motor vehicle, nor shall any
person carry any firearm in any motor vehicle within ten (10) years after he
shall have been convicted of murder, burglary, robbery or assault with intent
to commit a felony or any crime of violence.
   D.   Carrying Concealed Weapons: Carry concealed on or about his person a
pistol, revolver or other firearm. This provision does not apply, however, to
the following officers while engaged in the discharge of their official duties:
sheriffs, coroners, constables, police officers or other duly constituted peace
officers nor to the following employees or agents while engaged in the
discharge of the duties of their employment: conductors, baggagemen,
messengers, drivers, watchmen, special agents and police employed by railroad
or express companies and persons lawfully summoned by an official to assist in
making arrests or preserving the peace while so engaged in assisting such
officer. (Ord. O-42-90, 8-6-1990; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  5-9-5 of this title.
5-8-2-3: DISCHARGING FIREARMS:
No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within the
city, except upon premises used by a duly licensed shooting gallery, gun club
or rifle club; except, that the discharge of blank cartridges by any military
company on parade and in command of the commanding officer or the discharge of
firearms by any city officer or other person in the discharge of any legal duty
when the same is done in such manner as not to endanger the safety of any
person or injure any property shall not be deemed violations hereof. (Ord. O-
42-90, 8-6-1990)
5-8-2-4: KEEPING FIREARMS IN HOMES:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to deprive any citizen of
the right to keep in his home or place of business any firearm reasonably
necessary for the protection thereof. (Ord. O-42-90, 8-6-1990)
5-8-3: DEADLY WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess or sell, loan or give
to any person any blackjack, slingshot, sand club, sand bag, metal knuckles,
bludgeon or to carry or possess, with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto or any other
dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character. (Ord. O-42-90, 8-6-
1990)
5-8-4: POSSESSION OF TEAR GAS GUNS, PROJECTORS OR BOMBS:
No person, except a duly appointed or elected law enforcement officer, member
of the armed forces of the United States or of the national guard or organized
reserves, in pursuance of his official duty, or employee or agent of a bank,
trust company, express company, railroad company or of a commercial
institution, in pursuance of, and while engaged in the discharge of the duties
of his employment, shall possess or carry on or about his person or in any
vehicle a tear gas gun, projector or bomb or any object containing noxious
liquid gas or substance, other than an object containing a nonlethal noxious
liquid gas or substance designed solely for personal defense by a person
eighteen (18) years of age or older. (Ord. O-68-90, 12-17-1990)
5-8-5: AIR GUNS:
No person shall be permitted to carry, display, transport, fire or discharge
anywhere within the corporate limits of the city any air gun or air pistol,
spring gun or spring pistol or other device which is calculated or intended to
propel or project a pellet, arrow or similar projectile unless police
authorized supervision is present. (Ord. O-42-90, 8-6-1990)
5-8-6: THROWING STARS:
It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess or otherwise use a knifelike
instrument commonly known as a "throwing star". Any person convicted of
selling, possessing or otherwise using a "throwing star" shall be fined not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), for each offense. (Ord. O-12-85, 11-
18-1985; amd. 1992 Code)
5-8-7: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Arrest: Any police officer of the city may, within the limits of the
city, without a warrant, arrest any person which he may find in the act of
carrying or possessing, selling, lending or giving away any deadly weapon or
firearm as prohibited under the provisions of this chapter until a summons or
warrant can be procured on complaint made (under oath or affirmation) for the
trial of such person.
   B.   Confiscation Of Weapons: Any deadly weapon or firearm duly adjudged by
a properly constituted court to have been worn or carried by any person in
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be forfeited to the city and
shall be so adjudged as part of the judgment and penalty for any violation,
wherein a deadly weapon or firearm shall have been discovered and taken. (Ord.
O-42-90, 8-6-1990; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993)
5-8-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. O-42-90, 8-6-1990; amd.
1992 Code)
CHAPTER 9
MINORS
SECTION:
5-9-1: Curfew
5-9-2: Sale Of Certain Chemical Substances To Minors
5-9-3: Cruelty To Children
5-9-4: Abandoned Refrigerators
5-9-5: Weapons
5-9-6: Sale Of Explosives To Minors
5-9-7: Plastic Bags
5-9-8: Comic Books And Publications Depicting Crimes
5-9-9: School Curfew; Truancy; Parental Responsibility
5-9-10: Parental Responsibility
5-9-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following definitions apply:
CURFEW HOURS:
      1.   Eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, or Thursday until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day; and
      2.   Twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on any Friday or Saturday and until
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day.
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to
which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN:
      1.   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      2.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the
court.
MINOR: Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
PARENT: A person who is:
      1.   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person;
or
      2.   At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or
guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
REMAIN:
      1.   To linger or stay; or
      2.   To fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death
or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   B.   Offenses:
      1.   A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on
the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
      2.   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew
hours.
      3.   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
   C.   Defenses:
      1.   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this section
that the minor was:
         a.   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
         b.   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
         c.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
         d.   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
         e.   Involved in an emergency;
         f.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor's presence;
         g.   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
         h.   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
         i.   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
emancipation of mature minor act, as amended.
      2.   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B3 of this section
that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment
during curfew hours and refused to leave.
   D.   Police Detention: Each member of the police force is hereby authorized
to arrest, without warrant, any person violating any provisions of this section
and retain such person until he or she is turned over to the custody of the
parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of such
child.
   E.   Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in
the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
subsection C of this section is present.
   F.   Penalties: A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty
of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation
is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord.
O-11-2004, 5-17-2004)
5-9-2: SALE OF CERTAIN CHEMICAL SUBSTANCES TO MINORS 1 :
No person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale, deliver or give away to any
person under seventeen (17) years of age, unless upon the written order of
parent or guardian, any substances containing any of the following volatile
solvents, where the seller, offerer or deliverer knows or has reason to believe
that the substance will be used for the purpose of inducing symptoms of
intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior or in any
manner change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or mental processes:
toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl
ethyl ketone, trichloroethane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl
cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone or any other substance which will induce
symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior or
in any manner change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or mental processes.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. O-11-82, 5-14-
1982; amd. 1992 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  5-6-3-2 of this title.
5-9-3: CRUELTY TO CHILDREN:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, cause or knowingly permit any of
the following offenses against children:
   A.   Abandon any child;
   B.   Unnecessarily fail to provide any child in his or her charge or custody
with proper food, drink, shelter or raiment;
   C.   Cruelly beat, torture, overwork or mutilate any child;
   D.   Wilfully expose to inclement weather or in any manner injure a child in
health or limb. (Ord. O-11-82, 5-14-1982)
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be
fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. O-
11-82, 5-14-1982; amd. 1992 Code)
5-9-4: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS:
Any person who abandons or discards in any place accessible to children any
refrigerator, icebox or ice chest of a capacity of one and one-half (11/2)
cubic feet or more which has an attached lid or door which may be opened or
fastened shut by means of an attached latch or who, being the owner, lessee or
manager of any place or premises, knowingly permits such abandoned or discarded
refrigerator, icebox or ice chest to remain there in such condition shall be
fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Every day
that such violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. O-07-82, 5-14-1982; amd. 1992 Code)
5-9-5: WEAPONS 1 :
   A.   Possession Or Discharge Of Weapons: No person under the age of eighteen
(18) years shall carry, discharge, use or be in possession of any weapon, air
gun, gas operated gun or bow or sling type instrument made for the purpose of
throwing or projecting missiles of any kind and capable of inflicting injury.
   B.   Sale To Minors: No person shall sell to any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years any such weapon, bow or sling type instrument 2 .
   C.   Exemptions: This section shall not apply to the possession or use of
any bow or any other weapon in any area designated for the use of such weapons.
(Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 8 of this title.
2 2. See also subsection
  5-8-2-2B of this title.
5-9-6: SALE OF EXPLOSIVES TO MINORS:
No person shall sell, give or deliver to any minor any of the following
explosives: gunpowder, blasting powder, giant powder, gun cotton,
nitroglycerine, dynamite, dynamite caps or other explosives of a similar
character. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
5-9-7: PLASTIC BAGS:
   A.   Definition: "Plastic bag" shall mean a polyethylene bag, other than one
used for food products, weighing not more than five (5) pounds, intended for
household use, which is larger than seven inches (7") in diameter at the opened
end and is made of thin film less than one mil (0.001 inch) in thickness
(according to standards established under the common standards division of the
United States department of commerce).
   B.   Plastic Bags Restricted; Warning: No person shall package, deliver or
sell any article for use in or around the household in a plastic bag or shall
sell or distribute any plastic bag for use in or around the household, unless
the bag bears a warning against the hazard of suffocation by children in the
following or substantially equivalent wording:
WARNING: Keep this bag away from babies and children. Do not use in cribs,
beds, carriages or playpens. The thin film may cling to nose and mouth and
prevent breathing.
The warning shall be printed on, attached to or accompany each bag; provided,
that it shall be permissible to print the warning on the outside wrapper of
packages of bags intended for home processing use only, e.g., freezer bags,
garbage bags, in lieu of each individual bag. The warning shall be prominently
and conspicuously displayed in bold face type, in accordance with the following
table:
Total of the length and width of the bag, combined:
 
60 inches or more                  24 points
40 inches, but less than 60 inches 18 points
30 inches, but less than 40 inches 14 points
Less than 30 inches                10 points
 
   (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be fined not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979;
amd. 1992 Code)
5-9-8: COMIC BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS DEPICTING CRIMES:
   A.   Prohibited Publications: No person shall sell, offer for sale, attempt
to sell, exhibit, give away, keep in his possession with intent to sell or give
away or in any way furnish or attempt to furnish to any child under the age of
eighteen (18) years any "comic book", magazine or other publication which, read
as a whole, is concerned with an account of crime and which depicts, by the use
of drawings, the following crimes:
      1.   Administering poisonous and injurious potions;
      2.   Aggravated assault;
      3.   Arson;
      4.   Aggravated battery;
      5.   Burglary;
      6.   False imprisonment;
      7.   Kidnapping and abduction;
      8.   Maiming and disfiguring;
      9.   Malicious mischief;
      10.   Murder;
      11.   Rape;
      12.   Robbery;
      13.   Theft;
      14.   Conspiracy to commit any of the foregoing offenses.
   B.   Scope: It is the intent of this section to include publications where
the text is not prominent, but rather is incidental to the picture, usually in
the balloons that indicate the words spoken by the characters.
   C.   Exemptions:
      1.   This section shall not be construed to apply to those accounts of
crime which are part of the ordinary and general dissemination of news nor such
drawings and photographs as are used to illustrate such accounts.
      2.   This section shall not be included to apply to legitimate,
illustrated, historical accounts of crime or crimes.
   D.   Prima Facie Evidence: If any publication prohibited hereunder shall be
displayed in any newsstand, bookstore, drugstore, market or other mercantile
establishment where the prohibited publication may be seen by any child under
the age of eighteen (18) years visiting such establishment, such display shall
be prima facie evidence that the person in charge of such establishment was
then exhibiting the crime "comic book" or other prohibited publication and
intended to sell or offer for sale, furnish or attempt to furnish such
prohibited publication to a child or children under the age of eighteen (18)
years in violation of this section, but it shall be competent for the defendant
in any case to show that no such intention existed. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
5-9-9: SCHOOL CURFEW; TRUANCY; PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of seven (7) years and
under the age of eighteen (18) years, or for any person registered in any
grades 1 through 12 and who is enrolled in any public, private or parochial
school, to be present in any public place, building, street, or assembly in the
city, other than school, while school is in session during the regular school
term, unless he or she is:
      1.   Traveling to or from school by the most direct route;
      2.   Accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or school official;
      3.   Engaged in approved school related activities;
      4.   Engaged in lawful employment, provided that the school board of the
public school district in which the child resides has recommended the
employment and has certified the facts concerning such employment;
      5.   Physically or mentally unable to attend school and such disability
has been certified in accordance with section 5/26-1(2) of the Illinois school
code 1 ; or
      6.   Otherwise absent from school for valid cause. "Valid cause" shall be
defined as illness, observance of a religious holiday, death in the immediate
family, family emergency, such other situation beyond the control of the
student as determined by the board of education, or such other circumstances
which cause reasonable concern to the parent or legal guardian for the safety
or health of the student.
   B.   Any police officer who witnesses a person whom the officer reasonably
believes to be in violation of this section may stop and detain the person for
the purpose of verifying the person's identity, age, school enrollment and
authority to be absent from school. The police officer shall immediately inform
the person of the reason for the detention and that he or she will be released
upon verification of authorization to be absent from school. Other than to
transport the student to school or to his/her parent or legal guardian, the
person shall not be removed from the scene of the investigatory stop unless he
or she refuses to provide the officer with the necessary information. If the
officer determines that the person is in violation of this section, he shall,
if practical, transport the offender to school authorities or to the child's
parent or legal guardian. In addition to any citation that may be issued to the
student, the officer shall also notify the parent or legal guardian in writing
of the offense.
   C.   Any parent or legal guardian or other person having custody or control
of a student subject to the provisions of this section and who knowingly or
wilfully permits such child to violate the provisions of this section or any
parent or legal guardian having custody or control of a student who fails to
take reasonable steps to ensure compliance by the student with this section
shall be fined in an amount not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a first offense; not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for a second offense; and not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a third or
subsequent offense within a school year. A rebuttable presumption shall exist
that a parent or legal guardian or other person having custody or control of a
student has failed to take reasonable steps to ensure compliance with this
section, upon such student committing a third or subsequent violation within
the school year, following the parent or legal guardian or such other person
having received two (2) written notices of a violation of this section. The
foregoing presumption may be overcome by clear and convincing evidence to the
contrary. (Ord. O-04-2006, 3-6-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. 105 ILCS 5/26-1.
5-9-10: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the terms specified have the meanings ascribed to them:
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a
circuit court of the state but does not include a person appointed guardian or
given custody of a minor under the juvenile court act 1 .
MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years but not yet nineteen
(19) years of age.
   B.   Responsibility Of Parents Or Guardians: The parent or legal guardian of
an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be
presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to
exercise proper parental responsibility, and said minor shall be deemed to have
committed the acts described below with the knowledge and permission of the
parent or guardian, in violation of this section, upon the occurrence of the
events described in subsections B1, B2 and B3 of this section:
      1.   An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian
shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property or
shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or
statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property; and
      2.   Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice
thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or
by personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned from the
police department of the city following said adjudication or nonjudicial
sanction; and
      3.   If, at any time within one year following receipt of the notice set
forth in subsection B2 of this section, said minor is either adjudicated to be
in violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection B1 of
this section or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official
agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law
or statute as described in subsection B1 of this section. (Ord. O-07-80, 4-8-
1980; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
   C.   Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of
this section shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars for each
offense. (Ord. O-07-80, 4-8-1980; amd. 1992 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.
CHAPTER 10
ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
5-10-1: Definitions
5-10-2: Registration
5-10-3: False Alarms
5-10-4: Administration
5-10-5: Special Alarm Provisions
5-10-6: Liability Of City Limited
5-10-7: Penalty
5-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
ALARM SYSTEMS: Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to
signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity or condition
requiring urgent attention and to which the police department is expected to
respond. This includes, but is not limited to, those alarms commonly referred
to as fire, burglar, holdup and medical alert.
ALARM USER: A person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
other organization of any kind in control of any building, structure, facility
or vehicle where an alarm system is maintained or activated.
AUTOMATIC VOICE DIALING DEVICE: A device which is interconnected to a telephone
line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit
by a prerecorded voice message an emergency message indicating the need for a
response.
DIRECT CONNECTION: An alarm system which has the capability of transmitting
signals to and receiving them at the Police Communication Center.
FALSE ALARM: Any emergency signal produced by any alarm system, either local or
central station or direct connection, which requires a response by the police
department where no real emergency exists. This includes, but is not limited
to, those caused by equipment malfunction, improper installation, human error
or any unknown cause. The classification of alarms as false shall be the
responsibility of the police department as appropriate.
LOCAL ALARM: An alarm system which when activated causes an outside audible or
visual signal to be activated in or on the premises within which the system is
installed. This includes vehicle alarms. (Ord. O-04-94, 3-7-1994; amd. Ord. O-
06-2014, 3-3-2014)
5-10-2: REGISTRATION:
   A.   It shall be a violation of this chapter for anyone to become an alarm
user without first having registered with the police department. Vehicle alarms
are not included within the registration requirement of this section. (Ord. O-
04-94, 3-7-1994; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
   B.   Registration shall be in writing on forms provided by the city and
shall contain all such information as the finance director deems necessary. It
shall be the alarm user's responsibility to keep all the information up to date
at all times. (Ord. O-04-94, 3-7-1994; amd. Ord. O-20-99, 12-6-1999)
   C.   All businesses and residences with alarm systems shall be required to
fill out a new registration form by May 1 of each year. The registration for
the previous year shall expire on April 30. (Ord. O-04-94, 3-7-1994)
5-10-3: FALSE ALARMS:
It shall be unlawful for any alarm user to have more than four (4) false alarms
occur in the use of said alarm user's system during a calendar year. The
complaint issued shall be in the nature of a business offense.
   MINIMUM FINE SCHEDULE
   FOR FALSE ALARMS
 
Number Of          Minimum Fine
False Alarms       Per False Alarm
In Calendar Year
                  
5                 $100.00
6                 100.00
7 or more         200.00
 
(Ord. O-17-99, 11-1-1999)
When four (4) or more false alarms are received within a twelve (12) month
period by the police department, the chief of police or his representative
shall cause a written warning to be sent to the alarm user giving notice of the
number and dates of the false alarms. (Ord. O-17-99, 11-1-1999; amd. Ord. O-06-
2014, 3-3-2014)
The fines imposed for violations of this section shall be by complaint issued
against the alarm user. No charge shall be imposed for false alarms for thirty
(30) days from the date of initial installation of the alarm system nor shall a
charge be made for a false alarm activated by weather related conditions,
telephone or electric line interruptions or other such unusual occurrences
which are demonstrated as having been outside the control of the alarm user.
(Ord. O-17-99, 11-1-1999)
5-10-4: ADMINISTRATION:
In the administration of the provisions of this chapter, the finance director
is hereby authorized to establish such procedures as may be necessary in order
to implement the provisions herein provided. The finance director may assign a
member of the police department the responsibility of acting as an alarm
administrator with responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. O-
04-94, 3-7-1994; amd. Ord. O-20-99, 12-6-1999; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
5-10-5: SPECIAL ALARM PROVISIONS:
   A.   Automatic voice dialing devices as defined in section
5-10-1 of this chapter, shall, within sixty (60) days from the effective date
of this section, be disconnected from any primary trunk line of the city. A
user of an automatic voice dialing device may, at its discretion, obtain a
central answering point other than the city.
   B.   Local alarms shall not resemble the sound of any official emergency
signals or civil defense alarms. All local alarms shall have the capacity to
reset themselves within fifteen (15) minutes of activation. Local alarms in use
on the effective date of this section shall have ninety (90) days to comply
with the requirements of this section. In the interim pending such compliance
the alarm user must reset any local alarm within thirty (30) minutes. (Ord. O-
04-94, 3-7-1994)
   C.   No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of any alarm system
without first obtaining permission from the police department. (Ord. O-04-94,
3-7-1994; amd. Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
5-10-6: LIABILITY OF CITY LIMITED:
The city shall not be liable for any defects in any operation of any alarm
system, any failure or neglect of any person in connection with the
installation and operation of equipment, any transmission of signals and
messages or the relay of such signals and messages. In the event that the city
finds it necessary to disconnect a defective device or otherwise, the city
shall incur no liability for such action taken pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. O-04-94, 3-7-1994)
5-10-7: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be a violation
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. (Ord. O-04-94, 3-7-1994)
CHAPTER 11
SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUGS
SECTION:
5-11-1: Definitions
5-11-2: Sale Or Delivery
5-11-3: Possession
5-11-4: Use
5-11-5: Penalty
5-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires different meaning:
PRODUCT CONTAINING A SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUG: Any product containing
synthetic cannabinoids, synthetic stimulants and/or synthetic psychedelic/
hallucinogens, as those terms are defined herein such as, but not limited to,
the examples of brand names or identifiers listed on exhibit A attached to the
ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein by reference.
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID: Any laboratory created compound that functions similar
to the active ingredient in marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), including,
but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound,
mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including isomers, esters,
ethers, salts and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid receptor agonist,
such as:
JWH-007 (1-pentyl-2-methyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole)
JWH-015 ((2-methyl-1-propyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1- naphthalenylmethanone)
JWH-018 (1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole)
JWH-019 (1-hexyl-3-(naphthalene-1-oyl) indole)
JWH-073 (naphthalene-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl) methanone)
JWH-081 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl) methanone)
JWH-098 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentyl-2-methylindol-3- yl) methanone)
JWH-122 (1-pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl) indole)
JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl) methanone
JWH-200 (1-((2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)) indol-3-yl)-naphthalen- 1-ylmethanone)
JWH-203 (2-(2-chloropheynyl)-1-(1-pentylindol-3-yl) ethanone)
JWH-201 (4-ethylnaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl) methanone)
JWH-250 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl) indole)
JWH-251 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methlphenylacetyl) indole)
JWH-398 (1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl) indole)
HU-210 ((6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2- methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a,7,10 a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1- ol))
HU-211 ((6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2- methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a,7,01,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1- ol))
HU-308 ([1R,2R,5R)-2-[2,6-dimethoxy-4-(2 methyloctan-2- yl)phenyl]-7,7-
dimethyl-4-bicyclo [3.1.1] hept-3-enyl] methanol)
HU-331 ((3-hydroxy-2-[1R,6R)-3-methyl-6-(1-methylethenyl)-2- cyclohexen-1-yl]-
5-pentyl-2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione)
CP 55, 940 (2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxypropyl) cyclohexyl]-5-(2-
methyloctan-2-yl) phenol)
CP 47, 497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxcyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan- 2-yl) phenol)
WIN 55, 212-2 ((R)-(+)-[2,3-dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4- morpholinylmethyl) pyrrolo
[1,2,3-de)-1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1- nepthalenylmethanone)
RCS-4 ((4-methoxyphenyl) (1-pentyl-1H-indol-3-yl) methanone)
RCS-8 (1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-1H-indol-3-yl)-2-(2- methoxyphenyl) ethanone)
SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELIC/HALLUCINOGEN: Any compound that mimics the effects of any
federally controlled schedule I substance, including, but not limited to, any
quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation,
substance and their analog (including salts, isomers, esters, ethers and salts
of isomers) containing substances which have a psychedelic/hallucinogenic
effect on the central nervous system and/or brain, such as:
2-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-ethylphenyl) ethanamine (2C-E)
2-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylpheny)ethanamine (2C-D)
2-(4-chloro-2, 5-dimethoxyphenyl) ethanamine (2C-C)
2-(4-iodo-2, 5-dimethoxyphenyl) ethanamine (2C-I)
2-(4-(ethylthio)-2, 5-dimethoxyphenyl) ethanamine (2C-T-2)
2-(4-(isopropylthio)-2, 5-dimethoxyphenyl) ethanamine (2C-T-4)
2-(2, 5-dimethoxyphenyl) ethanamine (2C-H)
2-(2, 5-dimethoxy-4-nitro-phenyl) ethanamine (2C-N)
2-(2, 5-dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl) ethanamine (2C-P)
SYNTHETIC STIMULANT: Any compound that mimics the effects of any federally
controlled schedule I substance such as cathinone, methcathinone, MDMA and
MDEA, including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic
material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including
salts, isomers and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a
stimulant effect on the central nervous system, such as:
3-Fluoromethcathinone
4-Fluoromethcathinone (other name: flephedrone)
3, 4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name: methylone, MDMC)
3, 4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (other name: MDPV)
4-Methylmethcathinon (other names: mephedrone, 4-MMC)
4-Methoxymethcathinone (other names: methedrone, bk-PMMA, PMMC)
4-Ethylmetlicathinone (other name: 4-EMC)
Ethcathinone
Beta-keto N-methylbenzodioxyolylpropylamine (other names: butylone, bkMBDB)
Napthylpyrovalerone (other names: naphyrone, NRG-1)
N, N-dimethylcathinone (other name: metamfepramone)
Alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: alpha-PPP)
4-methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MOPPP)
3, 4-methylenedioxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MDPPP)
Alpha-pyrrolidinovalerophenone (other name: alpha-PVP)
6, 7-kihydro-SH-indeno(5,6-d)-1,3-dioxal-6-amine) (other name: MDAI)
Any compound that is structurally derived from 2-amino-l- phenyl-l-propanone by
modification or substitution in any of the following ways:
In the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl,
or halide substituents, whether or not further substituted in the phenyl ring
by one or more other univalent substituents.
At the 3-position with an alkyl substituent.
At the nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl, benzyl, or methoxybenzyl groups.
Or by inclusion of the nitrogen atom in a cyclic structure. (Ord. O-13-2012, 4-
2-2012)
5-11-2: SALE OR DELIVERY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or deliver any
product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/
hallucinogen. (Ord. O-13-2012, 4-2-2012)
5-11-3: POSSESSION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess a product containing a
synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen. (Ord. O-13-2012,
4-2-2012)
5-11-4: USE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of a synthetic
cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen. (Ord. O-13-2012, 4-2-2012)
5-11-5: PENALTY:
Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. Each
violation of this chapter, or every day a violation continues to exist, shall
constitute a new and separate violation. (Ord. O-13-2012, 4-2-2012)
CHAPTER 12
REIMBURSEMENT FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSE SERVICES
SECTION:
5-12-1: Definitions
5-12-2: Responsible Party Liability
5-12-3: Responsible Party Charges
5-12-4: Payment Of Emergency Response Charges
5-12-5: Fines
5-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
EMERGENCY RESPONSE: Providing, sending or utilizing, through any means, police,
emergency medical services, rescue services, public works services or related
services and personnel by the city or by any other municipality, corporation or
individual operating at the request or direction of the city to an incident
which threatens or may threaten, directly or indirectly, the public health,
safety and welfare within the city. Such incidents shall include, but are
specifically not limited to, accidents, fires, vehicular extrication efforts,
medical rescue responses or any hazardous condition which threatens or may
threaten the public health, safety and welfare within the city.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CHARGE: Any expense for personnel and equipment involved in
an emergency response. Emergency responses include, but are not limited to:
police services; firefighting services; vehicle accidents involving rollover,
bridge or embankments, gas, fluid or cargo spills and other hazardous
materials; accident reconstruction services; emergency rescue services;
emergency medical services; hazardous materials response teams; civil defense
services; technical rescue teams; public works service and the services
performed by a private contractor providing an emergency response at the
request of the city.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person or entity owning, controlling, leasing, having
custody over or conducting any activity upon any land, facility, equipment or
vehicles who creates or contributes to the creation of any incident that
requires an emergency response. (Ord. O-20-2015, 9-14-2015)
5-12-2: RESPONSIBLE PARTY LIABILITY:
It shall be the duty of any responsible party to reimburse the city for the
expenses of an emergency response incurred by the city as the result of any
action or nonaction by the responsible party. The liability of responsible
parties is joint and several. (Ord. O-20-2015, 9-14-2015)
5-12-3: RESPONSIBLE PARTY CHARGES:
The city shall be reimbursed for emergency response charges at the rate of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) per hour, or any portion thereof, for any motor
vehicles, including, but not limited to, police vehicles and public works
equipment and one hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour for all personnel engaged
in the emergency response. All other charges shall be billed at their
reasonable and customary rate. (Ord. O-20-2015, 9-14-2015)
5-12-4: PAYMENT OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE CHARGES:
A responsible party shall pay the emergency response charges within thirty (30)
days of the issuance of an invoice by the city. An emergency response charge
that is unpaid after thirty (30) days from the issuance of an invoice by the
city bears interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month. Failure to pay
an emergency response charge within thirty (30) days of the issuance of an
invoice by the city shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). Every day that any portion of an emergency response charge
remains unpaid shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. O-20-
2015, 9-14-2015)
5-12-5: FINES:
In addition to the responsible party charges a responsible party may be fined
up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day that an event giving rise
to an emergency response exists. (Ord. O-20-2015, 9-14-2015)
CHAPTER 13
MISDEMEANOR OFFENSES 
SECTION:
5-13-1: Sex Offenses
5-13-2: Theft And Related Offenses
5-13-3: Damage And Trespass To Property
5-13-4: Dog Fighting
 
5-13-5: Penalty
 
5-13-1: SEX OFFENSES:
There is hereby adopted by the City of Northlake and incorporated herein for
the purpose of prohibiting certain sex offenses the following sections of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 2012:
   A.   720 ILCS 5/11-0.1 Definitions;
   B.   720 ILCS 5/11-14 Prostitution;
   C.   720 ILCS 5/11-14.1 Solicitation of a sexual act;
   D.   720 ILCS 5/11-14.3 Promoting prostitution; and
   E.   720 ILCS 5/11-18 Patronizing a prostitute. (Ord. O-18-2023, 10-3-2023)
5-13-2: THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES:
There is hereby adopted by the City of Northlake and incorporated herein for
the purpose of prohibiting theft and related offenses the following sections of
the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012:
   A.   720 ILCS 5/16-0.1 Definitions;
   B.   720 ILCS 5/16-1 Theft;
   C.   720 ILCS 5/16-2 Theft of lost or mislaid property;
   D.   720 ILCS 5/16-5 Theft from coin-operated machine;
   E.   720 ILCS 5/16-6 Theft - related device;
   F.   720 ILCS 5/16-14 Theft of utility services; and
   G.   720 ILCS 5/16-25 Retail theft. (Ord. O-18-2023, 10-3-2023)
5-13-3: DAMAGE AND TRESPASS TO PROPERTY:
There is hereby adopted by the City of Northlake and incorporated herein for
the purpose of prohibiting damage and trespass to property the following
sections of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012:
   A.   720 ILCS 5/21-1 Criminal damage to property;
   B.   720 ILCS 5/21-1.01 Criminal damage to Government Supported Property;
   C.   720 ILCS 5/21-1.2 Institutional vandalism;
   D.   720 ILCS 5/21-1.3 Criminal defacement of property;
   E.   720 ILCS 5/21-1.4 Jack racks violation;
   F.   720 ILCS 5/21-3 Criminal trespass to real property;
   G.   720 ILCS 5/21-5 Criminal trespass to State supported land; and
   H.   720 ILCS 5/21-5.5 Criminal trespass to a Safe school zone. (Ord. O-18-
2023, 10-3-2023)
5-13-4: DOG FIGHTING:
There is hereby adopted by the City of Northlake and incorporated herein for
the purpose of prohibiting dog fighting, Section 48-1 of the Illinois Criminal
Code of 2012 (720 ILCS 5/48.1). (Ord. O-18-2023, 10-3-2023)
5-13-5: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
Every day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. O-18-2023, 10-3-2023)
CHAPTER 14
NITROUS OXIDE
SECTION:
5-14-1: Definitions
5-14-2: Sale And Distribution Prohibited
5-14-3: Usage Prohibited
 
5-14-4: Penalties
5-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings listed below:
NITROUS OXIDE: A colorless, non-flammable gas, used as an anesthetic and in
aerosols. Nitrous Oxide also refers to any of the following substances:
dinitrogen monoxide, dinitrogen oxide, nitrogen oxide, or laughing gas.
NITROUS OXIDE CARTRIDGE: Any cartridge of compressed nitrous oxide tied to the
illegal usage of nitrous oxide. Nitrous Oxide Cartridge includes but is not
limited to the following definitions:
   a.   Cylinders, balloons, and other containers used, intended for use, or
designed for use in packaging nitrous oxide.
   b.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for
use in storing or concealing nitrous oxide.
   c.   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing nitrous oxide into the human body. (Ord. O-
16-2025, 6-16-2025)
5-14-2: SALE AND DISTRIBUTION PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or
business to sell, offer for sale, distribute or give away any Nitrous oxide
cartridge, balloon or other container; except that, the forgoing provision
shall not apply to wholesalers and manufacturers who use nitrous oxide in the
normal course of their business to manufacture other lawful items.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or
business to sell, offer for sale, distribute or give away any nitrous oxide
cartridge, balloon or other container for the recreational usage of nitrous
oxide in a manner inconsistent with the laws of Illinois. (Ord. O-16-2025, 6-
16-2025)
5-14-3: USAGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to inhale or otherwise introduce into his
or her respiratory system nitrous oxide, except under the direct care and
supervision of a licensed physician or dentist. (Ord. O-16-2025, 6-16-2025)
5-14-4: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person, firm, corporation, association or business who violates
this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Each day that a
violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   B.   Any person, firm, corporation, association or business who violates
this chapter for a second time is subject to a revocation of their City
business license. (Ord. O-16-2025, 6-16-2025)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
VEHICLE LICENSES
SECTION:
6-1-1: License Fee Waived
6-1-2: License Required
6-1-3: Application For License
6-1-4: License Period
6-1-5: License Fees
6-1-6: License Tag
6-1-7: Sale Or Transfer Of Motor Vehicle
6-1-1: LICENSE FEE WAIVED:
No license fee shall be charged to city residents for passenger vehicles,
motorcycles, buses, recreational vehicles or to trucks with a "B" plate
classification that are not driven for commercial use. Licenses for such
vehicles shall be issued at such intervals as the city council establishes.
(Ord. O-11-2016, 6-13-2016)
6-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person residing in the city and no firm or corporation having a place of
business in the city shall use or cause or permit any of his or its agents or
employees to use any motor vehicle, whether owned or leased by said person,
firm or corporation, upon the streets or alleys of the city unless such motor
vehicle is licensed, as hereinafter provided. (Ord. O-11-2016, 6-13-2016)
6-1-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person desiring a license for any motor vehicle shall file an application
therefor with the city clerk, upon a form to be provided by the city clerk,
setting forth the name, address and telephone number of the applicant, the
description of the motor vehicle and the state license number thereof, the
place where such motor vehicle is to be kept when not in use, the number and
kind of other motor vehicles kept by such applicant at such place and such
further information as may be prescribed. The license fee for said
noncommercial use vehicles is waived, however, application for and possession
of the actual vehicle sticker shall remain a requirement. (Ord. O-52-95, 10-2-
1995)
6-1-4: LICENSE PERIOD:
Required vehicle stickers shall be valid for such period as the city council
establishes. (Ord. O-11-2016, 6-13-2016)
6-1-5: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Generally: Effective June 30, 1997, the license fee for commercial
trucks and buses to be paid every year to the city clerk shall be as follows:
Commercial trucks, expire 6/30
 
B plate           $ 50.00 for 1 year
D plate           80.00 for 1 year
F plate           100.00 for 1 year
All plates over F 150.00 for 1 year
 
   B.   Late Fee: The fee for commercial truck stickers not purchased prior to
August 15, as otherwise required, shall be the cost of the license fee plus
fifty percent (50%) of said license fee according to the plate type.
Notwithstanding the waiver of said fees, a late fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
shall be imposed upon all persons that apply for the license after March 15 of
the valid license period. (Ord. O-52-95, 10-2-1995)
6-1-6: LICENSE TAG:
Upon the issuance of a license, the city clerk shall deliver to the applicant a
metal plate or decalcomania device or other form of sticker emblem which shall
be affixed by the licensee upon the front end of the motor vehicle licensed, or
in the case of a decalcomania or sticker emblem, the same shall be affixed in
the lower right hand corner of the windshield in such a manner as to be easily
read from the outside. No motor vehicle, although duly licensed, shall be used
upon the streets or alleys of the city unless such metal plate or decalcomania
device is attached thereto. Any person carrying license plate or decalcomania
device shall keep the same clean of dust and mud so that the same can be
plainly seen at all times. (Ord. O-52-95, 10-2-1995)
6-1-7: SALE OR TRANSFER OF MOTOR VEHICLE:
Immediately upon the sale or transfer of a licensed motor vehicle, the vendor
of such vehicle shall remove the license tag or sticker from the motor vehicle
so sold or transferred, and the license so issued for such motor vehicle shall
cease to apply to such motor vehicle from such date, and the purchaser or
transferee thereof shall apply to the city clerk for a new license. Upon a
showing to the city clerk that such tag or sticker has been removed from such
sold or transferred vehicle, the city clerk may issue a new tag bearing a new
number which shall apply to and be assigned to any other vehicle of the same
class owned by such vendor or transferor.
No tag or sticker issued for or assigned to any motor vehicle shall ever be
used for or attached to or upon another and different motor vehicle.
The fee for new truck license tag or sticker shall be as provided in section
6-1-5 of this chapter; provided, that if the newly acquired vehicle is of a
class requiring the payment of a license fee higher than that which was paid
for the license originally for the vehicle disposed of, the fee required to be
paid for the new tag shall be a sum equal to the difference between the fee
paid for the original license and the fee fixed for the license of the class of
the newly acquired vehicle plus the required transfer fee of fifty cents
($0.50). (Ord. O-52-95, 10-2-1995)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Illinois Vehicle Code Adopted
6-2-2: Authority To Regulate And Control Traffic
6-2-3: Obedience To Police And Fire Officials
6-2-4: Traffic Control Signs, Signals And Markings
6-2-5: Accidents
6-2-6: Through Streets
6-2-7: Motorcycles
6-2-8: Seat Belts
6-2-9: Operating Motor Vehicle On City Property
6-2-10: Motor Driven Or Electric Cycles; Restrictions On Use
6-2-11: Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System
6-2-12: Use Of Mobile Telephones While Operating A Motor Vehicle
6-2-1: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of regulating and
controlling traffic on the streets of the city, the Illinois vehicle code, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended 1 . The adoption of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes shall not preclude the city from charging any person in
violation of said chapter under the provisions of this code and use of the
penalty provision contained in section
1-4-1 of this code. Not less than three (3) copies of such law are on file in
the office of the city clerk and are available for public use, inspection and
examination. (Ord. O-15A-90, 3-19-1990; amd. 1992 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  6-7-3 of this title.
6-2-2: AUTHORITY TO REGULATE AND CONTROL TRAFFIC:
   A.   City Council: Except as otherwise provided, the city council shall
regulate, control and approve all matters pertaining to vehicular traffic
within the city.
   B.   Police Department:
      1.   The chief of police is empowered to make and enforce temporary
regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions in connection with
vehicular traffic. (Ord. O-15A-90, 3-19-1990; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993;
Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
      2.   The officers of the police department or such officers as are
assigned by the chief of police shall enforce the traffic laws of this city and
the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city.
      3.   Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned
by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice,
hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of
a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
   C.   Fire Department: Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of
a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the
immediate vicinity. (1976 Code § 27-1-2; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-
06-2014, 3-3-2014)
6-2-3: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS:
   A.   Obedience To Police: No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested by law with
authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. (1976 Code § 27-1-3)
   B.   Obedience To Fire Officials: The fire department officer in command or
any fireman designated by him may exercise the powers and authority of a police
officer in directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the fire
department has responded to an emergency call for so long as fire department
equipment is on the scene in the absence of or in assisting the police. (1976
Code § 27-1-4)
6-2-4: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS:
   A.   Authority To Install Signs, Signals And Markings: The city shall cause
to be placed and maintained traffic control signs, signals, lane markings and
devices when and as required under the ordinances and may place and maintain
such additional traffic control devices as it may deem necessary to regulate
traffic under the ordinances of this city or under state law or to guide or
warn traffic, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation. (1976
Code § 27-3-1)
   B.   Existing Traffic Control Devices: All traffic control devices, signals
and signs presently located in the city which have been erected by the city and
are maintained by the city are hereby permitted, authorized and empowered. Any
subsequent traffic control device, signal or sign, prior to the erection by the
city, shall be authorized only by the enactment of an appropriate ordinance
concerning same. (Ord. O-09-88, 7-12-1988)
   C.   Obedience To Traffic Control Signs And Signals:
      1.   No driver of any vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any
traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the city or in accordance
with the laws of the state except on direction of a police officer.
      2.   No person shall leave the roadway and cross private property to
avoid an official traffic control device.
      3.   No provision of this title for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section
does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even
though no signs are erected or in place. (1976 Code § 27-3-2)
      4.   Violations of any of the traffic control devices, signals or signs
shall carry penalties and fines as otherwise set forth in this code. (Ord. O-
09-88, 7-12-1988)
   D.   Design Of Signs And Signals: All signs and signals established by
direction of the city council shall conform to the "Illinois State Manual Of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways". (1976 Code § 27-3-2)
6-2-5: ACCIDENTS:
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death
of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any
person shall give his name, address and the registration number of the vehicle
he is driving and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit his operator's
or chauffeur's license to the person struck or occupant of or person attending
any vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured in such
accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying or the making of
arrangements for the carrying of such person to a physician, surgeon or
hospital for medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent that such
treatment is necessary, or if it is apparent that such carrying is requested by
the injured person.
If none of the persons entitled to information pursuant to this section is in
condition to receive and understand such information, and no police officer is
present, such driver, after rendering reasonable assistance, shall forthwith
report such accident at the nearest office of a duly authorized police
authority, disclosing the information required by this section. (1976 Code §
27-1-5)
6-2-6: THROUGH STREETS:
The streets and parts of streets designated by ordinance as through streets are
hereby declared to be through streets. Unless directed otherwise by the traffic
officer or a traffic control signal, the driver of a vehicle shall stop at the
entrance to a through street and shall yield the right of way to other vehicles
which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so close on a
through street as to constitute an immediate hazard. (1976 Code § 27-5-3)
6-2-7: MOTORCYCLES:
   A.   Operation Of Motorcycles:
      1.   Riding On Sidewalks: No motorcycle, motor scooter or motorbicycle
shall be ridden on any sidewalk.
      2.   Holding Onto Moving Vehicles: No rider of a motorcycle, motorbicycle
or motor scooter shall hold onto any moving vehicle for the purpose of being
propelled.
   B.   Handlebars: Handlebars on motorbicycles, motorcycles and motor scooters
shall not exceed twelve inches (12") in height, measured from the crown or
point of attachment. (1976 Code § 27-11-9)
6-2-8: SEAT BELTS:
   A.   Definitions: The following words and phrases when used in this section
shall, for the purpose of this section have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq.: "driver", "motor
vehicle", "passenger car", "motorcycle", "operator", or "roadway".
   B.   Violations, Exceptions, Penalties, Applicability:
      1.   Each driver and each passenger of a motor vehicle operated on a
roadway in this city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened seat belt;
except that a child less than six (6) years of age shall be protected as
required pursuant to the Illinois child passenger protection act 1 . Each
driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child six (6) years of age or more,
but less than sixteen (16) years of age, in a motor vehicle shall secure the
child in a properly adjusted and fastened seat belt.
      2.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the
following:
         a.   A driver or passenger frequently stopping and leaving the vehicle
for roadway maintenance or roadway construction, if the speed of the vehicle
between stops does not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour.
         b.   A driver or passenger possessing a written statement from a
physician that such person is unable, for medical or physical reasons to wear a
safety belt.
         c.   A driver or passenger possessing an official certificate or
license endorsement issued by the appropriate agency in another state or county
indicating that the driver or passenger is unable for medical, physical, or
other valid reasons to wear a safety belt.
         d.   A driver operating a motor vehicle in reverse.
         e.   A motor vehicle with a model year prior to 1965.
         f.   A motorcycle.
         g.   A motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with safety
belts under federal law.
      3.   Any person convicted of a violation hereunder shall be fined up to
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      4.   Any officer may stop any motor vehicle, or driver or passenger of
such vehicle solely on the basis of a violation or suspected violation of this
section while such motor vehicle is being operated on any roadway within the
city. (Ord. O-39-98, 8-17-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 25/1 et seq.
6-2-9: OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE ON CITY PROPERTY:
   A.   It shall be illegal to operate a motor vehicle on city owned property
other than on a street, roadway, alley, parking lot or other property
specifically designed for the operation of a motor vehicle.
   B.   Any person violating this section shall be fined not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each offense. (Ord. O-32-2000, 12-4-2000)
6-2-10: MOTOR DRIVEN OR ELECTRIC CYCLES; RESTRICTIONS ON USE:
   A.   For purposes of this section, the term "motor driven or electric
cycles" is defined as any motorcycle, motor scooter, motorized pedalcycle, or
motor driven skateboard with less than one hundred fifty (150) cubic centimeter
piston displacement, or any electric scooter, electric pedalcycle or electric
skateboard.
   B.   No person shall operate a motor driven or electric cycle upon any
public sidewalk or bike path, or in any public park. No person shall operate a
motor driven or electric cycle upon any public or private street, upon any
alleyway, or within any public parking lot, unless such vehicle bears a valid
license registration issued by the secretary of state, and unless the operator
has a valid driver's license.
   C.   The sellers of such motor driven or electric cycle must prominently
post a sign which shall be no smaller than four feet by four feet (4' x 4')
with two inch (2") block lettering which states:
The operation of Motor Driven or Electric Cycle on any sidewalk, bike path or
public parking lot is prohibited by local ordinance. Such vehicles may not be
operated on any public street unless such vehicles bears a valid license
registration issued by the Secretary of State and the operator has a valid
drivers license.
   D.   The seller of such motor driven or electric cycle must also give the
purchaser a notice on eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (81/2" x 11")
white paper with no less than twelve (12) point black print bearing the legend
set forth in subsection C of this section prior to completing such sale. (Ord.
O-22-2003, 8-4-2003)
6-2-11: AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM:
   A.   As used in this section, words or terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context or usage clearly indicates that another meaning is
intended:
ADMINISTRATOR: The city's traffic control administrator.
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM: A device with one or more motor
vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce
recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a red light
signal in violation of section 11-306 of the code or a similar provision of a
city ordinance.
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATION: A violation described in section 11-208.6 of
the code.
CERTIFIED REPORT: A report concerning five (5) or more unpaid fines or
penalties for automated traffic law violations made by the city to the
secretary in accordance with section 6-306.5 of the code.
CITY: The city of Northlake, Cook County, Illinois.
CODE: The Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100, et
seq.
COMPANY: Redflex Traffic Systems, Inc.
DETERMINATION NOTICE: A notice of final determination of automated traffic law
violation liability issued pursuant to section 11-208.3 of the code and
pursuant to the provisions of this section.
RECORDED IMAGES: Images showing the time, date and location of an automated
traffic law violation recorded by an automated traffic law enforcement system
on: 1) two (2) or more photographs, 2) two (2) or more microphotographs, 3) two
(2) or more electronic images or 4) a video recording showing the motor vehicle
and, on at least one image or portion of the recording, clearly identifying the
registration plate number of the motor vehicle.
SECRETARY: The Illinois secretary of state.
SUSPENSION NOTICE: A notice of impending driver's license suspension issued
pursuant to section 11-208.3 of the code and pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
SYSTEM: Individually, an automated traffic law enforcement system or,
collectively, automated traffic law enforcement systems established in the city
pursuant to this section.
VIOLATION NOTICE: An automated traffic law violation notice issued pursuant to
sections 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 of the code and pursuant to the provisions of
this section.
   B.   The city hereby determines to establish systems at the following
intersections located within the corporate limits of the city:
Lake Street and Railroad Avenue
Lake Street and Wolf Road
Mannheim and Armitage
North Avenue and Hillside
North Avenue and Northwest Avenue
North Avenue and Railroad Avenue
North Avenue and Roy
North Avenue and Wolf Road
Wolf Road and Fullerton
   C.   The city is authorized to enter into agreements, substantially in the
forms attached as group exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein and
incorporated herein by reference (collectively, the "agreements"), with company
for the design and implementation of the system(s) and for services related to
the system(s). The agreements shall be subject to final modification by the
attorneys for the city and company, the mayor is hereby authorized and directed
to execute the agreements, once finalized, thereby binding the city to their
terms. The city clerk is authorized and directed to attest to the mayor's
signature, as necessary.
   D.   A violation notice, the contents of which shall comply with the
requirements of sections 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 of the code, as amended, shall
be served by mail to the address of the registered owner of a vehicle cited for
an automated traffic law violation as recorded with the secretary within thirty
(30) days after the secretary notifies the city of the identity of the owner of
the vehicle, but in no event later than ninety (90) days after the violation.
Service of a violation notice shall be deemed complete as of the date of
deposit in the United States mail. The original or a facsimile of a violation
notice or, in the case of a violation notice produced by a computerized device,
a printed record generated by the device showing the facts entered on the
violation notice, shall be retained by the administrator, and shall be a record
kept in the ordinary course of business. A violation notice issued, signed and
served in accordance with this section and section 11-208.3 of the code, a copy
of the violation notice or the computer generated record shall be prima facie
correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown
on the violation notice. The violation notice, copy or computer generated
record shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal
proceedings.
   E.   Before a citation may be issued for any automated traffic law
violation, a determination must be made by a technician employed or contracted
by the city that, based on inspection of recorded images generated by the
system, the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of section 11-208.6
of the code or an ordinance of the city. If the technician determines that the
vehicle entered the intersection as part of a funeral procession or in order to
yield the right of way to an emergency vehicle, a citation shall not be issued.
   F.   The registered owner of the vehicle cited in a violation notice shall
have the opportunity for a hearing in which said owner may contest the merits
of the alleged violation. The lessee of a vehicle cited in a violation notice
likewise shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing of the same kind
afforded the registered owner. The formal or technical rules of evidence shall
not apply at any such hearing. Such hearings shall be recorded, and the person
conducting the hearing on behalf of the administrator shall be empowered to
administer oaths and to secure by subpoena both the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers. Persons appearing at
such a hearing may be represented by counsel at their own expense.
   G.   A final determination of automated traffic law violation liability
shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty after a hearing
officer's determination of violation liability. Where a person fails to appear
at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified
in a prior mailed notice, the hearing officer's determination of violation
liability shall become final: 1) upon denial of a timely petition to set aside
that determination, or 2) upon expiration of the period for filing such a
petition without a filing having been made.
   H.   A determination notice, the contents of which shall comply with the
requirements of section 11-208.3 of the code, as amended, shall be sent
following a final determination of automated traffic law violation liability
and the conclusion of judicial review procedures taken under section 11-208.3
of the code. A determination notice shall be sent by first class United States
mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the cited
vehicle as recorded with the secretary or, if any notice to that address is
returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United
States post office approved database or, under section 11-1306 of the code, to
the lessee of the cited vehicle at the last address known to the lessor of the
cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice to that address is
returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United
States post office database. Service of the determination notice shall be
deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
   I.   A person owing an unpaid fine or penalty for automated traffic law
violation penalty may file a petition to set aside a final determination of
such liability within ten (10) days after service by the city of a
determination notice. Such a petition shall be filed by sending the same,
together with any documentation in support thereof, to the administrator by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery to the
administrator. The grounds for such a petition shall be limited to: 1) the
person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the
violation notice was issued, 2) the person having already paid the fine, or
penalty for the violation in question, and 3) excusable failure to appear at or
request a new date for a hearing. A hearing on such a petition shall be held
within thirty (30) days after the filing of same. In the event that such a
petition is granted upon a showing of just cause, and the subject determination
of automated traffic law violation liability is thereby set aside, the
registered owner shall be provided with a hearing on the merits for that
violation.
   J.   A suspension notice, the contents of which shall comply with the
requirements of sections 6-306.5 and 11-208.3 of the code, as amended, shall be
sent to the person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on
five (5) or more unpaid automated traffic law violations. The suspension notice
shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the
address recorded with the secretary or, if any notice to that address is
returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United
States post office approved database. Service of a suspension notice shall be
deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
   K.   If the administrator provides a suspension notice to a vehicle owner
and subsequently makes a certified report to the secretary, the subject vehicle
owner may challenge the accuracy of the certified report in writing. To do so,
the vehicle owner must submit to the administrator a written statement under
oath, together with any supporting documentation, establishing one of the
following grounds for challenging the accuracy of the certified report: 1) that
the person was not the owner or lessee of the subject vehicle or vehicles
receiving five (5) or more automated traffic law violations on the date or
dates such violation notices were issued, or 2) that the person already paid
the fines or penalties for the five (5) or more automated traffic law
violations indicated on the certified report. Such statement and supporting
documentation must be sent to the administrator by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or hand delivered to the administrator within five (5) days
after the person receives notice from the secretary that the person's driver's
license will be suspended at the end of a specified period of time unless the
secretary is presented with a notice from the city certifying that the fines or
penalties due and owing have been paid or that the inclusion of the person's
name on the certified report was in error.
   L.   Nonresidents of the city who receive violation notices may contest the
merits of the alleged automated traffic law violation without attending a
hearing by sending a signed statement, under oath, together with any supporting
documentation, to the administrator via certified mail, return receipt
requested, within ten (10) days after service of the violation notice. Such a
statement shall set forth the reasons why a finding of liability should not be
entered. The administrator shall rule on such a statement within ten (10) days
after receipt of same, and shall inform the nonresident of his decision within
ten (10) days thereafter. (Ord. O-19-2007, 8-6-2007)
   M.   Unless the driver of the motor vehicle cited for an automated traffic
law violation received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer at the
time of the violation, the owner of the motor vehicle is subject to a penalty
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. In the event that such penalty
is not paid within twenty one (21) days after service of a violation notice, a
person will have ten (10) days to respond. If no response is received within
ten (10) days, the penalty shall increase to two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(Ord. O-03-2008, 2-4-2008)
6-2-12: USE OF MOBILE TELEPHONES WHILE OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms shall
apply:
HANDS FREE DEVICE: An external device that connects to a mobile telephone that
allows the user to engage in a telephone call without touching the user's
mobile telephone.
MOBILE TELEPHONE: A cellular, analog, wireless or digital telephone or other
device capable of sending or receiving telephone messages without an access
line for service.
ONBOARD COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE: A communications system or device that is
hardwired into the motor vehicle.
USE: Talking or listening to another person, text messaging, sending, reading
or listening to an electronic message or browsing the internet.
   B.   Prohibited: Except as otherwise provided in subsection C of this
section, no person shall operate a motor vehicle while using a mobile
telephone.
   C.   Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   Any person using a mobile telephone or onboard communications device
for nonpersonal use in the course of ordinary business in their employment with
a city, state or federal agency or authority;
      2.   Any person using a hands free device for voice communication,
provided that such person does not touch the mobile telephone connected to such
hands free device while operating or using the vehicle;
      3.   Any person using a mobile telephone to call 911 or other emergency
telephone numbers to contact public safety forces;
      4.   Any person using a mobile telephone while maintaining a motor
vehicle in a stationary and parked position.
   D.   Penalty: Any person who violates subsection B of this section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), provided however,
that if a violation occurs at the time of a traffic accident, the driver shall
be subject to an additional fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. O-02-2014, 2-10-2014)
CHAPTER 3
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-3-1: No Parking Places
6-3-2: Right Of Way To Vehicles Intending To Park
6-3-3: Method Of Parking
6-3-4: General Parking Restrictions
6-3-5: No Parking At Specified Times
6-3-6: Loading Zones
6-3-7: Authority To Remove Illegally Stopped Vehicle
6-3-8: Effect Of Provisions
6-3-9: Resident Only Parking
6-3-1: NO PARKING PLACES:
No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control device, in any of the following places:
   A.   On a sidewalk;
   B.   In front of a public or private driveway or in such a manner as to
obstruct the use of any alley or driveway;
   C.   Within an intersection;
   D.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
   E.   On a crosswalk;
   F.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   G.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
   H.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30')
of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
   I.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade
crossing;
   J.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within
seventy five feet (75') of such entrance when properly signposted;
   K.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
parking would obstruct traffic;
   L.   On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
   M.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a
highway tunnel;
   N.   In any city easement area on any fully improved public street;
   O.   At any place where official signs that prohibit parking are posted;
(1976 Code § 27-5-15; amd. Ord. 0-14-82, 6-11-1982)
   P.   Any cul-de-sac located in an area zoned for single-family use (R-1)
under the Northlake zoning ordinance. (Ord. O-15-2005, 6-6-2005, eff.
retroactive to 1-1-2005)
Those streets designated as no parking streets are specified in section
6-4-4 of this title. (1976 Code § 27-5-15)
6-3-2: RIGHT OF WAY TO VEHICLES INTENDING TO PARK:
   A.   The driver of any vehicle intending to occupy a parallel parking space
where a backing movement is necessary and which is being vacated by another
vehicle shall stop his vehicle to rear of the parking space until the vacating
vehicle has cleared and entered normal traffic. He then shall be deemed to have
the right of way to such parking space over any other vehicle attempting to
park therein.
   B.   The first of two (2) or more vehicles to reach the rear boundary of an
unoccupied parallel parking space where a backing movement is necessary to
occupy shall be deemed to have the right of way to such parking space. (1976
Code § 27-5-11)
6-3-3: METHOD OF PARKING:
   A.   Parallel Parking: No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such
vehicle next to the curb except on one-way streets, and no person shall stand
or park any vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the
two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regularly
established curb line; except that upon those streets that have been marked for
angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by
such marks. (1976 Code § 27-5-28)
   B.   Angle Parking:
      1.   Obedience To Angle Parking Arrangements: No person shall park or
stand a vehicle upon those streets or setback locations which have been signed
or marked by the city for angle parking other than at the angle to the curb or
edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. (1976 Code § 27-5-12)
      2.   Angle Parking Of Commercial Vehicles: Commercial vehicles shall be
permitted to park on any street or highway at an angle with the curb for the
purpose of loading or unloading merchandise only when such angle parking does
not interfere with the normal flow of vehicular traffic on the street or
highway. (1976 Code § 27-5-13)
6-3-4: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Not To Obstruct Traffic: No person shall park any vehicle upon a
street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to
leave available less than ten feet (10') of width of the roadway for free
movement of vehicular traffic. (1976 Code § 27-5-9)
   B.   Negligent Parking: No person shall park, cause to be parked, stop or
leave unattended any vehicle:
      1.   In a careless or negligent manner so as to obstruct vehicular or
pedestrian or other parking spaces;
      2.   In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person or property; or
      3.   In such manner as to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic
or use of the streets. (1976 Code § 27-5-10)
   C.   Double Stopping:
      1.   No vehicle shall be permitted to double stop under the conditions
hereinafter set out:
         a.   Within fifty feet (50') of an intersection, except alley
intersections, or within ten feet (10') of an alley intersection;
         b.   Opposite a double stopped vehicle across the street;
         c.   When such double stopping would or does block or interfere
materially with the normal movement of traffic;
         d.   When parking space adjacent to the curb is available;
         e.   When directed by a police officer to move on.
      2.   Vehicles not used ordinarily for the transportation of merchandise
may double stop for the purpose of, but only while actually engaged in, the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers subject, however, to all the
general conditions set out in this Chapter.
      3.   Vehicles used ordinarily for the transportation of merchandise may
double stop for the purpose of, but only while actually engaged in, the
expeditious loading or unloading of merchandise subject, however, to all the
general conditions herein set out. No such vehicle shall be double stopped
longer than ten (10) minutes, provided such double stopping does not obstruct
the flow of vehicular traffic. (1976 Code § 27-5-7; 1992 Code)
   D.   One-Way Streets and Roadways:
      1.   If a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic
is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway, unless signs are
erected to permit such standing or parking.
The Mayor, under the direction of the City Council, is authorized to determine
when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such
one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. (1976 Code § 27-5-4;
1992 Code)
      2.   The Mayor, under the direction of the City Council, is authorized to
erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the
standing or parking of vehicles. When the signs are in place, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle in violation of any such signs. (1976 Code § 27-5-5;
1992 Code)
   E.   Narrow Streets: The Mayor, under the direction of the City Council, is
hereby authorized to erect signs indicating "No Parking" upon any street when
the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet (20') or upon one side of
a street, as indicated by such signs, when the width of the roadway does not
exceed thirty feet (30'). No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in
violation of any such sign so erected. (1976 Code § 27-5-8; 1992 Code)
   F.   Alleys: No person shall park any motor vehicle at any time in any
public alley within the City. This subsection shall not prohibit the standing
or the parking of a vehicle for a reasonable time incidental to delivery
purpose. (1976 Code § 27-5-23)
   G.   All Night Parking:
      1.   Streets: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public
street within the corporate limits of the City between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 0-14-82, 6-11-82)
      2.   Permit to Park in Municipal Parking Lots: Parking is permitted on
Municipally-owned parking lots within the City between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., upon displaying a City issued permit
for same. Said permits shall be issued by the office of the City Clerk for the
sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year, per vehicle. (Ord. 0-09-86, 5-
19-86)
   H.   Fully Improved Public Streets (Curbs, Gutters, etc.) 1 :
      1.   Day Parking: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any fully
improved public street within the corporate limits of the City between the
hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. Parking is
permitted during daytime hours on the south side of streets running east and
west and the east side of streets running north and south. Emergency vehicles,
service vehicles and delivery vehicles shall be allowed to park on the south
side of east and west streets or on the east side of north and south streets,
but service vehicles and delivery vehicles shall be limited to thirty (30)
minutes' parking, and only while service or delivery is being conducted.
      2.   Private Property 2 : It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle on private property on any fully improved public street other than on a
designated driveway area or within the confines of a garage.
      3.   Commercial Vehicles 3 : It shall be unlawful for any person to keep,
park or store any commercial vehicle in a residential zone on any fully
improved public street, unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a garage.
(Ord. O-14-82, 6-11-1982)
      4.   Trailers, Mobile Homes And Boats: It shall be unlawful for any
person to keep, park or store any trailer, mobile home, boat, etc., on the side
yard or front yard of a residential zone. Parking of such vehicle is permitted
in a garage, driveway or rear yard only. Trailers, mobile homes, boats, etc.,
must be owned by the owner of the property on which said vehicle is parked.
(Ord. O-15-82, 6-11-1982)
   I.   Residential Areas 4 :
      1.   Parking Restricted In Residential Areas: All residential streets
within the corporate boundaries of the city shall have restricted parking
limited to residents, their guests and residential deliveries only. (Ord. O-23-
92, 9-8-1992)
      2.   Front, Side Or Back Yards: In a residential district, parking of
motor vehicles shall not be permitted in any portion of a front yard, side yard
or back yard, except where such front yard, side yard or back yard is a means
of access to a required approved off street parking space, or currently paved
or concrete surface within the guidelines of this code. (Ord. O-08-95, 5-1-
1995)
      3.   Junk Vehicles 5 : In a residential district, parking of junk motor
vehicles shall not be permitted in any yard area. (Ord. O-18-78, 6-13-1978)
      4.   Commercial Vehicles 6 : No person shall park any box truck or other
commercial vehicle bearing a B or D classification license plate in any area in
the city which is zoned for residential purposes, unless such vehicle is parked
in a garage or on the private driveway behind the front yard setback of the
residence where the truck is parked provided, however, that no more than one
such vehicle shall be parked at any residence. Parking of any truck bearing
other than a B or D classification license plate in an area zoned for
residential purposes is prohibited.
This subsection shall not prohibit the parking within the area zoned
residential of pickup trucks, sport utility vehicles or other such vehicles
used for solely personal transportation. (Ord. O-12-2003, 7-7-2003)
   J.   Truck And Service Vehicles On Service Drives: Trucks and service
vehicles are prohibited from parking or standing on any service drives or
service drive parkways within the city. (1976 Code § 27-5-25)
   K.   Private Property 7 : No person shall park any motor vehicle on any
private property without the consent of the owner of the property. (1976 Code §
27-5-27)
   L.   Adjacent To Schools: The mayor, under the direction of the city
council, is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either
or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking
would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any such signs. (1976 Code § 27-
5-6; amd. 1992 Code)
   M.   After Snowfall: No person shall park any motor vehicle of any kind on
any street of the city within five (5) hours after a snowfall of two inches
(2") or more, as measured by the U.S. weather bureau or any of its recognized
agencies. (1976 Code § 27-5-22)
   N.   Street Cleaning: No person shall park any vehicle on any public street
or portion thereof in the city at any time when such street is being cleaned.
Signs indicating that a street or portion thereof is being cleaned shall be
posted immediately before the cleaning of the street and shall be removed after
the cleaning of the street is finished. (1976 Code § 27-5-31)
   O.   Cab Stands; Bus Stands: No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall
be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a cab stand 8 , and no vehicle
other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a bus loading
zone. (1976 Code § 27-5-33)
   P.   Vehicles For Sale; Peddling Merchandise:
      1.   No person shall park any vehicle upon any street at anytime for the
purpose of displaying it for sale, or park any vehicle upon any business street
from which vehicle merchandise is peddled.
      2.   No person shall park any vehicle upon privately owned property at
anytime that does not display a valid license plate and city of Northlake city
sticker for the purpose of selling such vehicle. Any vehicle displayed for sale
on privately owned property must be owned by the person on whose property the
vehicle is displayed. (Ord. O-59-95, 10-16-1995)
   Q.   Moving Parked Vehicles:
      1.   No person shall move a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked
unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (1976 Code §
27-5-32)
      2.   No person, other than a police officer, as provided in section
6-3-7 of this chapter shall move a vehicle into any prohibited parking area or
away from a curb such distance as is unlawful or start or cause to be started
the motor of any motor vehicle or shift, change or move the levers, brake,
starting device, gears or other mechanism of a parked motor vehicle to a
position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver thereof or
attempt to do so. (1976 Code § 27-5-15)
   R.   Opening Doors Into Trafficways: No person in any automobile, taxicab,
bus or truck, when such vehicle is parked, double parked or stopped, shall open
any side door on the vehicle unless he first ascertains if any bicycle or motor
vehicle is approaching from the rear within such distance as will render
hazardous the opening of the door. (1976 Code § 27-5-36)
   S.   Hazardous Or Congested Places: The mayor, under the direction of the
city council, is hereby authorized to determine and regulate by proper signs
the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles when such stopping, standing or
parking would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual
delay in traffic. When such official signs are erected at hazardous or
congested places, no person shall violate such signs. (1976 Code § 27-5-29;
amd. 1992 Code)
   T.   Handicapped Parking:
      1.   Definition: "Handicapped Person" shall mean every natural person who
is unable to walk two hundred feet (200') or more unassisted by another person
or without the aid of a walker, crutches, braces, prosthetic device or a
wheelchair or without great difficulty or discomfort due to the following
impairments: neurologic, orthopedic, respiratory, cardiac, arthritic disorder,
blindness, or the loss of function or absence of a limb or limbs.
      2.   Handicapped Persons; Parking Privileges; Exemptions: The provisions
set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.1 (formerly Illinois
Revised Statutes Chapter 951/2, Par. 11-1301.1) are hereby officially adopted
by the City as follows:
A motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to a handicapped person, as
defined by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-159.1, pursuant to 5/3-616 or to
a disabled veteran pursuant to 5/3-609 or a special decal or device issued
pursuant to 5/3-616 or pursuant to 5/11-1301.2 of this Code or a motor vehicle
registered in another jurisdiction, state, district, territory or foreign
country upon which is displayed a registration plate, special decal or device
issued by the other jurisdiction designating the vehicle is operated by or for
a handicapped person shall be exempt from the payment of parking meter fees and
exempt from any statute or ordinance imposing time limitations on parking,
except limitations of one-half hour or less, on any street or highway zone or
any parking lot or parking place which are owned, leased or owned and leased by
a municipality or a municipal parking utility; and shall be recognized by state
and local authorities as a valid license plate or parking device and shall
receive the same parking privileges as residents of this State; but, such
vehicle shall be subject to the laws which prohibit parking in "no stopping"
and "no standing" zones in front of or near fire hydrants, driveways, public
building entrances and exits, bus stops and loading areas, and is prohibited
from parking where the motor vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard, whereby such
motor vehicle shall be moved at the instruction and request of a law
enforcement officer to a location designated by the officer. Any motor vehicle
bearing registration plates or a special decal or device specified in this
Section or in 5/3-616 of this Code or such parking devices as specifically
authorized in 5/11-1301.2 as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a
handicapped person or disabled veteran may park, in addition to any other
lawful place, in any parking place specifically reserved for such vehicles by
the posting of an official sign as provided under 5/11-301. Parking privileges
granted by this Section are strictly limited to the person to whom the special
registration plates, special decal or device were issued and to qualified
operators acting under this express direction while the disabled person is
present.
Such parking privileges granted by this Section are also extended to motor
vehicles of not-for-profit organizations used for the transportation of
handicapped persons when such motor vehicles display the decal or device issued
pursuant to 5/11-1301.2 of this Code.
No person shall use any area for the parking of any motor vehicle pursuant to
5/11-1303 of this Code or where an official sign controlling such area
expressly prohibits parking at any time or during certain hours.
      3.   Parking Privileges Limited: Parking privileges are strictly limited
to the handicapped person. The disabled person must be present when parking the
vehicle in areas reserved for the handicapped. Misuse of the handicapped
parking device can result in its revocation. (Ord. 0-05-94, 3-7-94)
      4.   Parking Cards:
         a.   New handicapped parking cards shall be issued by the City on July
1 of every year and shall expire on June 30. Temporary handicapped parking
cards shall be valid for a period of one year. Permanent handicapped parking
cards shall be valid for a period of four (4) years. A new application shall be
filled out for both temporary cards or permanent cards prior to the issuance of
a new handicapped parking card. Permanent handicapped parking license plates
are issued through the State. (Ord. 0-12-94, 4-4-94)
         b.   The provisions for the issuance of handicapped parking cards as
set forth by George H. Ryan, Secretary of State, of the State of Illinois are
hereby adopted by the City of Northlake, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. 0-05-94,
3-7-94)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  6-3-1N of this Chapter.
2 2. See also subsection
   6-3-4K of this Chapter.
3 3. See also subsection
   6-3-4I4 of this Chapter.
4 4. See also subsections H3 and H4 of this section.
5 1. See also chapter 6 of this title.
6 2. See also subsection H3 of this section.
7 3. See also subsection H2 of this section.
8 1. See also section
  3-7A-7 of this code.
6-3-5: NO PARKING AT SPECIFIED TIMES:
No person shall park any vehicle at any place designated as a "No Parking
Specified Times Area" during the times so specified and posted. The streets
specified in Schedule V contained in Section
6-4-5 of this Title are hereby designated as "No Parking Specified Times Area".
(1976 Code § 27-5-16)
6-3-6: LOADING ZONES:
No driver of a vehicle shall stop, stand or park a passenger vehicle for a
period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes, in any place designated by the
City Council as a loading zone and marked as such or in any of the following
designated places:
   A.   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb
before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time;
   B.   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb line
before the entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. except on a Sunday;
   C.   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the
theater is open. (1976 Code § 27-5-14)
6-3-7: AUTHORITY TO REMOVE ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLE:
   A.   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing, stopped or parked
upon a roadway in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, such
officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle or require the driver or
other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same to a position off the
paved or improved or main travel part of such roadway.
   B.   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge
or causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
   C.   Whenever any police officer finds an abandoned or disabled vehicle
standing upon the paved or main traveled part of a roadway, which vehicle is or
may be expected to interrupt the free flow of traffic on such roadway or
interfere with the maintenance of such roadway, such officer shall have
authority to move the vehicle to a position off the paved or improved or main
traveled part of such roadway 1 . (1976 Code § 27-5-34)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 7 and section
  6-8-1 of this title.
6-3-8: EFFECT OF PROVISIONS:
All parking limit regulations, unless otherwise specifically provided herein,
shall be in force and effect between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except Sundays and holidays. The provisions of this
chapter regulating vehicular parking upon the streets shall have no application
on Sundays and holidays unless the particular regulation specifically provides
that it shall apply at all times. (1976 Code § 27-5-21)
6-3-9: RESIDENT ONLY PARKING:
   A.   There is hereby established a category of parking on public streets to
be known as resident only parking.
   B.   Subject to the approval of the city council, the department of public
works is authorized to erect and maintain signs on any block of any residential
street indicating resident only parking.
   C.   When the official signs are erected indicating resident only parking,
it shall be illegal to park any vehicle in such area unless such vehicle has a
current city vehicle sticker or resident only parking permit is displayed and
the following shall apply:
      1.   Each homeowner within a resident parking area will be issued two (2)
parking passes. This pass can be handed out to the person of the homeowner's
choice who is not a resident to be used when visiting. Any misuse of such
permits shall render the same invalid and the same shall not be issued to the
person or household, which originally held the same. Visitor's parking is
limited to the time that the person driving the visiting vehicle is actually in
the residence or on the property being visited.
      2.   When visiting, the parking pass is to placed on the driver's side
dashboard so as to be seen by the police officers.
      3.   Any additional parking passes can be issued for hardship cases such
as medical personnel that need to come to the residence on a regular basis by
board approval.
      4.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any service or
delivery vehicle when used to provide services or to make deliveries to
residences within a resident only parking zone, provided that the parking of
such vehicle does not exceed the time the services or deliveries are being
made.
      5.   Nonresident vehicles parked in a resident parking only area without
a parking pass or parking permission shall be cited and/or towed.
   D.   Resident only parking shall be on the following streets:
Edward Avenue.
300 block of Country Club.
300 block of Parkview. (Ord. O-15-2007, 5-7-2007)
CHAPTER 4
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Schedule I - Stop Intersections
6-4-2: Schedule II - Yield Right-Of-Way Intersections
6-4-3: Schedule III - One-Way Streets And Alleys
6-4-4: Schedule IV - No Parking At All Times
6-4-5: Schedule V - No Parking At Specified Times; Exceptions
6-4-6: Schedule VI - Time Limit Parking
6-4-7: Schedule VII - No Parking On One Side Only
6-4-8: Schedule VIII - U-Turns Prohibited
6-4-9: Schedule IX - Turns Restricted
6-4-10: Schedule X - Truck Traffic
6-4-11: Schedule XI - Speed Limits
6-4-12: Schedule XII - Parade Permits
6-4-13: Temporary Barricades
6-4-1: SCHEDULE I - STOP INTERSECTIONS:
Street At Intersection With
Street                                                 At Intersection With
Armitage Avenue                                        North LaPorte Avenue
Armitage Avenue                                        Prater Avenue
Belle Drive, eastbound                                 Alvin Avenue
Country Club Hills                                     Roy Avenue
Dickens Avenue, eastbound and westbound                McLean Street
East Bernice Avenue, 300 block adjacent to existing     
school crosswalks
Elm Street                                             LeMoyne Street
Gail Avenue                                            LeMoyne Street
Geneva Avenue                                          Lyndale Avenue
Geneva Avenue, northbound and southbound               Medill Avenue
Gulfview Drive, eastbound                              LaVergne Avenue
Haber Court                                            Village Drive
Hillside Avenue                                        Lemoyne Avenue
Hirsch Street                                          43rd Avenue
Hirsch Street                                          45th Avenue
Hirsch Street                                          46th Avenue
Hirsch Street                                          Harold Avenue
Hirsch Street                                          Roberta Avenue
Jerome Drive                                           Fullerton Avenue
LaPorte Avenue, northbound and southbound              Bernice Avenue
LaPorte Avenue, southbound                             Whitehall Avenue
LaVergne Avenue                                        Fullerton Avenue
LaVergne Avenue, northbound                            Golfview Drive
LaVergne Avenue, northbound and southbound             Soffel Avenue
LeMoyne Street                                         Harold Avenue
LeMoyne Street                                         Roberta Avenue
LeMoyne Street                                         43rd Avenue
LeMoyne Street                                         44th Avenue
LeMoyne Street                                         46th Avenue
Lind Street                                            LeMoyne Street
Lyndale Avenue                                         Roberta Avenue
Major Drive, eastbound and westbound                   McLean Street
McLean Avenue                                          Palmer Avenue
Medill Avenue, eastbound and westbound                 Geneva Avenue
Morse Drive, eastbound                                 46th Avenue
Morse Drive, westbound                                 46th Avenue
Palmer Avenue                                          Jerome Drive
Palmer Avenue                                          LaVergne Avenue
Palmer Avenue, eastbound                               LaPorte Avenue
Palmer Avenue, westbound                               LaPorte Avenue
Parkview Drive                                         Roy Avenue
Parkview Drive, eastbound and westbound                Roberta Avenue
Rhodes Avenue                                          Derrough Avenue
Roberta Avenue                                         Armitage Avenue
Roberta Avenue                                         Country Club Drive
Roberta Avenue                                         Fullerton Avenue
Roberta Avenue, north, south and eastbound             Wagner Drive
Roy Avenue                                             Harold Avenue
Roy Avenue                                             Hirsch Street
Roy Avenue                                             Lyndale Avenue
Roy Avenue                                             Parkview Drive
Roy Avenue                                             Victoria Drive
Roy Avenue                                             Village Drive
Roy Avenue                                             Whitehall Avenue
Roy Avenue, northbound and southbound                  Wagner Drive
Roy Avenue, southbound                                 Soffell Avenue
Sandra Drive                                           Fullerton Avenue
Service drives of North Avenue, north and south sides,  
between Roberta Avenue and Prater Avenue
Soffel Avenue                                          Harold Avenue
Soffel Avenue                                          South Roberta Avenue
Soffel Avenue, eastbound                               44th Avenue, southbound
Victoria Drive                                         Prater Avenue
Village Drive, westbound                               LaPorte Avenue
Westward Ho Drive                                      Golfview Drive
Westward Ho Drive                                      Harvard Avenue
Westward Ho Drive                                      West Drive
Westward Ho Drive, westbound                           Franklin Drive
Whitehall Avenue                                       Prater Avenue
Whitehall Avenue                                       Roberta Avenue
Whitehall Avenue, eastbound                            Alvin Avenue
Whitehall Avenue (stop signs on the northeast corner)  Alvin Avenue
Wiltse Parkway                                         Parkview Drive
44th Avenue                                            Hirsch Street
46th Avenue                                            Hirsch Street
 
(1976 Code § 27-10-1; amd. Ord. O-07-75, 3-11-1975; Ord. O-10-75, 3-11-1975;
Ord. O-11-75, 4-8-1975; Ord. O-24-75, 6-24-1975; Ord. O-37-75, 10-14-1975; Ord.
O-15-77, 6-14-1977; Ord. O-17-78, 5-23-1978; Ord. O-10-88, 7-12-1988; Ord. O-
26-89, 7-19-1989; Ord. O-40-89, 9-18-1989; Ord. O-38-90, 7-2-1990; Ord. O-67-
90, 12-17-1990; Ord. O-16-91, 5-21-1991; 1992 Code; Ord. O-34-93, 10-18-1993;
Ord. O-13-94, 4-4-1994; Ord. O-21-94, 7-18-1994; Ord. O-25-94, 9-19-1994; Ord.
O-49-95, 10-2-1995; Ord. O-45-97, 11-17-1997; Ord. O-51-97, 1-5-1998; Ord. O-
15-2001, 9-17-2001; Ord. O-25-2001, 12-17-2001; Ord. O-18-2018, 8-13-2018; Ord.
O-13-2020, 9-14-2020)
6-4-2: SCHEDULE II - YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS:
On the southeast corner of Derrough Avenue and Diversey Avenue so that
motorists exiting from the west exit of West Leyden High School shall yield the
right-of-way to traffic on Diversey Avenue. (1976 Code § 27-10-2; amd. 1992
Code)
6-4-3: SCHEDULE III - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
Street Or Alley Between Direction Type
Street Or Alley         Between              Direction Type
Alley west of Wolf Road Alley south of North South      
                        Avenue to Soffel
Alley west of Wolf Road LeMoyne Street and   South      
                        Soffel Avenue
Armitage Avenue         Wolf Road and        East       
                        LaPorte Avenue
Derrough Avenue         Within City limits   North      
Diversey Avenue         Within city limits   West       
Gail Avenue             North Avenue and     North     Monday through Friday,
                        LeMoyne Street                 3:00 P.M. to 6:00 P.M.
Village Drive           LaPorte Avenue and   West       
                        Wolf Road
 
(Ord. O-28-96, 5-6-1996)
6-4-4: SCHEDULE IV - NO PARKING AT ALL TIMES 1 :
   A.   Streets Generally:
Street Location  Side
Street                    Location                     Side
Fullerton Avenue,
parkways immediately      Between Roberta Avenue and  South
south and immediately     Geneva Avenue
north
Fullerton Avenue,
parkways immediately      Between Wolf Road and       Both
south and immediately     Roberta Avenue
north
Geneva Avenue             Between Armitage Avenue to  Both
                          Major Drive
Geneva Avenue             Lyndale Avenue to Dewey     East
                          Avenue
Golfview Drive, during 2" Between LaVergne Avenue     North
or more of snowfall       and Westward Ho Drive
Grand Avenue              Entire length               Both
                          LeMoyne Street on the
                          north to the south
Harvard Avenue            property line of the        East
                          property and lot described
                          as 101 South Harvard
                          Avenue
Harvard Avenue            North Avenue to Westward    Both
                          Ho
Lake Street               From east city limits to    Both
                          west city limits
Lakewood Avenue           South of North Avenue       Both
                          From a point commencing at
                          the south property line of
LaVergne Avenue           St. John Vianny Roman       East
                          Catholic Church to West
                          Drive
LeMoyne Avenue            Wolf Road to Dodd Avenue    Both
Mannheim Road, except in
areas that are legally                               Both
designated for parking
Maplewood Avenue          North of Lake Street        Both
                          Adjacent to the
                          intersection with Roy
                          Avenue. The city council
                          will prohibit future
                          parking at such locations
                          on or immediately adjacent
North Avenue              to North Avenue at said      
                          intersection as may be
                          determined and directed by
                          the state to be necessary
                          to ensure the free flow of
                          traffic and safety to the
                          motoring public.
North Avenue, south       Lind Avenue to Railroad      
service drive             Avenue
North Roy Avenue          North Avenue to Parkview    Both
                          Drive
North Wolf Road           North Avenue to MacArthur   Both
                          Drive
                          Center line of Grand
Northwest Avenue          Avenue to a point 300'      East
                          south of the centerline of
                          Grand Avenue
Palmer Avenue             Wolf Road to Geneva Avenue  South (2:00 A.M. to 6:00
                                                       A.M.)
Parkview Drive            Prater Avenue to Roy        South
                          Avenue
Parkview Drive            Roy Avenue to Roberta       North
                          Avenue
                          Wolf Road to east property
Parkview Drive            line of the Fire            North
                          Department
Railroad Avenue           Lake Street to north        Both
                          terminus
Roy Avenue                Between Country Club Drive  Both
                          and North Avenue
Roy Avenue                Between Lake Street and     Both
                          North Avenue
                          Between northerly City
Roy Avenue                limits and Country Club     West
                          Drive
                          In the turnaround area
Sandra Avenue             located at the north        Both
                          terminus
West Drive                Entire length               North
West Drive                LaVergne Avenue to Wolf     South
                          Road
Westward Ho Drive         West of west line of        North
                          LaVergne Avenue - 150'
Wolf Road                 North Avenue and West       Both
                          Drive
Wolf Road                 North Avenue to City        Both
                          limits
                          North Avenue to Lake
Wolf Road                 Street, parking where        
                          provided hereafter shall
                          be parallel parking only
Wolf Road                 South of Addison Creek      Both
 
(1976 Code § 27-10-4; amd. Ord. O-11-77, 5-24-1977; Ord. O-19-77, 7-12-1977;
Ord. O-09-78, 3-14-1978; Ord. O-26-78, 8-8-1978; Ord. O-28-78, 9-12-1978; Ord.
O-29-78, 9-12-1978; Ord. O-10-85, 10-21-1985; Ord. O-08-87, 8-17-1987; Ord. O-
04-88, 4-12-1988; Ord. O-12-88, 8-9-1988; Ord. O-01-89, 1-10-1989; Ord. O-35-
89, 9-6-1989; Ord. O-67-90, 12-17-1990; 1992 Code; Ord. O-21-2001, 11-19-2001;
Ord. O-09-2002, 4-15-2002; Ord. O-17-2002, 11-18-2002; Ord. O-21-2018, 10-1-
2018)
   B.   Fire Lanes: The following are designated fire lanes. Said fire lanes
shall be designated by yellow paint stripes:
 
Street           Location
West Lake Street 401 West Lake Street
 
Any space designated on the plat of the property attached to the contract
between the City and LaSalle National Bank trust no. 48199, which space is
designated on said plat as a fire lane. (Ord. O-42-77, 10-11-1977)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  6-3-1 of this title.
6-4-5: SCHEDULE V - NO PARKING AT SPECIFIED TIMES; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   No Parking At Specified Times:
Street Location  Side Type
Street                Location                  Side  Type
                      300 block at Whittier
                      School. Portable stop           8:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M.
East Whitehall Avenue signs shall be placed         on school days
                      adjacent to the school
                      crosswalks
Golfview Drive        Westward Ho Drive to     South 2:00 A.M. to 6:00 A.M.
                      Hillside Avenue
Hirsch Street         45th Avenue to 46th      North 9:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M.
                      Avenue
                      Roy Avenue between              No parking during church
Roy Avenue            Whitehall Avenue and     West  services except for
                      Bell Avenue                     church service attendees
West Drive            Wolf Road and LaVergne   Both  Sunday, 7:00 A.M. to 1:00
                      Avenue                          P.M.
                      North Avenue on the
Wolf Road             south to City limits on       2:00 P.M. to 7:00 P.M.
                      the north
46th Avenue           Hirsch Street and        East  9:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M.
                      LeMoyne Street
                      West side from LeMoyne          8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M. on
46th Avenue           Street on the north to        days when school is in
                      Hirsch Street on the            session
                      south
 
(1976 Code § 27-10-5; amd. Ord. O-31-76, 10-26-1976; Ord. O-13-80, 7-8-1980;
Ord. O-01-90, 1-9-1990; 1992 Code; Ord. O-47-98, 9-21-1998; Ord. O-54-98, 12-
21-1998)
   B.   Exceptions: There shall be no time restriction for the duration of
parking motor vehicles on either the west side or the east side of Wolf Road
between Lake Street and North Avenue in the city. (Ord. O-07-84, 9-13-1984)
6-4-6: SCHEDULE VI - TIME LIMIT PARKING:
Street Location Side Type
Street               Location                   Side Type
North Avenue Service From Wolf Road to LaVergne      1 hour parking between 9:
Drive                Avenue, north of North         00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M.
                     Avenue
                                                     15 minute parking between
                    In front of city hall          9:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. on
                                                     days city hall is open for
                                                     city business
                     Dropoff zone in front of
North Wolf Road      property commonly known as     15 minute parking
                     77 North Wolf Road
                     Dropoff zone in front of
                    property commonly known as     15 minute parking
                     231 North Wolf Road
                     28 South Wolf Road, 2
South Wolf Road      parking spaces in front of     15 minute parking
                     commercial property
                     In front of the premises        15 minute parking between
                    designated as 28 South     West 7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M.,
                     Wolf Road                       except on Sundays and
                                                     holidays
                     In front of property            15 minute parking between
                    commonly known as 36-38-40     7:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
                     South Wolf Road
                                                     15 minute parking between
                                                     6:00 A.M. to 8:00 A.M. and
                                                     3:00 P.M. to 5:00 P.M.,
                     36 South Wolf Road, 3           daily, except Saturdays,
                    parking spaces in front of     Sundays and legal
                     commercial property             holidays. Regular parking
                                                     restrictions shall be in
                                                     full force and effect at
                                                     all other times
                     In any area designated by       1 hour parking between 8:
                    ordinance as a restricted      00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M.,
                     parking area and posted         except Sundays or holidays
 
The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (1976 Code §§ 27-5-17, 27-
5-18, 27-5-19; amd. Ord. O-05-75, 2-25-1975; Ord. O-13-78, 4-25-1978; Ord. O-
09-84, 11-9-1984; 1992 Code; Ord. O-01-2009, 1-5-2009)
6-4-7: SCHEDULE VII - NO PARKING ON ONE SIDE ONLY:
The following streets and thoroughfares shall be designated as "no parking":
Street  Between  And
Street              Between             And
                                       
Alvin Avenue        Country Club Drive  Whitehall Avenue
Belle Drive         Country Club Drive  Alvin Avenue
Bernice Avenue      LaPorte Avenue      Geneva Avenue
Caryl Avenue        Soffel Avenue       Hirsch Street
                   Victoria Drive      Morse Drive
Charles Drive       Country Club Drive  Prater Avenue
Country Club Drive  Wolf Road           Alvin Avenue
Division Street     45th Avenue         44th Avenue
Dodd Avenue         Victoria Drive      Prater Avenue
East Drive          Country Club Drive  Prater Avenue
Edward Avenue       North Avenue        Belle Drive
Gail Avenue         LeMoyne Avenue      North Avenue
Geneva Avenue       Whitehall Avenue    Armitage Avenue
Harold Avenue       Soffel Avenue       Hirsch Street
                   Victoria Drive      Morse Drive
Hirsch Street       Caryl Avenue        Roy Avenue
                   Roy Avenue          43rd Avenue
Lakewood Avenue     Lake Street         End
LaPorte Avenue      Whitehall Avenue    Armitage Avenue
LeMoyne Street      Harold Avenue       43rd Avenue
                   Harvard Avenue      Wolf Road
                   Wolf Road           Dodd Avenue
Marilyn Avenue      Victoria Drive      Morse Drive
Morse Drive         Prater Avenue       Roy Avenue
                   Roberta Avenue      43rd Avenue
Prater Avenue       North Avenue        Armitage Avenue
                   Victoria Drive      North Avenue
Roberta Avenue      Soffel Avenue       Hirsch Street
Soffel Avenue       Elm Avenue          Wolf Road
                   Roy Avenue          Roberta Avenue
                   46th Avenue         44th Avenue
Victoria Drive      Dodd Avenue         Roy Avenue
                   Roberta Avenue      46th Avenue
Whitehall Avenue    Wolf Road           Geneva Avenue
Wiltse Drive        Wolf Road           Parkview Avenue
43rd Avenue         Hirsch Street       North Avenue
44th Avenue         Division Street     LeMoyne Street
45th Avenue         Division Street     LeMoyne Street
46th Avenue         Division Street     North Avenue
 
(Ord. O-16-81, 11-10-1981; amd. Ord. O-01-82, 1-8-1982; Ord. O-03-83, 2-11-
1983; 1992 Code)
6-4-8: SCHEDULE VIII - U-TURNS PROHIBITED:
 
Street       Between
Wolf Road    North Avenue and West Drive
 
(1976 Code § 27-10-6)
6-4-9: SCHEDULE IX - TURNS RESTRICTED:
 
Street        Intersection    Direction  Turn Prohibited
North Avenue  LaVergne Avenue Westbound  Left turn 3:00 P.M. to 6:00 P.M.
                                         Monday through Friday
Palmer Avenue Jerome Avenue   Eastbound  Left turn
             North LaVergne  Eastbound  Left turn
                              Avenue
Wolf Road     LeMoyne Street  Northbound Right turn when children are present
 
(Ord. O-28-96, 5-6-1996; amd. Ord. O-51-97, 1-5-1998)
6-4-10: SCHEDULE X - TRUCK TRAFFIC:
   A.   Exceptions: No person shall drive a truck, except vans and pickup
trucks, on any street within the city except the following:
      County Line Road
      Lake Street
      Mannheim Road
      North Avenue
      Northwest Avenue
      Wolf Road
   (1976 Code § 27-10-8)
   B.   Limited Load Streets:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for trucks or other commercial vehicles over
five (5) tons of gross weight to use or drive upon Wolf Road in the city in
either direction from Grand Avenue on the north to Lake Street on the south.
This subsection B1 shall not be interpreted so as to prohibit deliveries to
businesses, schools, churches, commercial establishments or residents located
on Wolf Road in the city. (Ord. O-15-75, 5-27-1975)
      2.   Pursuant to the authority vested in the city and by 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes, it shall be unlawful and prohibited for any person to
operate or drive through Northlake any motor vehicle weighing in excess of
fifteen (15) tons upon Railroad Avenue and/or Wolf Road between Lake Street
(State Route 20) and North Avenue (State Route 64). (Ord. O-14-79, 7-10-1979)
   C.   No Truck Traffic: Truck traffic on Alvin Avenue within the city shall
be prohibited. A “no truck traffic” sign shall be installed at the intersection
of James Place and Alvin Street prohibiting truck traffic exiting James Place
onto Alvin Avenue located so as to allow a clear and unobstructed view of said
sign from James Place. (Ord. O-17-89, 6-13-1989)
   D.   Truck Parking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to park any truck or
commercial vehicle weighing in excess of five (5) gross tons on either side of
Dickens Avenue or McLean Avenue east of Mannheim Road.
   E.   Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of
$200.00.
(Ord. O-20-2010, 5-17-2010; amd. Ord. O-18-2025, 8-4-2025)
6-4-11: SCHEDULE XI - SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   Specific Streets:
 
Street           From                         Speed
Northwest Avenue Grand Avenue to North Avenue 30 mph
 
   (Ord. O-11-79, 6-12-1979)
   B.   Schools, Parks And Playgrounds: No person shall drive a motor vehicle
at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour while passing a school while
school is in session or a park or playground or while children pass at
crossings going to and from a school park or playground. Appropriate signs
shall be posted to indicate this restriction. (Ord. O-66-90, 12-17-1990; amd.
1992 Code)
6-4-12: SCHEDULE XII - PARADE PERMITS:
   A.   Parade Permit Required:
      1.   Requirement: No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or
start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the
chief of police or other appropriate official or body.
      2.   Exceptions: This chapter shall not apply to:
         a.   Funeral processions;
         b.   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction
and supervision of the proper school authorities;
         c.   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
   B.   Parade Permit Application:
      1.   Requirement: A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file
an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such officer.
      2.   Filing Period: An application for a parade permit shall be filed
with the chief of police not less than five (5) days nor more than sixty (60)
days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
      3.   Contents: The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
         a.   The name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade;
         b.   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or
by an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters
of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such
organization;
         c.   The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct;
         d.   The date when the parade is to be conducted;
         e.   The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination
point;
         f.   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and description of the
vehicles;
         g.   The hours when such parade will start and terminate;
         h.   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
         i.   The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade;
         j.   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at
any such assembly area or areas;
         k.   The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade;
         l.   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for,
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file
with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing
to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his
behalf;
         m.   Any additional information which the chief of police shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued.
      4.   Late Applications: The chief of police, where good cause is shown
therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which
is filed less than thirty (30) days before the date such parade is proposed to
be conducted.
      5.   Fee: There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a
parade permit a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   C.   Recommendation Of City And Other Officials: Prior to issuance of a
parade permit, the chief of police shall consult for their recommendations of
parade permit the following officials: mayor, city attorney, fire chief, and
director of the department of city services.
   D.   Standards For Issuance: The chief of police shall issue a permit as
provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from
such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
      1.   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
      2.   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great
a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement
and the areas contiguous thereto so as to prevent normal police protection to
the city;
      3.   The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions
of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and
areas contiguous thereto;
      4.   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly
areas;
      5.   The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
      6.   The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury
to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct, or create a disturbance;
      7.   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its
point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route;
      8.   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods, or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private
profit. (Ord. O-23-2007, 7-9-2007)
6-4-13: TEMPORARY BARRICADES:
   A.   It shall be illegal for any motor vehicle to be operated around or
otherwise in violation of any temporary barricade erected by or at the
direction of the city. The registered owner of the motor vehicle shall be
liable for violations of this section.
   B.   All citations issued in connection with this section shall be processed
by the Northlake ordinances enforcement department.
   C.   Fines for violations of this section shall be as set forth in section
1-15-11 of this code. (Ord. O-15-2013, 6-17-2013)
CHAPTER 5
BICYCLES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Scope Of Provisions
6-5-2: Bicycle Registration
6-5-3: Removal Or Alteration Of Serial Number
6-5-4: Report Of Dismantled Bicycles
6-5-5: Rental Agencies
6-5-6: Bicycle Dealers
6-5-7: Operation Of Bicycles
6-5-8: Equipment
6-5-9: Parental Responsibility
6-5-10: Impoundment Of Bicycles
6-5-11: Penalties
6-5-1: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS:
The regulations in this chapter applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any street or public sidewalk or upon any public path
set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated
herein. (1976 Code § 27-12-21)
6-5-2: BICYCLE REGISTRATION:
   A.   Bicycle Registration Required: No person shall operate or use a bicycle
upon any public way within the city without first registering such bicycle with
the police department. (1976 Code § 27-12-2)
   B.   Application For Registration; Fee; Term: An application for
registration of a bicycle shall be made on a form provided for that purpose by
the police department. No person shall knowingly make any false statement of a
material fact in his application for registration with the intent to procure
title to any bicycle which he knows or has reason to believe has been stolen.
(1976 Code §§ 27-12-3, 27-12-6)
   C.   Registration Fee And Term: The registration fee for a bicycle shall be
one dollar ($1.00), and the registration shall be good for the life of the
bicycle. (1976 Code §§ 27-12-4, 27-12-5)
   D.   Nontransferability Of Registration: Upon the sale or transfer of any
bicycle, the new owner, within ten (10) days of the date of such sale or
transfer, shall obtain from the police department a new registration for such
bicycle in his name. (1976 Code § 27-12-7)
   E.   Records Kept: The police department shall keep a record of the date of
the issuance of each registration and the name and address of the person to
whom the registration is issued and the number thereof, together with a
description of the bicycle registered. (1976 Code § 27-12-8)
6-5-3: REMOVAL OR ALTERATION OF SERIAL NUMBER:
No person shall destroy, remove, alter, cover or deface the manufacturer's
serial number on any bicycle. No person shall own or have custody of a bicycle,
the original manufacturer's serial number of which has been destroyed, removed,
altered, covered or defaced unless such person can prove ownership by bill of
sale or other means. (1976 Code §27-12-9)
6-5-4: REPORT OF DISMANTLED BICYCLES:
The person in whose name any bicycle has been registered shall report a change
in the status of the bicycle to the Police Department within ten (10) days
after the bicycle is dismantled or taken out of operation. (1976 Code §27-12-
10)
6-5-5: RENTAL AGENCIES:
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle
is registered in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. (1976 Code
§27-12-22)
6-5-6: BICYCLE DEALERS:
Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or secondhand
bicycles shall make a report to the Chief of Police of every bicycle purchased
or sold, giving the name and address of the person from whom purchased or to
whom sold, a description of such bicycle by name or make, the frame number
thereof and the registration number, if any, found thereon. (1976 Code §27-12-
23)
6-5-7: OPERATION OF BICYCLES:
   A.   Application of Traffic Laws: Every person riding a bicycle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this State
declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances
of the City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to those
provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no
application. (1976 Code §27-12-11)
   B.   Obedience to Traffic-Control Devices:
      1.   Any person operating a bicycle shall comply with official traffic-
control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.
      2.   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or
left turn or a turn in the opposite direction is permitted, no person operating
a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such
person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event, such
person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. (1976 Code
§27-12-20)
   C.   Speed Restrictions: No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed
greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
(1976 Code §27-12-12)
   D.   Emerging from Alleys or Driveways: The operator of a bicycle emerging
from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right of way to all
pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area and upon entering the
roadway, shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway. (1976 Code §27-12-13)
   E.   Riding on Sidewalks: Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a
sidewalk, such person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall
give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (1976 Code
§27-12-14)
   F.   Riding on Roadways and Bicycle Paths:
      1.   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near
to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or a vehicle proceeding in the same direction and at
all times giving the right of way to other moving vehicles.
      2.   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride other than
single file except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles.
      3.   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
(1976 Code §27-12-15)
   G.   Carrying Articles: No person operating a bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars or which impedes or interferes with the safe,
reasonable and prudent operation of the bicycle. (1976 Code §27-12-16)
   H.   Parking Bicycles: No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other
than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to
support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb and in such manner as
to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (1976 Code §27-12-17)
   I.   Manner of Riding on Bicycles:
      1.   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
      2.   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped. (1976 Code §27-12-19)
6-5-8: EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Lights and Reflectors: Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall
be equipped with a headlamp which shall emit a white light visible from a
minimum distance of five hundred feet (500') from the front and with a rear red
reflector of the type capable of reflecting the headlamp beams of an
approaching motor vehicle back to the operator of such vehicle at a distance up
to two hundred feet (200') or a rear lamp emitting a red light visible from a
distance of at least two hundred feet (200') from the rear.
   B.   Bell Or Warning Device: No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is
equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a
distance of at least one hundred feet (100'); except, that a bicycle shall not
be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
   C.   Brake: Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable
the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. (1976
Code § 27-12-18)
6-5-9: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
No parent or guardian of any minor shall knowingly authorize or permit any such
minor to violate the provisions of this chapter. First violation will be a
warning to the parents of said minor. (1976 Code § 27-12-21)
6-5-10: IMPOUNDMENT OF BICYCLES:
The officers of the police department are authorized and directed to impound
any bicycle found on any public way in the city when it has not been registered
or the equipment required by the ordinances of the city is missing.
An impounded bicycle shall be released to the owner thereof only upon
satisfactory proof of ownership and placing thereon the required license or
equipment. (1976 Code § 27-12-24)
6-5-11: PENALTIES:
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by
suspension of the registration for such person's bicycle for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days, by impounding of such bicycle for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days or by revocation of any registration issued under this
chapter or by any combination thereof.
Suspension or revocation of a bicycle registration shall be effected after a
hearing, written notice of which shall be served upon the registrant in person
or by certified mail at least three (3) days prior to said hearing. (1976 Code
§ 27-12-25; amd. 1992 Code)
CHAPTER 6
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-6-1: Definitions
6-6-2: Abandonment Of Vehicles
6-6-3: Leaving Wrecked, Inoperable Vehicles On Streets
6-6-4: Inoperable Motor Vehicles
6-6-5: Compliance With Notice To Dispose
6-6-6: Impoundment Procedures
6-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is left at any place for such time and
under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have
been abandoned, or any vehicle which does not bear current state license plates
and a current city vehicle sticker.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at
least one month, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed or on
which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise
so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor
power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle which has
been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own power in
order to perform ordinary service or repair operations or to any motor vehicles
that are kept within a building when not in use, to historic vehicles over
twenty five (25) years of age or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place
of business engaged in wrecking or junking of motor vehicles 1 .
PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is not a street or highway.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic. (Ord. O-09-82, 5-14-1982)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 3, chapter 10, article B, "Junk Dealers", of this code.
6-6-2: ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES:
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city, and no person shall leave
any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such
circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to have been abandoned. (Ord.
O-09-82, 5-14-1982)
6-6-3: LEAVING WRECKED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES ON STREETS:
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked
vehicle on any street or highway in the city. (Ord. O-09-82, 5-14-1982)
6-6-4: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: Inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or
private property, are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. O-09-82, 5-14-
1982)
   B.   Disabled Cars: It shall be unlawful to store and keep any automobile
which is in an inoperable or in a disabled condition and unlicensed anywhere in
the city for a period of more than fifteen (15) days, unless such vehicle is in
a building maintained and used as an automobile repair shop or garage 1 . Any
place where such cars are stored in violation of this subsection shall be
construed to be a junkyard 2 . (Ord. O-62-95, 11-20-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 3, chapter 7, article C of this code.
2 2. See title 3, chapter 10, article B of this code; see also subsection
  6-3-4I3 of this title.
6-6-5: COMPLIANCE WITH NOTICE TO DISPOSE:
All persons are required to dispose of any abandoned or inoperative motor
vehicles under their control or on their property, upon written notice received
from the corporate authorities or from the chief of police or any member of his
department designated by him, commanding such disposition of such abandoned or
inoperable motor vehicles. (Ord. O-09-82, 5-14-1982; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-
1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
6-6-6: IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES 1 :
The chief of police or any member of his department designated by him is hereby
authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place within the
city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter or which
reasonably appears to be lost, stolen or unclaimed or which is an "inoperable
vehicle" as defined in this chapter. Such vehicle, as defined in this chapter
shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with
state law. (Ord. O-09-82, 5-14-1982; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-
2014, 3-3-2014)
 
Notes
1 3. See also section 6-7-1 of this title.
CHAPTER 7
IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES; PENALTIES
SECTION:
6-7-1: Vehicle Impoundment And Redemption
6-7-2: Administrative Adjudication Of Parking Violations
6-7-3: Penalties
6-7-1: VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION 1 :
   A.   Purpose: The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions
of this section shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection
of the public peace, safety and welfare and the safeguarding of property and
shall be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards,
prevention and abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law
violations, protection of the public rights in the use of city streets,
highways and roadways from obstructions placed and left in derogation of those
rights and for safeguarding and protecting recovered stolen vehicles. (1976
Code § 27-9-1)
   B.   Authority Of Police To Impound Vehicles: Members of the police
department are authorized within the limits set forth in this section to
impound vehicles under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated. No impoundment
shall be valid unless made under order of an authorized police officer and in
strict adherence with the procedures required in this section. (1976 Code § 27-
9-2; amd. Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-2014, 3-3-2014)
   C.   Owner Of Record: "Owner of record" shall mean a person who holds legal
title of a vehicle, a person who has registered a vehicle in his name with the
state, or in the event a vehicle is subject to an agreement for a conditional
sale, lease, or mortgage which vests an immediate right of possession in the
conditional vendee, lessee, or mortgagor, then such conditional vendee, lessee,
or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this section.
   D.   Violations Authorizing Impoundment: A motor vehicle, operated with the
permission, express or implied, of the owner of record, that is used in
connection with the following violations, shall be subject to tow and
impoundment by the city, and the owner of record of said vehicle shall be
liable to the city for an administrative fee in addition to any towing and
storage fees, as hereinafter provided:
      1.   Any offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized or forfeited
pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1.
      2.   Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs or intoxicating
compounds.
      3.   Operation or use of a vehicle in connection with the commission or
attempted commission of any felony offense in violation of the provisions of
the Illinois cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq.
      4.   Operation or use of a vehicle in connection with the commission or
attempted commission of any offense in violation of the Illinois controlled
substance act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq.
      5.   Unlawful use of a weapon in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/24-1, aggravated discharge of a firearm, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/24-1.5, or unlawful possession of a firearm and firearm ammunition,
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-3.1.
      6.   Fleeing and eluding a police officer, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/4-103.2.
      7.   Reckless driving or aggravated reckless driving, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-503.
      8.   Drag racing, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-504.
      9.   Driving with a suspended or revoked license, 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-303.
      10.   Operation of a motor vehicle with suspended registration, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-708.
      11.   Violation of city ordinance(s) regarding noise/amplification
systems.
      12.   Violation of city ordinance(s) regarding excessive muffler noise.
      13.   Violation of city ordinance(s) regarding unlawful possession or
consumption of alcohol by a minor.
      14.   Unlawful transportation or possession of alcohol in a motor
vehicle.
      15.   Arrest and detention of driver. Whenever the driver or person in
charge of any vehicle is placed under arrest and taken into custody and
detained by police under circumstances which leave or will leave a vehicle
unattended.
      16.   Vehicles creating traffic hazard. A vehicle left unattended and so
parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
      17.   Vehicles parked in prohibited zones. Any unattended vehicle parked
at the street curbing of any zone where parking is prohibited.
      18.   Vehicles blocking fire exits or hydrants. Any vehicle illegally
parked in such a manner that it blocks a fire escape ladder, device or exit or
blocks ready access to a fire hydrant.
      19.   Vehicles parked in intersections. Any unattended vehicle parked in
any street intersection.
      20.   Vehicles trespassing on private property:
         a.   An unattended vehicle found to be in violation of subsection
6-3-4K of this title may be impounded when the required complaint has been
properly made and filed as provided in this section.
         b.   If a violation of the provisions of subsection
6-3-4K of this title occurs, the owner or legal occupant who complains shall
sign a complaint against the person parking the vehicle on the owner's or legal
occupant's property, or if the identity of the person parking the vehicle is
unknown, then the complaint may be filed against the registered owner of the
vehicle. The complaint shall be verified and shall allege that the complaining
party is the owner or legal occupant of the property upon which the vehicle is
parked or standing.
         c.   Upon filing of the complaint by the property owner or legal
occupant, and if there appears to be proper cause to believe the provisions of
subsection
 6-3-4K of this title have been violated, the police department shall cause the
vehicle to be impounded from the property and placed in storage.
   E.   General Regulations:
      1.   This section shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing
state or federal laws pertaining to vehicle seizure, towing and impoundment,
and the owner shall be subject to these penalties in addition to any penalties
that may be assessed by a court for any criminal charges.
      2.   This section shall not apply if the vehicle used in the violation
was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police
authorities within twenty four (24) hours after the theft was discovered.
      3.   Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle under this section shall be
those approved by the chief of police or his designee for all tow companies
authorized to tow for the police department.
   F.   Notice: Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a
vehicle is subject to tow and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall arrange the towing of the vehicle by a towing company approved by
the city. Thereafter the police officer shall cause written notice to be issued
to the owner of record either in person or at his last known address or the
address registered with the Illinois secretary of state, and shall include the
following:
      1.   Year, make, model, and license plate number (if known) of the
vehicle towed;
      2.   Date and approximate time of towing;
      3.   Location of vehicle at time of towing;
      4.   Name and address of towing company;
      5.   Nature of the violation; (Ord. O-08-2006, 3-6-2006)
      6.   State owner has option of: a) paying towing fees, storage fees, and
administrative fee of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) to city for release
of vehicle in final disposition of matter; or b) requesting an administrative
hearing; (Ord. O-08-2006, 3-6-2006; amd. Ord. O-11-2011, 4-18-2011)
      7.   Procedure to request an administrative hearing, and statement that
the owner of record must request an administrative hearing within ten (10) days
of the vehicle being impounded; and (Ord. O-08-2006, 3-6-2006)
      8.   Procedure for posting three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) cash
payment for immediate release of vehicle pending administrative hearing, as
described in subsection G of this section.
   G.   Posting Cash Payment: If an owner of record has requested an
administrative hearing regarding the towing of his vehicle, but wishes to post
a cash payment to allow the immediate release of the vehicle, the owner of
record must post a three hundred fifty dollar ($350.00) payment to the city.
The city shall issue a receipt to the owner, and the owner must take the
receipt to the towing company. The towing company shall release the vehicle to
the owner upon full payment of all towing and storage fees incurred to date.
Upon final adjudication at the administrative hearing as described in
subsection H of this section, the three hundred fifty dollar ($350.00) payment
shall be applied toward any judgment issued in favor of the city, or shall be
returned to the owner if a finding is entered in favor of the owner. (Ord. O-
08-2006, 3-6-2006; amd. Ord. O-11-2011, 4-18-2011)
If the owner fails to pay the administrative tow fee and/or related towing and
storage fees pending the administrative hearing and a finding is entered in
favor of the owner, the city shall not be responsible for any towing fees and
storage charges which may have accrued.
   H.   Hearing: If the owner of record requests an administrative hearing, the
city shall issue notice at least five (5) days prior to the hearing in person
or via U.S. mail to the owner of record the hearing location, date and time.
The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer, designated by the city,
and in accordance with the procedures set forth in title 1, chapter 15 of this
code governing administrative hearings. If there is a conflict between the
terms of this section and title 1, chapter 15 of this code, the terms of this
section shall control. (Ord. O-08-2006, 3-6-2006)
If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was used
in connection with a violation set forth in subsection D of this section, the
hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the vehicle
civilly liable to the city for an administrative fee in the amount of three
hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) and requiring the vehicle to continue to be
impounded until the owner pays the administrative fee to the city, plus fees to
the tower for the towing and storage of the vehicle. If the owner of record
fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a default order
in favor of the city. If the hearing officer finds no such violation occurred,
the hearing officer shall order the immediate return of the owner's vehicle or
cash payment without fees. (Ord. O-08-2006, 3-6-2006; amd. Ord. O-11-2011, 4-
18-2011)
   I.   Administrative Fee: If an administrative fee is imposed pursuant to
this section, such fee shall constitute a debt due and owing the city. If a
cash bond has been posted pursuant to this section the bond shall be applied to
the fee. If a vehicle has been impounded when an administrative fee is imposed,
the city may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment
against the vehicle as provided by law. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded until the fee is paid to the
city and any applicable towing fees are paid to the tower, in which case
possession of the vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled
to possess the vehicle or the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to
satisfy a judgment to enforce a lien as provided by law. If the administrative
fee and other applicable fees are not paid within thirty (30) days after an
administrative fee is imposed against an owner of record who defaults by
failing to appear at the hearing, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and
shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of
unclaimed vehicles. In all other cases, if the administrative fee and other
applicable fees are not paid within thirty (30) days after the expiration of
time at which administrative review of the hearing officer's determination may
be sought, or within thirty (30) days after an action seeking administrative
review has been resolved in favor of the city, whichever is applicable, the
vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner
provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles under the Illinois
vehicle code. (Ord. O-08-2006, 3-6-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 6 of this title for regulations regarding abandoned, wrecked
  vehicles.
6-7-2: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF PARKING VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Operation Of An Administrative Adjudication System:
      1.   These provisions shall provide a system of administrative
adjudication as required by section 11-208.3 of the Illinois vehicle code to
cause the suspension of a registered owner's or lessee's driver's license upon
his failure to pay fines or penalties due and owing as a result of ten (10) or
more city standing and/or parking violations.
      2.   These provisions shall not preclude the city from adopting
procedures pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5 providing for
the authority to file a certified report to the Illinois secretary of state
upon a person's failure to satisfy any fine or penalty imposed by a final
judgment from a court of law for ten (10) or more standing and/or parking
violations.
In addition, notwithstanding any provision of this section, the city may
continue to prosecute in a court of law any person receiving less than ten (10)
standing and/or parking violations. (Ord. O-15A-90, 3-19-1990)
      3.   An individual, appointed by the mayor, shall serve as parking
administrator under the direction of the chief of police and shall be
authorized to adopt, distribute and process parking violation notices required,
collect money paid as fines and penalties for violation of parking ordinances
and shall operate the administrative adjudication system. The parking
administrator also may make a certified report to the secretary of state.
      4.   The city prosecutor or some other individual designated by the
mayor, shall serve as hearing officer and shall perform such duties as defined
within this Section. (Ord. 0-15A-90, 3-19-90; 1992 Code)
   B.   Authority to Issue:
      1.   Any employee of the City authorized to issue vehicular parking and
standing citations and who detects a violation of any section of this Code
restricting or prohibiting parking or standing of motor vehicles shall issue a
hang-on parking violation notice by either affixing it to an unlawfully parked
vehicle or handing it to the operator of such vehicle if he or she is present.
      2.   Police officers, auxiliary police officers, City inspectors and Code
enforcement officers shall be authorized, in the course of their specific
duties, to issue hang-on parking violation notices in accordance with the
provisions set forth herein.
   C.   Action by Recipient of Citation: A person receiving a citation for a
parking violation may make an appearance in one of the following manners:
      1.   Payment of the fine indicated on the citation. Such payment shall be
made by the deadline stated on the citation and shall operate as the final
disposition of the violation; or
      2.   Requesting a hearing on the merits of the parking violation in the
time and manner specified on the hang-on notice and attendance at the hearing
at the time, date and place specified by the Parking Administrator. The hearing
shall be conducted in accordance with procedures set forth herein.
   D.   Failure to Appear; Service of Additional Notices:
      1.   Failure to make an appearance shall result in additional notices of
violation, as indicated in this subsection, being sent by first class mail to
the registered owner of the cited vehicle at his or her address as recorded
with the Secretary of State or to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the last
address known to the lessor of said vehicle at the time of the lease. Service
of additional notices shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United
State mail.
      2.   A second notice of violation shall be sent to the responsible party,
as defined in subsection D1 above upon the failure of the recipient of a hang-
on parking violation to make an appearance as prescribed in subsection C of
this Section. The recipient may appear by either paying the indicated fine and
assessed penalty for late charges or by requesting a hearing on the merits of
the citation in the time and manner specified on the second notice and
attending such hearing at the time, date and place specified by the Parking
Administrator. Failure to appear as herein prescribed shall result in a final
determination of parking violation liability for the cited violation.
      3.   A notice of final determination of parking violation liability shall
be sent to the responsible party, as defined in subsection D1 above, upon the
failure to appear pursuant to the second notice of violation and after a final
determination of parking violation liability has been rendered in accordance
with subsection D2 hereof. The recipient may appear by paying the fine and
penalty within the time specified on the notice and shall be advised that
failure to do so pay may result in the City's filing of a petition in the
Circuit Court to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a judgment as
provided by section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, and that proceedings
to suspend his driver's license will be initiated pursuant to chapter 951/2,
section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code for failure to pay fines or
penalties for ten (10) or more parking violations.
      4.   A notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent to
the person for whom a final determination of liability was rendered, in
accordance with this subsection, on each of ten (10) or more unpaid parking
violations. Failure to pay the fines and/or penalties owing within forty five
(45) days of the notice's date shall result in notification to the Secretary of
State of said person's eligibility for initiation of driver's license
suspension proceedings.
   E.   Final Determination of Parking Liability; Petition to Set Aside:
      1.   A final determination of parking ticket violation liability shall
occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty after a hearing officer's
determination of parking violation liability and the Parking Administrator's
denial of a petition to set aside the determination or expiration of the period
for filing such petition without a filing having been made.
      2.   A determination of parking ticket violation liability may be set
aside by filing a petition with the Parking Administrator within ten (10)
working days after the hearing officer's determination. Petitions shall specify
the grounds on which a challenge may be based, including the following:
         a.   The person owing the unpaid fine and/or penalty was neither the
owner nor lessee of the cited vehicle(s) on the date or dates the parking
violation notice was issued;
         b.   The fine and/or penalty were paid for the parking violation in
question;
         c.   Excusable failure to request a hearing, appear at the hearing or
request a new date for hearing.
      3.   The Parking Administrator shall render a decision within fourteen
(14) days of the petition's receipt and shall immediately notify the hearing
officer and petitioner of such decision. If the petitioner has shown just
cause, the Parking Administrator shall set aside the parking ticket violation
liability determination.
      4.   If the petition is granted, and the determination of parking
violation liability set aside, the registered owner or lessee shall be provided
a hearing on the merits of the violation and shall be given notice of the time
and manner in which it will take place.
   F.   Administrative Adjudication Of Parking Violations: The hang on parking
violation citation and the second notice of liability shall provide the alleged
violator with the time and manner in which a hearing contesting the merits of
the alleged violation shall be held. Neither formal nor technical rules of
evidence shall apply. Such hearing shall be recorded, and the person conducting
the hearing, on behalf of the parking administrator, shall be empowered to
administer oaths and to secure by subpoena both the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers. Persons appearing at
such hearing may be represented by counsel at their own expense.
   G.   Certified Report; Contesting Certified Report:
      1.   Upon failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing after
the exhaustion of administrative procedures set forth herein for ten (10) or
more parking violations, the parking administrator shall make a certified
report to the secretary of state stating that the owner of a registered vehicle
has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing as a result of ten (10) or
more violations of the city's vehicular parking regulations and thereby cause
the suspension of that person's driver's license. A copy of the certified
report shall be sent to the registered owner.
      2.   The parking administrator shall take no further action unless and
until the fines and penalties due and owing are paid or upon determination that
the inclusion of the person's name on the certified report was in error. At
such time, the parking administrator shall submit to the secretary of state a
notification which shall result in the halting of a driver's license suspension
proceedings. The person named therein shall receive a certified copy of such
notification upon request and at no charge.
      3.   Persons may challenge the accuracy of the certified report by
completing a form provided by the office of the parking administrator within
ten (10) days after the date of the certified report and which specifies
grounds on which such challenge is based. Grounds for challenge shall be
limited to the following:
         a.   The person was neither the owner nor lessee of the vehicle(s)
receiving ten (10) or more parking violation notices on the date or dates such
notices were issued; or
         b.   The persons have paid the fine and penalty for the ten (10) or
more violations indicated on the certified report.
      4.   The parking administrator shall render a determination within ten
(10) business days of receipt of the objection form and shall notify the
objector thereof.
   H.   Procedure For Nonresidents:
      1.   Persons who are not residents of the city may contest the merits of
the alleged violation without attending a hearing as provided herein by
submitting a waiver of hearing and a notarized statement of facts specifying
grounds for challenging the citation. Such documentation must be received by
the parking administrator within the time for requesting a hearing.
      2.   The hearing officer shall issue to the parking administrator a
finding based on the statement of facts.
      3.   The parking administrator shall notify the nonresident of the
hearing officer's determination.
      4.   In all other respects, the procedures set forth in this section
shall apply to nonresidents.
   I.   Administrative Review: Any further review shall be pursuant to the
administrative review act 1 . (Ord. O-15A-90, 3-19-1990)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
6-7-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation Of Illinois Vehicle Code Provisions:
      1.   Any person accused of violating any of the following provisions of
the Illinois vehicle code adopted in section
6-2-1 of this title may settle and compromise the claim by paying the city the
sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) and showing proof of correction of the violation
ten (10) days from the time such alleged offense was committed or by paying to
the municipality the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and showing proof of
the correction of the violation subsequent to the said ten (10) day period.
(Ord. O-31-2004, 12-20-2004)
Section Of 625                 City Code Provisions
Illinois Compiled Statutes
Section Of 625                 City Code Provisions
Illinois Compiled Statutes
   3-112(b)              Failure to transfer title within five (5) days
   3-401(a)              No valid registration - never applied
   3-404                 No bill of lading or manifest/dispatch record
   3-411(a)              Failure to carry registration card or reciprocity
                            permit - second division vehicles
   3-413(a,b)            Improper display of license plates
   3-413(f)              Operation of vehicle with expired registration
                            plate or sticker
   3-416                 Failure to notify the secretary of state of name/
                            address change
   3-417(a)              Failure to immediately apply for replacement
                            registration card, plate or sticker
   3-701(1)              No valid registration - no valid plate or sticker
                            obtained
   3-701(2)              No valid registration - reciprocity, prorate or
                            apportionment
   5-201(h)              No in transit plates
   5-202(e)              Failure to display three (3) tow truck plates
   11-1406               Obstruction to driver's view of control
   11-1407               Improper opening of door into traffic
   11-1410               Coasting on downgrade
   11-1411               Following fire apparatus
   11-1419.01            Motor fuel tax ID card
   12-101                Driving vehicle which is in unsafe condition or
                            improperly equipped
   12-201(a)             Daytime lights on motorcycles
   12-202                Clearance, identification and side marker lamps
   12-204                Lamp or flag on projecting load
   12-205                Failure to display the safety lights required
   12-401                Restrictions as to tire equipment
   12-502                Mirrors
   12-503                Windshields must be unobstructed and equipped with
                            wipers
   12-601                Horns and warning devices
   12-602                Mufflers, prevention of noise or smoke
   12-603                Seat safety belts
   12-702                Certain vehicles to carry flares or other warning
                            devices
   12-710                Splash guards and replacements
   13-111                Operation without certificate of valid safety test
                            attached to windshield - second division vehicle
                            Failure to display valid unexpired emission
   13A-104(C)            inspection sticker (affected Illinois counties
                            only)
   15-104                Name and address on second division vehicles
                            Load projecting in any excess beyond left fenders
   15-105                or six inches (6") beyond right fenders of first
                            division vehicle
   15-106                Failure to fasten loose projecting member
   15-108                Failure to plank edge of pavement for any vehicle
                            in excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds
   15-109(a)             Spilling load on highway
   15-109(b)             Operating loading vehicle without securely fastened
                            covering
   15-109.1              Operating second division vehicle with load
                            falling, blowing or dropping to highway
   15-114                Unlawful pushing of disabled vehicle
   18c-4104(a)           Operation without registration - intrastate or
                            interstate
   18c-4604(1)           Operation without current cab card and Illinois
                            identifier stamp
   18c-4604(3)           Use of a cab card and Illinois identifier stamp
                            issued to another carrier
   18c-4604(4)           Failure to display or present a cab card and
                            Illinois identifier stamp
                            Operating without trade name, license and
   18c-4701(1)           registration number of carrier painted or affixed
                            to both doors of power unit
   1203-1                Operation of all-terrain vehicle or off highway
                            motorcycle without valid registration
   1203-4(b)             Operation of all-terrain vehicle or off highway
                            motorcycle without affixed registration decal
   1203-4(c)             Operation without registration certificate in
                            possession of operator
   1203-9                Failure to renew registration certificate
   1204-3                Operation of all-terrain vehicle or off highway
                            motorcycle without safety helmet and eye protection
   1204-6                Operation without headlamp and taillamp when
                            required
   1204-7                Operation without operational service brake
   1204-8                Operation without adequate muffler system
   1204-10               Operation with modified exhaust system
 
Display of city vehicle license, see section
6-1-6 of this title.
Pursuant to the Illinois vehicle code, section 6-204, conviction for these
offenses is not reportable to the secretary of state.
      2.   Penalties for violation of the Illinois size, weight and load law
shall be those set forth therein 1 . (Ord. O-15A-90, 3-19-1990; amd. Ord. O-10-
92, 5-18-1992)
   B.   Violation Of City Regulations:
      1.   Any person accused of violating the following city ordinances may
settle and compromise the claim within ten (10) days from the time the offense
was committed according to the following schedule:
Unauthorized use of parking places reserved for handicapped persons  $250.00
No parking in fire lane                                              50.00
Abandoned motor vehicles                                             50.00
Overnight parking in prohibited areas                                25.00
All other parking violations                                         25.00
No through truck traffic                                             100.00
Damage to city property                                              100.00
All other motor vehicle city ordinance violations for which no fine  50.00
is specifically mentioned
 
      2.   Subsequent to said ten (10) day period, any person accused of
violating city ordinances may settle and compromise the claim according to the
following schedule:
Unauthorized use of parking places reserved for handicapped persons  $250.00
No parking in fire lane                                              100.00
Abandoned motor vehicles                                             100.00
Overnight parking in prohibited areas                                50.00
All other parking violations                                         50.00
No through truck traffic                                             200.00
Damage to city property                                              200.00
All other motor vehicle city ordinance violations for which no fine  100.00
is specifically mentioned
 
(Ord. O-31-2004, 12-20-2004; amd. Ord. O-15-2012, 5-7-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/15-113.
   
CHAPTER 8
SIZE, WEIGHT AND VEHICLE LOAD RESTRICTIONS
SECTION:
6-8-1: Scope And Effect
6-8-2: Width Of Vehicles
6-8-3: Height Of Vehicles
6-8-4: Projecting Loads On Passenger Vehicles
6-8-5: Protruding Members Of Vehicles
6-8-6: Length Of Vehicles
6-8-7: Planking Edge Of Pavement
6-8-8: Spilling Loads
6-8-9: Covers Or Tarpaulins Required For Certain Loads
6-8-10: Towed Vehicles
6-8-11: Wheel And Axle Loads And Gross Weights
6-8-12: Officers To Weigh Vehicles And Require Removal Of Excess Loads
6-8-13: Violations, Penalties
6-8-14: Violations, Sentence Of Permit Moves
6-8-15: Violations, Sentence Of Permit Moves Exceeding Axle Weights
6-8-16: Violations, Sentence Of Permit Moves Exceeding Gross Weight
6-8-17: Pushing Of Disabled Vehicles
6-8-18: Vehicles Exceeding Prescribed Weight Limits, Preventing Use Of Streets
And Highways By
6-8-19: Enforcement
6-8-20: Permits For Excess Size And Weight
6-8-21: Fees For Special Permits
6-8-22: Transmission Fees
6-8-23: Fees For House Trailer Combination
6-8-24: Fees For Legal Weight But Overdimension Vehicles, Combinations And
Loads, Other Than House Trailer Combinations
6-8-25: Fees For Overweight-Axle Loads
6-8-26: Fees For Overweight-Gross Loads
6-8-27: Fees For Police Escort
6-8-28: Supplemental Permit Fee
6-8-29: Payment Of Fees
6-8-30: Exemptions To Requirement Of Fees
6-8-31: Reserved
6-8-32: Liability If Street, Highway Or Structure Damaged
6-8-33: Weight On Residential Streets
6-8-1: SCOPE AND EFFECT:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or move on, upon or across or
for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway
or street any vehicle or vehicles of a size and weight exceeding the
limitations stated in this Chapter or otherwise in violation of this Chapter,
and the maximum size and weight herein specified shall be lawful throughout the
City.
   B.   The provisions of this Chapter governing size, weight, and load shall
not apply to fire apparatus or equipment for snow and ice removal or to a
vehicle operated under the terms of a special permit issued by the City. (Ord.
O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-2: WIDTH OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided, the total outside width of any vehicle or
load thereon shall not exceed eight feet (8').
   B.   A vehicle and load traveling upon the National System of Interstate and
Defense Highways or any other highway in the system of State highways that has
been designated by the Illinois Department of Transportation or any street or
highway designated by the City or road district commissioners may have a total
outside width of eight feet six inches (8'6"), provided that certain safety
devices which the Illinois Department of Transportation determines as necessary
for the safe and efficient operation of motor vehicles shall not be included in
the calculation of width.
Vehicles operating under subsection E of this Section shall have access for a
distance of five (5) highway miles on a street or highway included in the
system of State highways and upon any street or highway designated by the City
or road district commissioners to points of loading and unloading and to
facilities for food, fuel, repairs and rest. In addition, any trailer or
semitrailer not exceeding twenty eight feet six inches (28'6") in length, which
was originally in combination with a truck tractor, and all household goods
carriers, when operating under subsection E of this Section, shall have access
to points of loading and unloading.
   C.   Mirrors required by Section 6-7-6 of this Title and other safety
devices identified by the Illinois Department of Transportation may project up
to six inches (6") beyond each side of a vehicle and such projection shall not
be deemed a violation of the width restrictions of this Section.
   D.   Any person who is convicted of violating this Section is subject to the
penalty, as provided in subsection
6-8-13C of this Chapter.
   E.   A vehicle and load traveling upon the National System of Interstate and
Defense Highways or any other highway in the system of State highways that has
been designated as a Class I or Class II highway by the Department, or any
street or highway designated by local authorities or road district
commissioners, may have a total outside width of eight feet six inches (8'6"),
provided that certain safety devices shall not be included in the calculation
of width.
Vehicles operating under this subsection shall have access for a distance of
one highway mile to or from a Class I highway on any street or highway, unless
there is a sign prohibiting the access, or five (5) highway miles to or from a
Class I or II highway on a street or highway included in the system of State
highways and upon any street or highway designated by local authorities or road
district commissioners, without additional fees, to points of loading and
unloading and to facilities for food, fuel, repairs and rest. In addition, any
trailer or semitrailer not exceeding twenty eight feet six inches (28'6") in
length, that was originally in combination with a truck tractor, and all
household goods carriers, when operating under this subsection, shall have
access to points of loading and unloading. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-3: HEIGHT OF VEHICLES:
The height of a vehicle from the underside of the tire to the top of the
vehicle, inclusive of load, shall not exceed thirteen feet six inches (13'6").
Any person convicted of violating this Section is subject to the penalty
provided in subsection
6-8-13C of this Chapter. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-4: PROJECTING LOADS ON PASSENGER VEHICLES:
No passenger type vehicle shall be operated on any highway or street with any
load carried thereon extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side
of such vehicle nor extending more than six inches (6") beyond the line of the
fenders on the right side thereof. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-5: PROTRUDING MEMBERS OF VEHICLES:
No vehicle with boom, arm, drill rig or other protruding component shall be
operated upon the highway or street unless such protruding component is
fastened so as to prevent shifting, bouncing or moving in any manner. (Ord. O-
01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-6: LENGTH OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, no single vehicle, with
or without load, other than a semitrailer that is not a house trailer, shall
exceed an overall length of forty two feet (42').
   B.   Subject to the provisions of subsection F of this Section and unless
otherwise provided in this Chapter, no truck tractor and semitrailer, unladen
or with load, except a semitrailer other than a house trailer, shall exceed a
length of fifty five feet (55') extreme overall dimension, except that such
combination when specially designed to transport motor vehicles may have a
length of sixty feet (60') extreme overall dimension, subject to those
exceptions and special rules otherwise stated in this Chapter. No other
combination of vehicles, unladen or with load, shall exceed a length of sixty
feet (60') extreme overall dimension.
   C.   A truck tractor semitrailer may draw one trailer or may draw one
vehicle which is special mobile equipment if the extreme length of such
combination does not exceed sixty feet (60'), and a truck in transit may draw
three (3) trucks in transit coupled together by the triple saddlemount method.
Except as otherwise provided, no other combinations of vehicles coupled
together shall consist of more than two (2) vehicles. For the purposes of this
subsection, a tow-dolly or convertor dolly which merely serves as substitute
wheels for another legally licensed vehicle will be considered part of the
vehicle and not as a separate vehicle.
Vehicles in combination, whether being operated intrastate or interstate, shall
be operated and towed in compliance with all requirements of Federal Highway
Administration, title 49, CFR, Motor Carrier Safety Regulations, pertaining to
coupling devices and towing methods and all other equipment safety requirements
set forth in said regulations.
   D.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, there is no
overall length limitation on motor vehicles operating in truck tractor-
semitrailer or truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer combinations, except that
"maxi-cube" combinations as defined in this Section, a truck in transit
transporting three (3) trucks coupled together by the triple saddlemount
method, and a combination of vehicles specifically designed to transport motor
vehicles or boats, shall not exceed sixty five feet (65') overall length, and
provided that a stinger steered combination of vehicles specifically designed
to transport motor vehicles or boats shall not exceed seventy five feet (75')
overall length, with such length limitations inclusive of front and rear
bumpers, but exclusive of the overhang of the transported vehicles, as provided
in subsection I of this Section, upon the National System of Interstate and
Defense Highways or any other highways in the system of State highways that
have been designated Class I highways by the Illinois Department of
Transportation or any street or highway designated by the City; provided that
the length of the semitrailer unit unladen or with load, operated in a truck
tractor-semitrailer combination shall not exceed fifty three feet (53') and the
distance between the kingpin and the rear axle of a semitrailer longer than
forty five feet six inches (45'6") shall not exceed forty five feet six inches
(45'6"); and provided that the length of any semitrailer or trailer, unladen or
with load, operated in a truck tractor-semitrailer- trailer combination shall
net exceed twenty eight feet six inches (28'6").
The length limitations described in this subsection shall be exclusive of
safety and energy conservation devices, such as rear view mirrors, turn
signals, marker lamps, steps and handholds for entry and egress, flexible
fender extensions, bumpers, mudflaps and splash and spray suppressant devices,
load-induced tire bulge, refrigeration units or air compressors and other
devices, which the Department may interpret as necessary for safe and efficient
operation; except that no device excluded under this subsection shall have by
design or use the capability to carry cargo.
Vehicles operating under this subsection shall have access for a distance of
five (5) highway miles on a street or highway in the system of State highways,
and upon any street or highway designated by the City, to points of loading and
unloading and facilities for food, fuel, repairs and rest. Household goods
carriers shall have access to points of loading and unloading.
For purposes of this Section, a "maxi-cube" vehicle shall be defined as a
combination of vehicles consisting of a truck-tractor, upon which is mounted a
separable cargo carrying semitrailer and a trailing unit which is attached by a
pintle hook or similar connection with the separable cargo carrying semitrailer
designed so as to be loaded and unloaded through the trailing unit, except that
the entire combination shall not exceed sixty five feet (65') in length and
that neither the semitrailer nor the trailing unit in such combination shall
itself exceed thirty four feet (34') in length.
   E.   In addition to the designation of streets and highways under subsection
D of this Section the Illinois Department of Transportation and the City may
designate other streets or highways under their respective jurisdiction as
streets and highways upon which a truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer combination
may be operated provided that the wheelbase between the front axle and rear
axle shall not exceed sixty five feet (65') and the length of any semitrailer
or trailer unladen or with load, in such a combination shall not exceed twenty
eight feet six inches (28'6").
A maxi-cube combination, a truck in transit transporting three (3) trucks
coupled together by the triple saddlemount method, and a combination of
vehicles specifically designed to transport motor vehicles or boats may operate
on said designated streets or highways provided the overall length shall not
exceed sixty five feet (65'), and provided that a stinger steered combination
of vehicles specifically designed to transport motor vehicles or boats shall
not exceed seventy five feet (75') overall length, with such length limitations
inclusive of front and rear bumpers but exclusive of the overhang of the
transported vehicles as provided for in subsection I of this Section.
The length limitations described in this subsection shall be exclusive of
safety and energy conservation devices, such as rear view mirrors, turn
signals, marker lamps, steps and handholds for entry and egress, flexible
fender extensions, bumpers, mudflaps and splash and spray suppressant devices,
load-induced tire bulge, refrigeration units or air compressors and other
devices, which the Department may interpret as necessary for safe and efficient
operation except that no device excluded under this subsection shall have by
its design or use the capability to carry cargo.
Vehicles operating under this subsection shall have access for a distance of
five (5) highway miles on a street or highway in the system of State highways,
and upon any street or highway designated by the City, to points of loading and
unloading and to facilities for food, fuel, repairs and rest. Household goods
carriers shall have access to points of loading and unloading.
   F.   On any street or highway in the system of State highways or under the
jurisdiction of the City that has not been designated by the Illinois
Department of Transportation or the City under subsection D of this Section, or
under the jurisdiction of the City, the wheelbase between the front axle and
the rear axles in a truck tractor-semitrailer combination shall not exceed
fifty five feet (55'), the length of the semitrailer, unladen or with load,
shall not exceed fifty three feet (53') and the distance between the kingpin
and the rear axles of a semitrailer longer than forty eight feet (48') shall
not exceed forty feet (40'). On any street or highway in the State system of
highways, or under the jurisdiction of the City, that has not been designated
by the Illinois Department of Transportation or the City under subsection D or
E, no truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer combination shall exceed a length of
sixty feet (60') extreme overall dimension.
   G.   Length limitations in subsections A through F of this Section shall not
apply to vehicles operated in the daytime, except on Saturdays, Sundays or
legal holidays, when transporting poles, pipes, machinery or other objects of a
structural nature which cannot readily be dismembered, nor to vehicles
transporting such objects operated on Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays or
at nighttime by a public utility when required for emergency repair of public
service facilities or properties, but in respect to such night operation every
such vehicle and the load thereon shall be equipped with a sufficient number of
clearance lamps on both sides and marker lamps upon the extreme ends of any
projecting load to clearly mark the dimensions of such load, provided that the
overall length of vehicle load shall not exceed one hundred feet (100') and no
such object exceeding eighty feet (80') in length shall be so transported,
except by a public utility when required for emergency repairs, unless a permit
has first been obtained as authorized in Section
6-8-20 of this Chapter. A combination of vehicles, including tow truck and a
disabled vehicle or disabled combination of vehicles, which exceeds the length
restriction imposed by this Chapter, may be operated on a public highway or
street in the City upon the following conditions:
      1.   The towing must be:
         a.   Specifically designed as a tow truck having a gross vehicle
weight rating of at least eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds and equipped with
air brakes;
         b.   Equipped with flashing, rotating or oscillating amber lights,
visible for at least five hundred feet (500') in all directions; and
         c.   Capable of utilizing the lighting and braking systems of the
disabled vehicle or combination of vehicles.
      2.   The towing of such vehicles on the streets and highways in the City
shall not exceed fifty (50) miles from the initial point of wreck or
disablement. Any additional movement of such vehicles shall only occur upon
issuance of authorization for that movement pursuant to the provisions of
Sections
6-8-20 through
6-8-32 of this Chapter.
For the purpose of this subsection G2, gross vehicle weight rating, or GVWR,
shall mean the value specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of the
tow truck. Legal holidays referred to in this Section shall be specified as the
day on which the following traditional holidays are celebrated:
New Year's Day;
Memorial Day;
Independence Day;
Labor Day;
Thanksgiving;
Christmas Day.
   H.   The load upon any vehicle operated alone, or the load upon the front
vehicle of a combination of vehicles, shall not extend more than three feet
(3') beyond the front wheels of such vehicle or the front bumper of such
vehicle if it is equipped with such a bumper.
   I.   The load upon the front vehicle of a combination of vehicles
specifically designed to transport motor vehicles shall not extend more than
three feet (3') beyond the foremost part of the transporting vehicle and the
load upon the rear transporting vehicle shall not extend more than four feet
(4') beyond the rear of the bed or body of such vehicle. This subsection shall
only be applicable upon highways and streets designated in subsections D and E
of this Section.
   J.   Articulated vehicles comprised of two (2) sections, neither of which
exceeds a length of forty two feet (42'), designed for the carrying of more
than ten (10) persons, may be up to sixty feet (60') in length, not including
energy absorbing bumpers, provided that such vehicles are:
      1.   Operated by or for any public body or motor carrier authorized by
law to provide public transportation services; or
      2.   Operated in local public transportation service by any other person
and the municipality in which such service is to be provided approved the
operation of such vehicle.
   K.   Any person who is convicted of violating this Section is subject to the
penalty as provided in subsection
6-8-13C of this Chapter. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-7: PLANKING EDGE OF PAVEMENT:
No tractor, traction engine or other metal-tired vehicle, weighing more than
four (4) tons, including weight of the vehicle and its load, shall drive up
onto, off or over the edge of any paved public highway or street in the City,
without protecting such edge by putting down solid planks or other suitable
device to prevent such vehicle from breaking off the edges or corners of such
pavement. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-8: SPILLING LOADS:
   A.   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway or street in the
City unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its
load from dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except
that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or
other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such
roadway.
   B.   No person shall operate a vehicle on any highway or street in the City
any vehicle with any load unless said load and any covering thereon is securely
fastened so as to prevent said covering or load from becoming loose, detached,
or in any manner a hazard to other user of the highway or street.
   C.   No person shall operate a flatbed truck on any highway or street in the
City in violation of any rule or regulation promulgated by the Department of
Transportation. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-9: COVERS OR TARPAULINS REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN LOADS:
No person shall operate or cause to be operated, on a highway or street, any
second division vehicle loaded with dirt, aggregate, garbage, refuse, or other
similar material, when any portion of the load is falling, sifting, blowing,
dropping or in any way escaping from the vehicle.
This Section shall not apply to the operation of highway maintenance vehicles
engaged in removing snow and ice from the roadway.
For the purpose of this Section "aggregate" shall include all ores, minerals,
sand, gravel, shale, coal, clay, limestone or any other ore or mineral which
may be mined.
Notwithstanding any other penalty, whenever a police officer determines that
the operator of a vehicle is in violation of this Section, as evidenced by the
issuance of a citation for a violation of this Section, the police officer
shall require the operator to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and keep
such vehicle stationary until the load has either been reduced, secured or
covered with a cover or tarpaulin of sufficient size to prevent any further
violation of this Section. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-10: TOWED VEHICLES:
   A.   When one vehicle is towing another, the drawbar or other connection
shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed thereby and the
drawbar or other connection shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') from one
vehicle to the other, except for the connection between any two (2) vehicles
transporting poles, pipes, machinery or other objects of structural nature
which cannot readily be dismembered.
   B.   No vehicle other than a pole trailer or a semitrailer which is being
towed by a truck tractor and is connected by the means of a fifth wheel shall
be towed on a roadway except by a drawbar and each such vehicle so towed shall,
in addition, be coupled with two (2) safety chains or cables to the towing
vehicle. Such chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and strength to
prevent the towed vehicle parting from the drawing vehicle in case the drawbar
should break or become disengaged.
   C.   The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any second division
vehicle owned, operated or controlled by any person who is registered with the
Bureau of Motor Carrier Safety of the Federal Highway Administration and the
rules and regulations of the Bureau. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-11: WHEEL AND AXLE LOADS AND GROSS WEIGHTS:
   A.   No vehicle or combination of vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires
shall be operated, unladen or with load, upon the highways and streets of the
City when the gross weight on the road surface through any single axle thereof
exceeds eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds, except when a different limit is
established and posted in accordance with this Chapter and except any single
axle of a two (2) axle motor vehicle weighing thirty six thousand (36,000)
pounds or less and not a part of a combination of vehicles shall not exceed
twenty thousand (20,000) pounds. Provided, however, that any single axle of a
two (2) axle motor vehicle equipped with a personnel lift or digger derrick,
weighing thirty six thousand (36,000) pounds or less, owned and operated by a
public utility, shall not exceed twenty thousand (20,000) pounds. No vehicle or
combination of vehicles equipped with other than pneumatic tires shall be
operated unladen or with load, upon the highways or streets of the City when
the gross weight on the road surface through any wheel thereof exceeds eight
hundred (800) pounds per inch width of tire tread or when the gross weight on
the road surface through any axle thereof exceeds sixteen thousand (16,000)
pounds. An "axle load" shall be defined as the total load transmitted to the
road by all wheels whose centers may be included between two (2) parallel
transverse vertical planes forty inches (40") apart when extending across the
full width of the vehicle.
Any two (2) or more single axles whose centers are more than forty inches (40")
and not more than ninety six inches (96") apart, measured to the nearest inch
between extreme axles in the series, shall be defined as tandem axles, and the
gross weight transmitted to the road surface through such series shall not
exceed thirty two thousand (32,000) pounds and no axle of the series shall
exceed the maximum weight permitted under this Section for a single axle.
Provided that on a four (4) axle vehicle or on a five (5) or more axle
combination of vehicles the weight on a series of three (3) axles whose centers
are more than ninety six inches (96") apart, measured between extreme axles in
the series, shall not exceed those allowed on three (3) axles in the table
contained in subsection E of this Section and no axle or tandem axle of the
series shall exceed the maximum weight permitted under this Section for a
single or tandem axle. Provided also that a three (3) axle vehicle or three (3)
axle truck mixer, used exclusively for the mixing and transportation of
concrete, specially equipped with a road surface engaging mixer trailing fourth
axle, manufactured prior to the model year of 2004 and first registered in
Illinois prior to January 1, 2005, with a distance greater than seventy two
inches (72") but not more than ninety six inches (96") between any series of
two (2) axles may transmit to the road surface a maximum weight of eighteen
thousand (18,000) pounds on each of these axles with a gross weight on these
two (2) axles not to exceed thirty six thousand (36,000) pounds. Any such
vehicle manufactured in the model year of 2004 or thereafter or first
registered in Illinois after December 31, 2004, may transmit to the road
surface a maximum of thirty two thousand (32,000) pounds through these two (2)
axles and none of the axles shall exceed eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds.
A truck, not in combination and specially equipped with a self-compactor, or an
industrial roll-off hoist and roll- off container, used exclusively for garbage
or refuse operations and a truck used exclusively for the collection of
rendering materials may, however, when laden, transmit upon the road surface of
any highway or street except when part of the National System of Interstate and
Defense Highways, a gross weight upon a single axle not more than twenty two
thousand (22,000) pounds, and upon a tandem axle not more than forty thousand
(40,000) pounds. When unladen, however, such trucks shall comply with the axle
limitations applicable to all other trucks.
A two (2) axle truck specially equipped with a front loading compactor used
exclusively for garbage, refuse, or recycling may transmit twenty thousand
(20,000) pounds per axle provided that the gross weight of the vehicle does not
exceed forty thousand (40,000) pounds.
   B.   The gross weight of vehicles and combination of vehicles including the
weight of the vehicle or combination and its maximum load shall be subject to
the foregoing limitations and further shall not exceed the following gross
weights dependent upon the number of axles and distance between extreme axles
of the vehicle or combination measured longitudinally to the nearest foot.
 
Vehicles having 2 axles 36,000 pounds
 
   VEHICLES OR COMBINATIONS
   HAVING 3 AXLES
With Axles Minimum                   With Or Without
Distance To Nearest Maximum Gross    Tandem Axles Minimum Maximum Gross Weight
Foot Between        Weight In Pounds Distance To Nearest  In Pounds
Extreme Axles                        Foot Between Extreme
                                     Axles
With Axles Minimum                   With Or Without
Distance To Nearest Maximum Gross    Tandem Axles Minimum Maximum Gross Weight
Foot Between        Weight In Pounds Distance To Nearest  In Pounds
Extreme Axles                        Foot Between Extreme
                                     Axles
10'                 41,000           15'                  45,000
11'                 42,000           16'                  46,000
12'                 43,000           17'                  47,000
13'                 44,000           18'                  47,500
14'                 44,500           19'                  48,000
                                   20'                  49,000
                                     21' or more          50,000
 
   VEHICLES OR COMBINATIONS
   HAVING 4 AXLES
With Axles Minimum                   With Or Without
Distance To Nearest Maximum Gross    Tandem Axles Minimum Maximum Gross Weight
Foot Between        Weight In Pounds Distance To Nearest  In Pounds
Extreme Axles                        Foot Between Extreme
                                     Axles
With Axles Minimum                   With Or Without
Distance To Nearest Maximum Gross    Tandem Axles Minimum Maximum Gross Weight
Foot Between        Weight In Pounds Distance To Nearest  In Pounds
Extreme Axles                        Foot Between Extreme
                                     Axles
15'                 50,000           26'                  57,500
16'                 50,500           27'                  58,000
17'                 51,500           28'                  58,500
18'                 52,000           29'                  59,500
19'                 52,500           30'                  60,000
20'                 53,500           31'                  60,500
21'                 54,000           32'                  61,500
22'                 54,500           33'                  62,000
23'                 55,500           34'                  62,500
24'                 56,000           35'                  63,500
25'                 56,500           36' or more          64,000
 
In applying the above table to a vehicle having more than four (4) axles that
is not in combination, only four (4) axles shall be considered in determining
the maximum gross weights.
   COMBINATIONS HAVING 5 OR MORE AXLES
 
With Axles Minimum Distance To Nearest Foot Maximum Gross Weight In Pounds
Between Extreme Axles
42' or less                                 72,000
43'                                         73,000
44' or more                                 73,280
Vehicle operating on crawler type tracks    40,000
 
   TRUCKS EQUIPPED WITH SELF-COMPACTORS OR ROLL-OFF HOISTS
   AND ROLL-OFF CONTAINERS FOR GARBAGE OR REFUSE HAULS ONLY
   ON HIGHWAY OR STREET NOT PART OF NATIONAL SYSTEM OF
   INTERSTATE AND DEFENSE HIGHWAYS
 
With 2 axles 36,000 pounds
With 3 axles 54,000 pounds
 
   C.   Weight limitations shall not apply to vehicles (including loads)
operated by a public utility when transporting equipment required for emergency
repair or public utility facilities or properties or water wells.
A combination of vehicles, including a tow truck and a disabled vehicle or
disabled combination of vehicles, which exceeds the weight restriction imposed
by this Chapter, may be operated on a public highway or street in the City
provided that neither the disabled vehicle nor any vehicle being towed nor the
tow truck itself shall exceed the weight limitations permitted under this
Chapter. During the towing operation, neither the tow truck nor the vehicle
combination shall exceed the following axle weight limitations:
24,000 pounds -- single rear axle;
44,000 pounds -- tandem rear axles.
Gross weight limits shall not apply to the combination of the tow truck and
vehicles being towed. The tow truck license plate must cover the operating
empty weight of the tow truck only. The weight of each vehicle being towed
shall be covered by a valid license plate issued to the owner or operator of
the vehicle being towed and displayed on that vehicle. If no valid plate issued
to the owner or operator of that vehicle is displayed on that vehicle, or the
plate displayed on that vehicle does not cover the weight of the vehicle, the
weight of the vehicle shall be covered by the third tow truck plate issued to
the owner or operator of the tow truck and temporarily affixed to the vehicle
being towed.
In addition, the following conditions must be met:
      1.   The towing vehicle must be:
         a.   Specifically designed as a tow truck having a gross vehicle
weight rating of at least eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds and equipped with
air brakes, provided that air brakes shall be required only if the towing
vehicle is towing a vehicle, semitrailer, or tractor-trailer combination that
is equipped with airbrakes;
         b.   Equipped with flashing, rotating or oscillating amber lights,
visible for a least five hundred feet (500') in all directions; and
         c.   Capable of utilizing the lighting and braking systems of the
disabled vehicle or combination of vehicles.
      2.   The towing of such vehicles on the highways and streets of the City
shall not exceed fifteen (15) miles from the initial point of wreck or
disablement. Any additional movement of such vehicles shall only occur upon
issuance of authorization for the movement pursuant to the applicable
provisions of this Chapter.
Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit a tow truck under instruction of a
police officer from legally clearing a disabled vehicle, that may be in
violation of weight limitations of this Chapter, from the roadway to the berm
or shoulder of the highway or street.
For the purpose of subsection E2 of this Section, gross vehicle weight rating,
or GVWR, shall mean the value specified by the manufacturer as the loaded
weight of the tow truck.
   D.   No vehicle or combination of vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires
shall be operated, unladen or with load, upon the highways or streets of the
City in violation of the provision of any permit issued under the provisions of
Sections
6-8-20 through
6-8-32 of this Chapter.
   E.   Notwithstanding any other provision in this Chapter, except for those
special provisions relating to emergency operations of public utilities and tow
trucks while actually engaged in the towing of a disabled vehicle, those
vehicles exempted by subsection C of this Section, and those vehicles for which
the City issues an overweight permit, the weight limitations contained in this
subsection shall apply to the National System of Interstate and Defense
Highways and other highways in the system of State highways that have been
designated by the Illinois Department of Transportation and all streets and
highways in the City. No vehicle shall be operated on said streets and highways
with a weight in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) pounds carried on any one
axle or with a tandem axle weight in excess of thirty four thousand (34,000)
pounds, or a gross weight in excess of eighty thousand (80,000) pounds for
vehicle combinations of five (5) axles or more, or a gross weight on a group of
two (2) or more consecutive axles in excess of that weight produced by the
application of the following formula:
W = 500 times the sum of (LN divided by N-1) + 12N + 36
Where "W" equals overall gross weight on any group of two (2) or more
consecutive axles to the nearest five hundred (500) pounds; "L" equals the
distance measured to the nearest foot between extremes of any group of two (2)
or more consecutive axles; and "N" equals the number of axles in the group
under consideration, except that two (2) consecutive sets of tandem axles may
carry a gross load of thirty four thousand (34,000) pounds each, provided the
overall distance between the first and last axles of the consecutive sets of
tandem axles is thirty six feet (36') or more. Provided also that a three (3)
axle vehicle registered as a special hauling vehicle manufactured prior to or
in the model year of 2004, and first registered in Illinois prior to January 1,
2005, with a distance greater than seventy two inches (72") but not more than
ninety six inches (96") between the two (2) rear axles may transmit to the road
surface a maximum weight of eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds on each of the
two (2) rear axles with a gross weight not to exceed thirty six thousand
(36,000) pounds. Any vehicle registered as a special hauling vehicle
manufactured in the model year of 2004 or thereafter or first registered in
Illinois after December 31, 2004, may transmit to the road surface a maximum of
thirty four thousand (34,000) pounds through the two (2) rear axles and neither
of the rear axles shall exceed twenty thousand (20,000) pounds. For purposes of
this subsection, "tandem axles" shall be defined as any two (2) or more single
axles whose centers are more than forty inches (40") and not more than ninety
six inches (96") apart, measured to the nearest inch between extreme axles in
the series.
The above formula when expressed in tabular form results in allowable loads as
follows:
Distance Measured To The
Nearest Foot Between The Maximum Loads In Pounds Carried On Any Group Of 2 Or
Extremes Of Any Group Of More Consecutive Axles
2 Or
More Consecutive Axles   2 Axles 3 Axles 4 Axles 5 Axles 6 Axles
Distance Measured To The
Nearest Foot Between The Maximum Loads In Pounds Carried On Any Group Of 2 Or
Extremes Of Any Group Of More Consecutive Axles
2 Or
More Consecutive Axles   2 Axles 3 Axles 4 Axles 5 Axles 6 Axles
4'                       34,000                        
5'                       34,000                        
6'                       34,000                        
7'                       34,000                        
8'                       34,000  42,000                 
9'                       39,000  42,500                 
10'                      40,000  43,500                 
11'                             44,000                 
12'                             45,000  50,000          
13'                             45,500  50,500          
14'                             46,500  51,500          
15'                             47,000  52,000          
16'                             48,000  52,500  58,000   
17'                             48,500  53,500  58,500   
18'                             49,500  54,000  59,000   
19'                             50,000  54,500  60,000   
20'                             51,000  55,500  60,500  66,000
21'                             51,500  56,000  61,000  66,500
22'                             52,500  56,500  61,500  67,000
23'                             53,000  57,500  62,500  68,000
24'                             54,000  58,000  63,000  68,500
25'                             54,500  58,500  63,500  69,000
26'                             55,500  59,500  64,000  69,500
27'                             56,000  60,000  65,000  70,000
28'                             57,000  60,500  65,500  71,000
29'                             57,500  61,500  66,000  71,500
30'                             58,500  62,000  66,500  72,000
31'                             59,000  62,500  67,500  72,500
32'                             60,000  63,500  68,000  73,000
33'                                    64,000  68,500  74,000
34'                                    64,500  69,000  74,500
35'                                    65,500  70,000  75,000
36'                                    66,000  70,500  75,500
37'                                    66,500  71,000  76,000
38'                                    67,500  72,000  77,000
39'                                    68,000  72,500  77,500
40'                                    68,500  73,000  78,000
41'                                    69,500  73,500  78,500
42'                                    70,000  74,000  79,000
43'                                    70,500  75,000  80,000
44'                                    71,500  75,500   
45'                                    72,000  76,000   
46'                                    72,500  76,500   
47'                                    73,500  77,500   
48'                                    74,000  78,000   
49'                                    74,500  78,500   
50'                                    75,500  79,000   
51'                                    76,000  80,000   
52'                                    76,500          
53'                                    77,500          
54'                                    78,000          
55'                                    78,500          
56'                                    79,500          
57'                                    80,000          
 
   F.   In applying the above formula to a vehicle having more than four (4)
axles which is not a combination, only four (4) axles shall be considered in
determining the maximum gross weight, and for a combination of vehicle having
more than six (6) axles, only six (6) axles shall be considered in determining
the maximum gross weight.
Notwithstanding the above table, two (2) consecutive sets of tandem axles may
carry a gross weight of thirty four thousand (34,000) pounds each if the
overall distance between the first and last axles of such consecutive sets of
tandem axles is thirty six feet (36') or more.
Combinations of vehicles, registered as special hauling vehicles that include a
semitrailer manufactured prior to or in the model year of 2004, and first
registered in Illinois prior to January 1, 2005, having five (5) axles with a
distance of forty two feet (42') or less between extreme axles shall be limited
to the weights prescribed in subsections A and B of this Section and not
subject to the bridge formula on the National System of Interstate and Defense
Highways and other highways in the system of State highways designated by the
Department. For all those combinations of vehicles, that include a semitrailer
manufactured after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1986, the
overall distance between the first and last axles of the two (2) sets of
tandems must be eighteen feet six inches (18'6") or more. All combinations of
vehicles registered as special hauling vehicles that include a semitrailer
manufactured prior to or in the model year of 2004 or thereafter or first
registered in Illinois after December 31, 2004, or that has had its cargo
container replaced in its entirety after December 31, 2004, are limited to the
gross weight allowed by the above formula.
Vehicles operating under this subsection shall have access for a distance of
one highway mile to or from a Class I highway on any street or highway, unless
there is a sign prohibiting the access, or five (5) highway miles to or from
either a Class I, II, or III highway on a street or highway included in the
system of State highways and upon any street or highway designated by local
authorities or road district commissioners to points of loading and unloading
and to facilities for food, fuel, repairs and rest.
   G.   No person shall operate a vehicle or combination of vehicles over a
bridge or other elevated structure constituting part of a highway or street
with a gross weight which is greater than the maximum weight permitted by the
Illinois Department of Transportation or the City, when such structure is
signposted as provided in this Section.
   H.   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of subsection F
of this Section, proof of the determination of the maximum allowable weight by
the Illinois Department of Transportation or the City and the existence of the
signs, constitutes conclusive evidence of the maximum weight which can be
maintained with safety to such bridge or structure. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-12: OFFICERS TO WEIGH VEHICLES AND REQUIRE REMOVAL OF EXCESS LOADS:
   A.   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a
vehicle and load is unlawful shall require the driver to stop and submit to a
weighing of the same either by means of a portable or stationary scales. If
such scales are not available at the place where such vehicle is stopped, the
police officer shall require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest
available scale that has been tested and approved by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture. Notwithstanding any provisions of the Weights and Measures Act or
the United States Department of Commerce NIST handbook 44, multi or single
draft weighing is an acceptable method of weighing by law enforcement for
determining a violation of this Chapter. Law enforcement is exempt from the
requirements of commercial weighing established in NIST handbook 44.
   B.   Whenever a police officer, upon weighing a vehicle and the load,
determines that the weight is unlawful, such officer shall require the driver
to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until such portion
of the load is removed as may be necessary to reduce the weight of the vehicle
to the limit permitted under this Chapter, or to the limit permitted under the
terms of a permit, issued pursuant to this Chapter and shall forthwith arrest
the driver or owner. All material so unloaded shall be cared for by the owner
or operator of the vehicle at the risk of such owner or operator; however,
whenever a three (3) or four (4) axle vehicle with a tandem axle dimension
greater than seventy two inches (72"), but less than ninety six inches (96")
and registered as a special hauling vehicle is transporting asphalt, or
concrete in the plastic state that exceeds axle weight or gross weight limits
by less than four thousand (4,000) pounds, the owner or operator of the vehicle
shall accept the arrest ticket or tickets for the alleged violations under this
Section and proceed without shifting or reducing the load being transported or
may shift or reduce the load under the provisions of subsection D or E of this
Section, when applicable. Any fine imposed following an overweight violation by
a vehicle registered as a special hauling vehicle transporting asphalt or
concrete in the plastic state shall be paid as provided in this Chapter.
   C.   Whenever any axle load of a vehicle exceeds the axle or tandem axle
weight limits permitted by subsection
6-8-11A or
 6-8-11E of this Chapter by two thousand (2,000) pounds or less, the owner or
operator of the vehicle must shift or remove the excess so as to comply with
subsection
 6-8-11A or
6-8-11E of this Chapter. No overweight arrest ticket shall be issued to the
owner or operator of the vehicle by any officer if the gross weight is shifted
or removed as required by this subsection.
   D.   Whenever the gross weight of a vehicle with a registered gross weight
of seventy three thousand two hundred eighty (73,280) pounds or less exceeds
the weight limits of subsection
 6-8-11B or
6-8-11E of this Chapter by two thousand (2,000) pounds or less, the owner or
operator of the vehicle must remove the excess. Whenever the gross weight of a
vehicle with a registered gross weight of seventy three thousand two hundred
eighty one (73,281) pounds or more exceeds the weight limits of subsection
6-8-11B or
6-8-11E of this Chapter by one thousand (1,000) pounds or less, the owner or
operator of the vehicle must remove the excess. In either case no arrest ticket
for any overweight violation of this Chapter shall be issued to the owner or
operator of the vehicle by any officer if the excess weight is removed as
required by this subsection.
   E.   Whenever the gross weight of a vehicle exceeds the registration weight
limits established under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-401, by two
thousand one (2,001) pounds or more, the driver or owner, in addition to any
other violation or penalty, shall be fined in accordance to the schedule
enumerated in Section
6-8-13 of this Chapter.
   F.   Whenever any axle load of a vehicle exceeds axle weight limits
allowable by the provisions of a permit, an arrest ticket shall be issued, but
the owner or operator of such vehicle may shift the load so as to comply with
the provisions of the permit. Where such shifting of a load to comply with the
permit is accomplished, the owner or operator of the vehicle may then proceed.
   G.   Any driver of a vehicle who refused to stop and submit his vehicle and
load to weighing after being directed to do so by an officer or removes or
causes the removal of the load or part of it prior to weighing is guilty of a
business offense and shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-
1998)
6-8-13: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES:
   A.   Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of
Section
6-8-11 of this Chapter, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed
guilty of such violation and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle may
be prosecuted for such violation. Any person, convicted of any violation of
Section
6-8-11 of this Chapter including, but not limited to, a maximum axle or gross
limit specified on a regulatory sign posted in accordance with subsection
6-8-11F of this Chapter, shall be fined according to the following schedule:
Up to and
including
2,000      $ 50.00
pounds
overweight
From 2,001
through
2,500      135.00
pounds
overweight
From 2,501
through
3,000      165.00
pounds
overweight
From 3,001
through
3,500      260.00
pounds
overweight
From 3,501
through
4,000      300.00
pounds
overweight
From 4,001
through
4,500      425.00
pounds
overweight
From 4,501
through
5,000      475.00
pounds
overweight
From 5,001 the fine shall be computed    by assessing $750.00 for the first 5,000 pounds
or more    overweight and $75.00 for each additional increment of 500 pounds overweight or
pounds     fraction thereof.
overweight
 
   B.   In addition any person convicted of four (4) or more violations of
Section
6-8-11 of this Chapter within any twelve (12) month period shall be fined an
additional amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for the
fourth and each subsequent conviction within the twelve (12) month period.
Provided, however, that with regard to a firm or corporation, a fourth or
subsequent conviction shall mean a fourth or subsequent conviction attributable
to any one employee driver.
   C.   Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of
Section
6-8-2,
6-8-3 or
6-8-6 of this Chapter, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed
guilty of such violation and may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person,
convicted of any violation of Section
6-8-2,
6-8-3 or
6-8-6 of this Chapter, shall be fined for the first or second conviction any
amount equal to not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), and for the third and subsequent convictions by the same
person, within a period of one year after the date of the first offense, not
less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand dollars
($2,000.00). (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-14: VIOLATIONS, SENTENCE OF PERMIT MOVES:
Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a permit
issued under the provisions of Sections
6-8-20 through
6-8-32 of this Chapter by operating under a fraudulent permit or under a permit
not specifically covering the move, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall
be deemed guilty of a business offense and either the owner or the driver of
such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. When any person is convicted
of such violation, the permit shall be null and void and such person, shall be
fined in an amount not less than ten cents ($0.10) per pound for each pound the
gross weight of the vehicle exceeds the gross weight of such vehicles allowable
under Section
6-8-11 of this Chapter. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-15: VIOLATIONS, SENTENCE OF PERMIT MOVES EXCEEDING AXLE WEIGHTS:
Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a permit
issued under the provisions of Sections
6-8-20 through
6-8-32 of this Chapter by operating with axle weights in excess of those
authorized in such permit, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed
guilty of a business offense and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle
may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person, convicted of such violation
shall be fined in an amount not less than two cents ($0.02) nor more than five
cents ($0.05) per pound for each pound of excess weight on such axle or tandem
axle in excess of the weight authorized in the permit when the excess is one
thousand (1,000) pounds or less; not less than five cents ($0.05) nor more than
ten cents ($0.10) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess
exceeds one thousand (1,000) pounds and is two thousand (2,000) pounds or less;
not less than ten cents ($0.10) nor more than fifteen cents ($0.15) per pound
for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds two thousand (2,000)
pounds and is three thousand (3,000) pounds or less; and not less than fifteen
cents ($0.15) nor more than twenty cents ($0.20) per pound for each pound of
excess weight when the excess exceeds three thousand (3,000) pounds.
Penalties for violation of this Section shall be in addition to any penalties
imposed for violation of subsection
6-8-20J of this Chapter. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-16: VIOLATIONS, SENTENCE OF PERMIT MOVES EXCEEDING GROSS WEIGHT:
Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a permit
issued under the provisions of Sections
6-8-20 through
6-8-32 of this Chapter by operating with the gross weight in excess of that
authorized in such permit, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed
guilty of a business offense and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle
may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person, convicted of such violation
shall be fined in an amount not less than two cents ($0.02) nor more than five
cents ($0.05) per pound for each pound of excess weight in excess of the gross
weight authorized in the permit when the excess is one thousand (1,000) pounds
or less; not less than four cents ($0.04) nor more than seven cents ($0.07) per
pound for each pound of excess eight when the excess exceeds one thousand
(1,000) pounds and is two thousand (2,000) pounds or less; not less than seven
cents ($0.07) nor more than ten cents ($0.10) per pound for each pound of
excess weight when the excess exceeds two thousand (2,000) pounds and is three
thousand (3,000) pounds or less; not less than ten cents ($0.10) nor more than
fifteen cents ($0.15) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess
exceeds three thousand (3,000) pounds and is four thousand (4,000) pounds or
less; not less than fifteen cents ($0.15) nor more than twenty cents ($0.20)
per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds four thousand
(4,000) pounds and is five thousand (5,000) pounds or less; and not less than
seventeen cents ($0.17) nor more than twenty five cents ($0.25) per pound for
each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds five thousand (5,000)
pounds.
Penalties for violations of this Section shall be in addition to any penalties
imposed for violation of subsection
 6-8-20J of this Chapter. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-17: PUSHING OF DISABLED VEHICLES:
It is unlawful under any circumstances for any vehicle to push any other
vehicle on or along any street or highway in the City, except in extreme
emergency and then the vehicle shall not be pushed farther than is reasonably
necessary to remove it from the roadway or from the immediate hazard that
exists. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-18: VEHICLES EXCEEDING PRESCRIBED WEIGHT LIMITS, PREVENTING USE OF STREETS
AND HIGHWAYS BY:
The Police Department is authorized to institute and maintain a program
designed to prevent the use of public streets and highways by vehicles which
exceed the maximum weights allowed by this Chapter or which exceeds the maximum
weights allowed as evidenced by the license plates attached to such vehicle.
(Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-19: ENFORCEMENT:
Such program shall make provision for an intensive campaign by the Police
Department to apprehend any violators of the acts above mentioned, and at all
times to maintain a vigilant watch for possible violators of such acts. (Ord.
O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-20: PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT:
   A.   The City, with respect to streets and highways under its jurisdiction
may, in its discretion, upon application and good cause being shown therefor,
issue a special permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle
or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the
maximum specified in this Chapter or otherwise not in conformity with this
Chapter upon any street or highway under its jurisdiction and for the
maintenance of which the City is responsible. Applications and permits other
than those in written or printed form may only be accepted from and issued to
the company or individual making the movement. Except for an application to
move directly across a street or highway the application shall show that the
load to be moved by such vehicle or combination of vehicles cannot reasonably
be dismantled or disassembled.
   B.   The application for any such permit shall: 1) state whether such permit
is requested for a single trip or for limited continuous operation; 2) state if
the applicant is an authorized carrier under the Illinois Motor Carrier of
Property Law, if so, his certificate, registration or permit number issued by
the Illinois Commerce Commission; 3) specifically describe and identify the
vehicle or vehicles and load to be operated or moved; 4) state the routing
requested including the points of origin and destination; and 5) state if the
vehicles or loads are being transported for hire. No permits for the movement
of a vehicle or load for hire shall be issued to any applicant who is required
under the Illinois Motor Carrier of Property Law to have a certificate,
registration or permit and does not have such certificate, registration or
permit.
   C.   The Police Department when not inconsistent with traffic safety, is
authorized to issue or withhold such permit at its discretion; or, if such
permit is issued at its discretion to prescribe the route or routes to be
traveled, to limit the number of trips, to establish seasonal or other time
limitations within which the vehicles described may be operated on the highways
indicated, or otherwise to limit or prescribe conditions of operations of such
vehicle or vehicles, when necessary to assure against undue damage to the road
foundation, surfaces or structures, and may require such undertaking or other
security as may be deemed necessary to compensate for any injury to any roadway
or road structure. The Police Department shall maintain a daily record of each
permit issued along with the fee and the stipulated dimensions, weights,
conditions and restrictions authorized and this record shall be presumed
correct in any case of questions or dispute.
   D.   The Police Department shall, upon application in writing from any local
authority, issue a semiannual permit authorizing the local authority to move
oversize highway construction, transportation, utility and maintenance
equipment over roads under the jurisdiction of the City. The permit shall be
applicable only to equipment and vehicles owned by or registered in the name of
the local authority, and no fee shall be charged for the issuance of such
permits.
   E.   Reserved.
   F.   The form and content of the permit shall be determined by the Police
Department. Every permit shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of
vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police
officer or authorized agent of the City and no person shall violate any of the
terms or conditions of such special permit. Violation of the terms and
conditions of the permit shall not be deemed a revocation of the permit. No
rule or regulation, nor anything herein shall be construed to authorize any
police officer, or authorized agent of the City to remove the permit from the
possession of the permittee. However, upon arrest for a violation of permit,
the permittee, or his agent, must produce the permit at any court hearing
concerning the alleged violation of permit.
If the permit designates and includes a routing to a certified scale, the
permittee, while en route to the designated scale, shall be deemed in
compliance with the weight provisions of the permit provided the axle or gross
weights do no exceed any of the permitted limits by more than the following
amounts:
 
Single axle 2,000 pounds
Tandem axle 3,000 pounds
Gross       5,000 pounds
 
   G.   The Police Department is authorized to adopt, amend, and to make
available to interested persons a policy concerning reasonable rules,
limitations and conditions or provisions of operation upon streets and highways
under the City's jurisdiction in addition to those contained in this Section
for the movement by special permit of vehicles, combinations, or loads which
cannot reasonably be dismantled or disassembled. All rules, limitations and
conditions or provisions adopted in the policy shall have due regard for the
safety of the traveling public and the protection of the highway and street
system. The requirements of the policy for flagmen and escort vehicles shall be
the same for all moves of comparable size and weight. When escort vehicles are
required, they shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   All operators shall be eighteen (18) years of age or over and
properly licensed to operate the vehicle.
      2.   Vehicles escorting oversized loads more than twelve feet (12') wide
must be equipped with a rotating or flashing amber light mounted on top as
specified under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-215.
Applicants shall be required to furnish a bond in the sum of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to the City conditioned so as to save the City,
its officers, agents and employees harmless from any claim, loss or damage that
may result from the granting of such permit or that may arise from or on
account of any work done thereunder, and further conditioned that the grantee
shall restore at his own cost, to a condition satisfactory to the City, any
pavement, subway, tunnel, sewer, pipe, conduit, or other public utility that
may be injured by reason of the transportation of such article under such
permit. In addition, the applicant shall carry general liability insurance in
an amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and shall tender
to the City a certificate of insurance evidencing same. Police vehicles may be
required for escort under circumstances as required by rules and regulations of
the Police Department.
   H.   Violation of any rule, limitation or condition or provision of any
permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this Section shall render
the permit void and the violator shall be deemed guilty of exceeding any size,
weight or load limitations in excess of those authorized by the permit.
   I.   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be operated or movement made
under a fraudulent permit and said permit shall be void. The Police Department
shall not issue permits to the person, convicted of such violation for a period
one year after the date of conviction. Penalties for violation of this Section
shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for violation of other sections
of this Chapter.
   J.   Whenever any vehicle is operated or movement made in violation of a
permit issued in accordance with this Section, the person to whom such permit
was granted, or the driver of such vehicle, is guilty of such violation and
either, but not both, persons may be prosecuted for such violation as stated in
this subsection. Any person, convicted of such violation shall be fined for the
first offense, not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) and, for the second offense by the same person, within a
period of one year, not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and, for the third offense by the same person,
within a period of one year after the date of the first offense, not less than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than three thousand dollars
($3,000.00) and the Police Department shall not issue permits to the person
convicted of a third offense during a period of one year after the date of
conviction for such third offense.
Penalties for violations of this Section shall be in addition to any penalties
imposed for violation of the sections of this Chapter. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-21: FEES FOR SPECIAL PERMITS:
The Police Department with respect to highways and streets under the City's
jurisdiction shall collect a fee from the applicant for the issuance of a
permit to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles or load as
authorized in Section
6-8-20 of this Chapter. The charge for each permit shall consist of:
   A.   A service charge for special handling of a permit when requested by an
applicant;
   B.   Fees for any dimension, axle weight or gross weight in excess of the
maximum size or weight specified in this Chapter; and
   C.   Additional fees for special investigation or special police escort when
required.
With respect to overweight fees, the charge shall be sufficient to compensate
in part for the cost of the extra wear and tear on the mileage of streets or
highways over which the load is to be moved. With respect to over- dimension
permits, the fee shall be sufficient to compensate in part for the special
privilege of transporting oversize vehicle or vehicle combination and loads and
to compensate in part for the economic loss of operators of vehicles in regular
operation due to inconvenience occasioned by the oversize movements.
Fees to be paid by the applicant are to be at the rates specified in this
Chapter. In determining the fees in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-306 and
5/15-307, all weights shall be to the next highest one thousand (1,000) pounds
and all distances shall be determined from the Illinois Official Highway Map or
official City maps.
For repeated moves of like objects which cannot be dismantled or disassembled
and which are monolithically structured for permanent use in the transported
form, the fees specified in Sections
6-8-24,
6-8-25 and
6-8-26 of this Chapter for other than the first move shall be reduced by four
dollars ($4.00) provided the objects are to be moved from the same origin to
the same destination, the number of trips will not be less than five (5), the
trips will be completed within thirty (30) days, and all applications are
submitted at one time. Round trip permits shall be the same as a single trip
permit except the fee shall be computed based upon the total distance traveled,
and shall be for the same vehicle, vehicle combination or like load traveling
both directions over the same route, provided a description including make and
model of the equipment being transported is furnished to the Police Department.
Limited continuous operation permits are to be valid for a period of ninety
(90) days, and shall be for the same vehicle, vehicle combination or like load.
(Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-22: TRANSMISSION FEES:
When special transmission of permits is requested by an applicant, a service
charge in an amount sufficient to defray the costs shall be charged. (Ord. O-
01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-23: FEES FOR HOUSE TRAILER COMBINATION:
Fees for special permits to move a house trailer or modular home section in
combination with a towing vehicle shall be paid by the applicant to the City at
the rates set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-304 as may be
amended from time to time. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-24: FEES FOR LEGAL WEIGHT BUT OVERDIMENSION VEHICLES, COMBINATIONS AND
LOADS, OTHER THAN HOUSE TRAILER COMBINATIONS:
Fees for special permits to move overdimension vehicles, combinations, and
load, other than house trailer combinations, shall be paid by the applicant to
the City at the rates set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-305 as
may be amended from time to time.
Permits issued under this Section shall be for a vehicle, or vehicle
combination and load not exceeding legal weights; and, in the case of the
limited continuous operation, shall be for the same vehicle, vehicle
combination or like load.
Escort requirements shall be as prescribed in the Police Department's Rules and
Regulations. Fees for the police vehicle escort, when required, shall be in
addition to the permit fees. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-25: FEES FOR OVERWEIGHT-AXLE LOADS:
Fees for special permits to move legal gross weight vehicles, combinations of
vehicles and loads with overweight-axle loads shall be paid by the applicant to
the Police Department as follows:
For each overweight single axle or tandem axle group, the flat fees herein
scheduled for increments of forty five (45) miles or fraction thereof including
issuance fee predicated upon an eighteen thousand (18,000) pound single axle
equivalency.
Single trip permits only shall be issued.
   18,000 POUND SINGLE AXLE EQUIVALENCY FEES
 
Axle Weight In Excess Of Legal Limit Single Axle   2 Axle Tandem 3 Axle Tandem
1 - 6,000 pounds                     $ 5.00        $ 5.00        $ 5.00
6,001 - 11,000 pounds                8.00          7.00          6.00
11,001 - 17,000 pounds               not permitted 8.00          7.00
17,001 - 22,000 pounds               not permitted not permitted 9.00
22,001 - 29,000 pounds               not permitted not permitted 11.00
 
(Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-26: FEES FOR OVERWEIGHT-GROSS LOADS:
Fees for special permits to move vehicles, combinations of vehicles and loads
with overweight-gross loads shall be paid at the flat rate fees established in
this Section for weights in excess of legal gross weights, by the applicant to
the Police Department. Single trip permits only shall be issued:
   A.   With respect to fees for overweight-gross loads listed in this Section,
and for overweight-axle loads listed in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-
306, one fee only shall be charged, whichever is the greater, but not for both.
   B.   In lieu of the fees stated in this Section and Section
6-8-24 of this Chapter, with respect to combinations of vehicles consisting of
a three (3) axle truck tractor with a tandem axle composed of two (2)
consecutive axles drawing a semitrailer, or other vehicle approved by the
Police Department, equipped with a tandem axle composed of three (3)
consecutive axles, weighing over seventy three thousand two hundred eighty
(73,280) pounds but not more than eighty eight thousand (88,000) pounds gross
weight, the fees shall be at the following rates:
Single trip rate   $10.00
For such combinations weighing over eighty eight thousand (88,000) pounds but
not more than one hundred thousand (100,000) pounds gross weight, the fees
shall be at the following rates:
Single trip rate   $15.00
For such combinations weighing over one hundred thousand (100,000) pounds but
not more than one hundred ten thousand (110,000) pounds gross weight, the fees
shall be at the following rates:
Single trip rate   $20.00
For such combinations weighing over one hundred ten thousand (110,000) pounds
but not more than one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) pounds gross weight,
the fees shall be at the following rates:
Single trip rate   $30.00
Payment of overweight fees for the above combinations also shall include fees
for overwidth dimensions of four feet (4') or less, overheight and overlength.
Any overwidth in excess of four feet (4') shall be charged an additional fee of
fifteen dollars ($15.00).
   C.   In lieu of the fees stated in this Section and Section
6-8-24 of this Chapter, with respect to combinations of vehicles consisting of
a three (3) axle truck tractor with a tandem axle composed of two (2)
consecutive axles drawing a semitrailer, or other vehicle approved by the
Department, equipped with a tandem axle composed of two (2) consecutive axles,
weighing over seventy three thousand two hundred eighty (73,280) pounds but not
more than eighty eight thousand (88,000) pounds gross weight, the fees shall be
at the following rates:
Single trip rate -- $20.00
For such combinations weighing over eighty eight thousand (88,000) pounds but
not more than one hundred thousand (100,000) pounds gross weight, the fees
shall be at the following rates:
Single trip rate -- $30.00
Payment of overweight fees for the above combinations also shall include fees
for overwidth dimension of four feet (4') or less, overheight and overlength.
Any overwidth in excess of four feet (4') shall be charged an additional
overwidth fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00).
   D.   In lieu of the fees stated in this Section and in Section
6-8-25 of this Chapter, with respect to a three (3) or more axle mobile crane
or water well-drilling vehicle consisting of a single axle and a tandem axle or
two (2) tandem axle groups composed of two (2) consecutive axles each, with a
distance of extreme axles not less than eighteen feet (18'), weighing not more
than sixty thousand (60,000) pounds gross with no single axles weighing more
than twenty one thousand (21,000) pounds, or any tandem axle group to exceed
forty thousand (40,000) pounds, the fees shall be at the following rates:
Single trip rate -- $12.50
For such vehicles weighing over sixty thousand (60,000) pounds but not more
than sixty eight thousand (68,000) pounds with no single axle weighing more
than twenty one thousand (21,000) pounds and no tandem axle group exceeding
forty eight thousand (48,000) pounds, the fees shall be at the following rates:
Single trip rate -- $20.00
Payment of overweight fees for the above vehicle shall include overwidth
dimension of four feet (4') or less, overheight and overlength. Any overwidth
in excess of four feet (4') shall be charged an additional overwidth fee of
fifteen dollars ($15.00).
   E.   In lieu of the fees stated in this Section and in Section
6-8-25 of this Chapter, with respect to a four (4) or more axle mobile crane or
water well-drilling vehicle consisting of two (2) sets of tandem axles composed
of two (2) or more consecutive axles each with a distance between extreme axles
of not less than twenty three feet (23') weighing not more than seventy two
thousand (72,000) pounds with axle weights on one set of tandem axles not more
than thirty four thousand (34,000) pounds, and weight in the other set of
tandem axles not to exceed forty thousand (40,000) pounds, the fees shall be at
the following rates:
Single trip rate -- $15.00
For such vehicles weighing over seventy two thousand (72,000) pounds but not
more than seventy six thousand (76,000) pounds with axle weights on either set
of tandem axles not more than forty four thousand (44,000) pounds, the fees
shall be at the following rate:
Single trip rate -- $20.00
Payment of overweight fees for the above vehicle shall include overwidth
dimension of four feet (4') or less, overheight and overlength. Any overwidth
in excess of four feet (4') shall be charged an additional fee of fifteen
dollars ($15.00).
   F.   In lieu of fees stated in this Section and in Section
6-8-25 of this Chapter, with respect to a two (2) axle mobile crane or water
well-drilling vehicle consisting of two (2) single axles weighing not more than
forty eight thousand (48,000) pounds with no single axle weighing more than
twenty five thousand (25,000) pounds, the fees shall be at the following rates:
Single trip rate -- $15.00
For such vehicles weighing over forty eight thousand (48,000) pounds but not
more than fifty four thousand (54,000) pounds with no single axle weighing more
than twenty eight thousand (28,000) pounds, the fees shall be at the following
rates:
Single trip rate -- $20.00
Payment of overweight fees for the above vehicle shall include overwidth
dimension of four feet (4') or less, overheight and overlength. Any overwidth
in excess of four feet (4') shall be charged an additional overwidth fee of
fifteen dollars ($15.00).
   G.   Fees for special permits to move vehicles, combinations of vehicles,
and loads with overweight gross loads not included in the fee categories shall
be paid by the applicant to the Police Department at the rate of fifty dollars
($50.00) plus 3.5 cents per ton-mile in excess of legal weight. Single trip
permits only shall be issued for such movements.
With respect to fees for overweight gross loads not included in the schedules
specified in subsections A through E of this Section and for overweight axle
loads listed in Section
6-8-25 of this Chapter, one fee only shall be charged, whichever is the
greater, but not both. An additional fee in accordance with the schedule set
forth in Section
6-8-24 of this Chapter shall be charged for each overdimension. (Ord. O-01-98,
1-5-1998)
6-8-27: FEES FOR POLICE ESCORT:
When City police escorts are required by the Police Department for the safety
of the motoring public, the following fees shall be paid by the applicant to
the Police Department: forty dollars ($40.00) per hour per vehicle based upon
preestimated time of movement to be agreed upon between Police Department and
applicant. The minimum fee is eighty dollars ($80.00) per vehicle. (Ord. O-01-
98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-28: SUPPLEMENTAL PERMIT FEE:
The Police Department shall collect a fee of five dollars ($5.00) and other
applicable fees to cover the cost of processing an application for supplemental
special permit. This fee shall be charged for each supplemental special permit
issued. In addition, if the supplemental permit provides for an increase in
size or weight or both over that specified in the original special permit,
additional fees shall be charged as provided in Sections
6-8-22 through
6-8-27 of this Chapter as applicable, to correct for the increase. (Ord. O-01-
98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-29: PAYMENT OF FEES:
The Police Department shall prescribe the time and method of payment of all
appropriate fees authorized by Sections
6-8-21 through
6-8-28 of this Chapter.
The Police Department may, at its discretion, establish credit accounts with
billing to be made at intervals not exceeding one month.
Failure to pay invoices in full within a period of thirty (30) days after the
billing date shall be sufficient cause for the Police Department to withhold
issuance of any further permits or credit to the individual, company, or
subsidiary firm.
The Police Department is authorized to charge a service fee of three dollars
($3.00) for a check returned for any reason. All money received by the Police
Department under the provisions of this Section shall be deposited in the Road
Fund. No refund shall be made to applicant following issuance of a permit if
move is not completed. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-30: EXEMPTIONS TO REQUIREMENT OF FEES:
   A.   The requirements as to fees authorized by Sections
6-8-21 through
6-8-29 of this Chapter shall not apply to the owner of the vehicle or vehicle
combination if owned by the United States, this State, or any political
subdivision of this State, or any municipality therein.
   B.   The provisions of Sections
6-8-21 through
6-8-29 of this Chapter requiring fees for a permit shall not modify, alter or
in any manner affect either the provisions of Section
6-8-20 of this Chapter, or the policy of the Police Department adopted for the
administration of this Chapter. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-31: RESERVED:
(Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-32: LIABILITY IF STREET, HIGHWAY OR STRUCTURE DAMAGED:
   A.   Any person driving any vehicle, object or contrivance upon any street,
highway or highway structure is liable for all damage which the highway or
structure may sustain as a result of any illegal operation, driving or moving
of such vehicle, object, or contrivance exceeding the maximum dimension or
weighing in excess of the maximum weight specified in this Chapter but
authorized by a special permit issued as provided in this Chapter. The measure
of liability is the cost of repairing a facility partially damaged or the
depreciated replacement cost of a facility damaged beyond repair together with
all other expenses incurred by the authorities in control of the highway or
highway structure in providing a temporary detour, including a temporary
structure to serve the needs of traffic during the period of repair or
replacement of the damaged highway or highway structure.
   B.   Whenever such driver is not the owner of such vehicle, object, or
contrivance, but is so operating, driving, or moving the same with the express
or implied permission of such owner, then the owner and driver are jointly and
severally liable to the extent provided in subsection A of this Section.
   C.   Recovery may be had in a civil action brought by the City. (Ord. O-01-
98, 1-5-1998)
6-8-33: WEIGHT ON RESIDENTIAL STREETS:
   A.   On all residential streets the gross weight of any type motor vehicle
including the weight of the vehicle and its maximum loads shall not exceed ten
thousand (10,000) pounds, except when such vehicle is making a local delivery,
and then such vehicle shall proceed to its destination via a section street
line or highway which is closest to it. (Ord. O-01-98, 1-5-1998; amd. Ord. O-
36-98, 7-20-1998)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Supervision And Enforcement
7-1-2: Defects, Maintenance And Repairs
7-1-3: Use Of Public Ways
7-1-4: Excavations
7-1-5: Street Openings
7-1-6: Barricades And Warning Lights
7-1-7: Deposits On Streets And Sidewalks
7-1-8: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
7-1-1: SUPERVISION AND ENFORCEMENT:
All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in the City shall
be under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works. He shall be
charged with the enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to such
public places except traffic ordinances. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. 1992
Code; Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
7-1-2: DEFECTS, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS:
   A.   City Employees To Report Defects: Every City officer or employee
becoming cognizant of any defect in any street, alley or sidewalk or any
obstruction thereof, shall report the same to the Superintendent of Public
Works or other proper City officers as soon as possible.
   B.   Pavement Repairs: All public street, alley and sidewalk pavements shall
be kept in good repair. Such repair work, whether done by the City or by the
abutting owner, shall be under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public
Works. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
   C.   Restoration Of Public Ways And Parkways: Any person constructing,
laying or breaking any sidewalk shall, upon completion thereof, remove any and
all materials and debris from the public ways and parkways and shall restore
the same to the condition in which it was prior to the commencement of work.
   D.   Maintenance Of Sidewalks And Walkways: All sidewalks on areas open to
the public on private property shall be maintained in a safe condition. Any
sidewalk on private property open to the general public for use or business
purposes shall be maintained by the owner and occupant of the premises in a
safe condition. Any such sidewalk containing cracks, uneven areas, holes or
other dangerous conditions is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the owner
and the occupant shall be responsible for correcting the nuisance. (Ord. O-23-
79, 11-20-1979)
7-1-3: USE OF PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Private Use: No person shall use any street, sidewalk, parkway or other
public place as space for the storage or display of goods or merchandise for
sale. No person shall place, install or maintain on any street, sidewalk,
parkway or other public place any sign or advertisement of any type other than
traffic-control signs installed by a unit of government. Any goods,
merchandise, sign or advertisement that is placed, installed or maintained in
violation of this Section is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be
removed at any time by the City at the expense of the person responsible for
the violation. (Ord. O-20-98, 4-20-1998)
   B.   Poles And Wires: No person shall erect any poles or wires or maintain
any poles or wires over any public street, alley or other public way without
first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Council.
   C.   Gas Pumps:
      1.   Permit Required: No person shall maintain or erect any gasoline pump
or tank in any public street, alley or sidewalk without having first obtained a
permit therefor from the City Council.
      2.   Bond Or Insurance Required: No gas pump permit shall be issued until
the applicant furnishes a bond or indemnity policy, with corporate surety, to
indemnify the City against loss or liability, in the sum of twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00), occasioned by such tank or pump. (Ord. O-23-79,
11-20-1979)
7-1-4: EXCAVATIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall make any excavation in or tunnel under
any public street, alley or sidewalk or other public place in the City without
having first obtained a permit therefor.
   B.   Application For Permit: An application for a street excavation permit
shall be made to the City Clerk in conformity with the general requirements of
this Code relating to applications for licenses and permits 1  and shall
specify the intended location and the purpose of the excavation.
   C.   Bond Or Insurance Required: No street excavation permit shall be issued
until the applicant furnishes a bond or indemnity policy, with corporate
surety, to indemnify the City against loss or liability, in the sum of twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00), occasioned by such excavation and a completion
or performance bond in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00),
guaranteeing that such excavation will be properly refilled and the surface
will be properly restored.
   D.   Refilling And Restoration Required: Any person making any street
excavation shall refill the excavation properly and shall restore the surface
to its condition before the excavation was made, as soon as possible. (Ord. O-
23-79, 11-20-1979)
   E.   Supervision: All such excavations, refills and resurfacing shall be
made subject to the supervision and direction of the Superintendent of Public
Works or any other proper City officer. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-
36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 3, Chapter 1 of this Code.
7-1-5: STREET OPENINGS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct or maintain any opening or
stairway in any public street or sidewalk or alley without a permit from the
City Council. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
   B.   Safety Guards: All lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a
suitable strong cover or a railing to the approval of the Superintendent of
Public Works or other proper City officer. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord.
O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
7-1-6: BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS:
   A.   Barricades And Lights Required:
      1.   Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or
other public place, or making an excavation in any such place, shall maintain
suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the
work; such barricades shall be protected by lights at nighttime.
      2.   Any defect in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent
injury. Any person properly maintaining any opening or excavation in any such
place shall guard such opening or excavation while the same remains open by
proper barricades and lights.
   B.   Disturbing Or Removal Of Barricades And Lights Prohibited:
      1.   No person shall disturb or interfere with any barricade or lights
lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or excavation opening in
any public street, alley or sidewalk.
      2.   No person shall remove any barricade or lights or danger signal
erected in front of or about any defective sidewalk or street under repair, or
undergoing reconstruction within the City, or in any way interfere with, change
or destroy such barricade, light or other danger signal. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-
1979)
7-1-7: DEPOSITS ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Generally: No person shall deposit on any street or public sidewalk any
material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof or any refuse, waste
material, glass or other articles which may do injury to any person, animal or
property. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
   B.   Deposit Of Snow: No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited on
any public thoroughfare including, but not limited to, streets, alleys and
sidewalks, any snow accumulation which might in any way obstruct, hinder,
render unsafe or create a nuisance to the orderly and normal use of said public
thoroughfare.
Any person violating any provision of this subsection shall be fined not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. O-01-79, 1-23-1979; amd. 1992 Code)
   C.   Merchandise On Sidewalks: Merchandise or other articles may be
deposited on sidewalks preparatory to delivery; provided, that the usable width
of the sidewalk is not thereby reduced to less than four feet (4') and
provided, that no such article remains on such walk for more than one-half (1/
2) hour.
   D.   Casting Rinds Or Peels On Sidewalks: No person shall throw, cast, lay
or place on any sidewalk in the City the rind or peel of any orange, banana,
apple or other fruit.
   E.   Coal On Streets: Coal or other materials may be deposited in streets
preparatory to delivery or use; provided, that such deposit does not reduce the
usable width of the roadway at that point to less than eighteen feet (18');
provided further, that such material or coal, other than material to be used in
actual building construction, shall not be permitted to remain on such street
for more than three (3) hours.
Any such material or coal shall be guarded by lights if the same remains upon
any street after nighttime. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
7-1-8: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Injury To Pavements:
      1.   No person shall injure any sidewalk, street or alley pavement.
      2.   No person shall walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon, or
injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while the same is guarded by
a warning sign or barricade or knowingly injure any soft or newly laid
pavement. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
   B.   Obstructions: No person shall cause, create or maintain any obstruction
of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except as may be
specifically authorized by ordinance or by the Director of Public Works when
necessary in an emergency or in connection with any lawful construction, repair
or removal work. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff.
12-1-1997)
   C.   Encroachments:
      1.   No person shall erect or maintain any building or structure which
encroaches upon any public street or property. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
      2.   No person shall install, place, maintain or construct any structure
that encroaches upon the State right of way for North Avenue within the limits
of the City. (Ord. O-36-89, 9-6-1989)
   D.   Drains: No person shall obstruct any drain in any public street or
alley.
   E.   Playing On Streets Or Sidewalks: No person shall play any games upon
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place where such games cause
unnecessary noise or interfere with traffic or pedestrians. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-
20-1979)
ARTICLE A. STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
7-1A-1: Construction Permit
7-1A-2: Bond and Insurance Requirements
7-1A-3: Sidewalk Construction
7-1A-3-1: Specifications for Concrete Sidewalks
7-1A-1: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct, lay or break any pavement
on any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, or repair the same
without first having secured a permit therefor.
   B.   Application for Permit: An application for a permit to construct or
repair streets or sidewalks shall be made to the Clerk in conformity with the
general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses and
permits 1  and shall state the location of the intended pavement or repair, the
extent thereof and the person who shall do the actual construction work.
   C.   Permit Fee: The fee for all sidewalk permits shall be as provided in
Section
3-1A-1 of this Code.
   D.   Restrictions on Issuance: No permit for construction or repair of
streets or sidewalks shall be issued except on order of the City Council. (Ord.
0-23-79, 11-20-79)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 3, Chapter 7 of this Code.
7-1A-2: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Bond and Insurance: No person shall build, construct or lay down
a cement, concrete or stone sidewalk or driveway 1  upon any public way in the
City unless he shall file with the City Clerk a bond or certificate of
insurance indemnifying the City in the minimum amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) for any claim or liability of the City or for any damage to City
property during the construction of the sidewalk or during a period of one year
following the completion of the sidewalk. If a sidewalk is constructed by a
property owner doing his own labor without a contractor, he shall file with the
City Clerk a certificate of insurance indicating that a homeowner's liability
policy is in effect which will be sufficient to comply with this requirement.
   B.   Performance Bond; Cash Deposit; Real Estate Bond: In addition to the
permit bond, the owner or contractor shall furnish a performance bond or a cash
deposit in a sum equal to three dollars ($3.00) per running foot when the
sidewalk or driveway is upon the City's easement for the public's use. Such
deposit or performance bond shall be returned or discharged after the final
inspection (Phase 4) and approval of the sidewalk by the Director of Health and
Inspectional Services. Where a sidewalk is constructed by a property owner with
his own labor without the use of a contractor, a real estate bond pledging the
property in question will be adequate to comply with the requirements of this
subsection. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
 
Notes
1 2. See Article C of this Chapter.
7-1A-3: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Sidewalk Construction Required; General Provisions:
      1.   A concrete sidewalk shall be constructed on each side of each street
where eighty percent (80%) of the sidewalk on each side is already in and
constructed.
      2.   All sidewalk construction shall be under the direction and
supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, and all necessary
labor and work shall be performed in good and workmanlike manner.
      3.   For the purpose of constructing sidewalks, the grades and lines of
construction shall be determined by the City Engineer.
   B.   Notice to Property Owners of Sidewalk Construction: All owners of lots,
blocks, tracts or parcels of land touching the line of proposed sidewalks are
hereby required to construct the sidewalk in front of or touching upon their
respective lots, blocks, tracts or parcels of land, in accordance with the
specifications for the construction of sidewalks now on file with the City
Clerk, within sixty (60) days after the mailing of notice addressed to the
party who last paid the general taxes on the respective lots, blocks, tracts or
parcels of land. In default thereof, the City may furnish the materials and
construct these sidewalks or may enter into a contract for the furnishing of
the materials and the construction of these sidewalks, in accordance with the
provisions of this Article.
   C.   Construction Not to Vary with Street Grade: All sidewalks constructed
in compliance with the provisions of this Article shall not vary more than six
inches (6") above or below an already established street grade. Where there is
no established street grade, construction of sidewalks shall be in compliance
with a grade established by the City Engineer. Upon completion of a permanent
street and/or gutter program hereafter, sidewalks varying more than six inches
(6") above or below the established street grade, but constructed in accordance
with a grade established by the City Engineer prior to establishment of a
permanent grade, shall be replaced by the City at no cost or expense to
property owner whatsoever. The City Clerk shall refer written complaints of
such variations to the City Engineer. The Director of Public Works shall
replace sidewalks within sixty (60) days after receipt of certification from
the City Engineer of such variance.
   D.   Construction by Property Owner: Sidewalk improvements, if made by the
abutting property owners, shall be made by owners of each lot, block, tract or
parcel of land of seventy five feet (75') or less upon posting with the City of
either five hundred dollars ($500.00) in cash, returnable to the party posting
the same in one year, or security for performance bond; provided, that all
corner lots shall be included even though they exceed seventy five feet (75').
All owners of lots, blocks, tracts or parcels of land of seventy six feet (76')
or more shall comply with all ordinances as to the posting of performance bonds
in such cases, and provided, further, any person, in any event, shall file with
the City evidence of public liability insurance to cover such construction as
herein directed in such amounts and of such kinds as provided by ordinance.
   E.   Construction by City; Special Tax:
      1.   Sidewalk improvements, if not made by the abutting property owners,
shall be made by the City, and the whole cost thereof shall be paid by special
tax in accordance with chapter 24, article 63 of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
      2.   Special Tax List: If the owners of lots, blocks, tracts or parcels
of land fail or refuse to construct their portion of the sidewalk in accordance
with the provisions of this Article, the City Clerk shall prepare a special tax
list against these lots, blocks, tracts or parcels of land touching upon such
sidewalks and which were not constructed by the owners, ascertaining, by
computation, the amount of special taxes and the annual installments thereof to
be charged against each of these lots, blocks, tracts or parcels of land.
      3.   Annual Installments: The total amount of the special tax assessed
and each individual assessment shall be divided into five (5) annual
installments which shall bear interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per
annum in accordance with chapter 24, article 63 of the Illinois Revised
Statutes.
      4.   Vouchers: For the purpose of anticipating the collection of the
installments of the special tax herein provided for, the City shall issue
vouchers bearing not to exceed five percent (5%) interest annually, payable
solely out of a special tax provided for in this Article when the tax is
collected. Such vouchers shall be issued in accordance with and shall in all
respects conform to the provisions of chapter 24, article 63 of the Illinois
Revised Statutes.
   F.   Supervision of Construction: The City Engineer is hereby designated to
take charge of the construction of these sidewalks and to prepare a bill of the
costs of construction, together with a list of the lots, blocks, tracts or
parcels of land touching upon the line of sidewalks, the names of the parties
who last paid the general taxes on the respective lots, blocks, tracts or
parcels of land and levy the cost according to the number of feet of property
touching upon said sidewalks.
   G.   Inspections: All work and materials used shall be inspected by the City
and the finished sidewalk shall be subject to inspection and acceptance by the
City prior to authorizing payment to the contractor.
The Director of Health and Inspectional Services or any other duly authorized
inspector shall make the following inspections during the course of all
installation of sidewalks in the following phases, and no subsequent phase of
work to be performed shall be commenced before a previous phase of the
construction is inspected:
      1.   Phase 1: Inspection of the excavation.
      2.   Phase 2: Inspection of the stone quantities in accordance with this
City Code for sidewalks.
      3.   Phase 3: Inspection of concrete specifications of sidewalks in
accordance with this City Code.
      4.   Phase 4: Inspection to determine that all excess material is leveled
and graded and debris removed. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79; 1992 Code)
7-1A-3-1: SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONCRETE SIDEWALKS: 1
All labor, material, equipment and tools necessary for the construction of all
concrete sidewalks shall be furnished and placed in compliance with the
following specifications:
   A.   Dimensions: All walks constructed in front of and siding residentially
zoned property shall be five feet (5') in width and five inches (5") in
thickness. Walks constructed in front of and siding business or industrially
zoned property shall be six feet (6') in width and five inches (5") in
thickness. Location of walks shall be one foot (1') streetward from the right-
of-way line, unless otherwise authorized by the City.
   B.   Grade: The standard grade for sidewalk shall be at a slope not less
than one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot (1') of parkway width where curb is
existing. Where conditions require, this standard may be modified as directed
by the Director of Health and Inspectional Services. Where no curbs exist, the
grade shall be established by the City.
   C.   Weather Conditions: No sidewalk shall be installed when the temperature
is forty five degrees (45°) or lower or when the United States Weather Bureau
forecasts a temperature of less than forty degrees (40°) within seventy two
(72) hours after pouring concrete.
   D.   Materials for Concrete:
      1.   All materials to be incorporated in concrete placed under these
specifications shall comply with the following specifications:
         a.   Portland Cement: Portland Cement shall conform to Type 1 of the
standard specifications and tests for Portland cement (Serial Designation C150-
56) of the American Society for Testing Materials and subsequent revisions
thereto.
         b.   Fine Aggregate: Fine aggregate shall consist of sand having
clean, hard, durable, uncoated grains, free from deleterious substances and
shall range in size from fine to coarse within the limits indicated below,
percentage by weight. Sand shall be obtained from a source known to be in
current use on concrete construction:
Passing through No. 4 sieve not less than ninety five percent (95%).
Passing through No. 100 sieve about five percent (5%).
         c.   Coarse Aggregate: Coarse aggregate shall consist of crushed
stone, gravel or other approved inert materials with similar characteristics,
or combination thereof, having clean, hard, durable, uncoated particles, free
from deleterious matter. It shall range in size from fine to coarse within the
following percentages, by weight. Coarse aggregate shall be obtained from a
source known to be in current use on concrete construction:
Passing one and one-half inch (11/2") sieve not less than ninety five percent
(95%).
Passing No. 4 sieve not more than five percent (5%).
         d.   Mixing Water: Mixing water shall be clean and shall be free from
oil, acid and injurious amounts of vegetable matter, alkalies or other salts.
      2.   All concrete shall be volume proportioned on the basis of one part
Portland cement, two (2) parts of fine aggregate and three and one-half (31/2)
parts of coarse aggregate with only enough water added to make a workable mix;
except, that all concrete shall contain not less than six (6) sacks of cement
per cubic yard. All concrete shall contain four percent (4%) to six percent
(6%) of entrained air. Slump shall not exceed four inches (4"). All concrete
used shall be subject to satisfactory inspection by the Director of Health and
Inspectional Services.
   E.   Cylinder or Cores: The Director of Health and Inspectional Services may
order standard concrete cylinder or cores made of concrete deemed questionable
by him. Such cylinder or cores shall be obtained and tested by a reputable
testing laboratory approved by the City. Concrete shall have a strength of
three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds per square inch at twenty five (25)
days when tested by standard methods.
   F.   Subgrade:
      1.   During excavation, all unsuitable material such as black dirt,
broken concrete, spoil or any other material deemed unsatisfactory by the
Director of Health and Inspectional Services shall be removed from the sidewalk
area and a satisfactory subgrade established. Fill under sidewalks shall
consist of tamped or rolled sand, gravel or crushed stone, satisfactory to the
Director of Health and Inspectional Services.
      2.   The subgrade shall be tamped or rolled until thoroughly compacted,
shall be constructed true to line, grade and cross-section for the bottom of
the sidewalk or sidewalk apron and shall be prepared sufficiently wide to
accommodate the forms.
   G.   Embankments: Embankments prepared for walk construction shall be not
less than six inches (6") wider on each side than the width of the walk to be
installed.
   H.   Forms:
      1.   Side forms shall be lumber with a nominal thickness of two inches
(2") or of steel of equal rigidity. They shall be held securely in place by
stakes or braces, with the top edges true to line and grade. The forms for
street sidewalks shall be so set that the slab will have a fall of one inch
(1") vertical to four feet (4') horizontal from the edge nearest the property
line toward the edge farthest from the property line.
      2.   Forms for the sidewalk aprons shall be so set that the slab will
have a uniform fall between the sidewalk proper and the curb grade. Forms shall
be of a depth equivalent to or greater than the thickness of the walk;
   I.   Laying Concrete: The subgrade or subbase shall be adequately moistened
just before the concrete is placed. The concrete shall be placed in successive
bate for the entire width of the slab, tamped until all voids are removed and
free mortar appears on the surface thoroughly spaded along the edges, struck
off to the true grade and finished to a true and even surface with suitable
trowels and floats. The surface shall be divided by grooves constructed at
right angles to the center line of the sidewalk. These grooves shall extend to
one-fourth (1/4) the depth of the sidewalk, shall be not less than one-eighth
inch (1/8") or more than one-fourth inch (1/4") in width and shall have the
edge rounded one-fourth inch (1/4"). No slab shall be longer than six feet (6')
or less than four feet (4') unless otherwise approved by the Director of Health
and Inspectional Services. The side edges of the walk shall also be edged with
an edging tool, having a one-fourth inch (1/4") radius. The finished sidewalk
shall be finally dragged across its width with a brush or the surface otherwise
roughened by approved methods to give a nonskid finish.
   J.   Expansion Joints:
      1.   Expansion joints, one-half inch (1/2") thick, shall be provided
between the sidewalk and all structures, such as light standards, traffic light
standards, traffic poles, etc., which extend through the sidewalk.
      2.   Expansion joints, one inch (1") thick, shall be placed wherever
sidewalks abut against concrete driveways, concrete pavements, concrete curb
and/or concrete walks.
   K.   Curing:
      1.   The concrete shall be cured by protecting it against loss of
moisture, rapid temperature change and from rain, flowing water and mechanical
injury for a period of not less than three (3) days from the beginning of the
curing operation. Moist curing, waterproof paper, white polyethylene sheeting,
liquid membrane compound or a combination thereof may be used for curing.
Immediately after finishing operations have been completed, the entire surface
of the newly laid concrete shall be covered by the curing medium which is
applicable to local conditions and approved by the City Engineer. The edge of
concrete slabs exposed by the removal of forms shall be protected immediately
to provide these surfaces with continuous curing treatment equal to the method
selected for curing the slab surface and to prevent injury to pavement edges;
      2.   The use of a covering material which contains or becomes
contaminated with sugar in any form, tannic acid or any other substances
considered detrimental to Portland cement will not be permitted. The initial
curing medium shall be effective and shall be applied so as to prevent
checking, crackling and the appearance of dry spots in the surface of the
concrete. The contractor shall have the equipment needed for adequate curing at
hand and ready to install before actual concrete placement begins. In all cases
in which the curing medium requires the use of water, the curing shall have
prior right to all water supply. Failure to provide sufficient cover material
of the type selected, failure to maintain saturation for the entire curing
period in the moist-curing methods, lack of water to adequately care for both
curing and other requirements or other failures to comply with curing
requirements shall be cause for immediate suspension of concreting operations.
      3.   Moist curing shall be accomplished by covering of burlap, cotton
mats or other approved fabric mat, used singly or in combination. Curing mats
shall be thoroughly wet when applied and kept continuously wet and in intimate
contact with the pavement surface for the duration of the moist-curing period.
Other fabric mats shall conform in design and shall provide a curing medium at
least equal to cotton mats. Cotton mats, other fabric mats and burlap strips
shall be furnished in the widths or lengths, after shrinkage, required to cover
the entire width and edges of the pavement lane. Mats or burlap shall be lapped
at joints between adjacent sheets to prevent drying of this location. Moist-
curing, when used as initial curing, shall be continued for not less than
twenty four (24) hours.
      4.   The surface of the concrete shall be wetted with a fine spray of
water and then covered with the waterproof paper. The paper shall be in pieces
large enough to cover the entire width and edges of the slab and shall be
lapped not less than twelve inches (12"). Paper shall be adequately weighted to
prevent displacement or billowing due to wind. Paper folded down over the side
of the pavement edges shall be secured by continuous bank of earth. Tears or
holes appearing in the paper during the curing period shall be immediately
repaired. Waterproof paper for curing concrete shall conform to the current
ASTM or AASHO Specification for Waterproof Paper for Curing Concrete (C-171 and
M-139, respectively).
      5.   White polyethylene sheeting shall consist of a single sheet having a
thickness of not less than four (4) mills (0.004"). Moisture retention shall
conform to the requirements of ASTM Specifications - Designation C156; except,
that air-entraining Portland cement shall be used in the mortar. The material
shall be tested for tensile strength and elongation as prescribed in the
current ASTM Specifications Designation D-882-Method A.
      6.   Membrane curing compounds shall be the white pigmented type or
approved equal and conform to the requirements for the current AASHO Standard
Specifications for Liquid Membrane-Forming Compounds for Curing Concrete
(designation: M-148). The curing compound must be applied to cover the surface
completely and uniformly at a rate which will achieve the performance
requirements specified in AASHO Specifications M-148. This method of curing
shall be applied immediately behind the final finishing operation or after the
initial curing when a combination of methods are used. Failure to provide
complete and uniform coverage at the required rate will be cause for
discontinuance of this method of curing and the substitution of one of the
other approved methods. The compound shall be kept agitated to prevent the
pigment from settling. Special care shall be taken to apply the curing compound
to the pavement edges immediately after the forms have been removed.
   L.   Barricades and Lights: Sidewalks shall be properly barricaded and
lighted after finishing.
   M.   Space Adjacent to Sidewalks: After removal of forms, the space
alongside the sidewalk shall be filled with topsoil and leveled to prevent a
finished appearance.
   N.   Longitudinal and Transverse Joints: Longitudinal and transverse joints
shall be constructed as shown on the plans. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  11-4A-1C of this Code.
ARTICLE B. SIDEWALK SPACE
SECTION:
7-1B-1: Sidewalk Space Permit
7-1B-2: Construction of Vaults; Inspection
7-1B-3: Safety Guards
7-1B-4: Maintenance and Repair of Sidewalks Over Vaults
7-1B-5: Use Restrictions
7-1B-1: SIDEWALK SPACE PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall use any vault, space, room or
structure under any street or sidewalk in the City without having first
obtained a permit therefor.
   B.   Application for Permit: An application for a permit to use or maintain
a vault, space, room or structure under any street or sidewalk in the City
shall be made in writing to the City Clerk and shall state thereon,
specifically, the size of the space to be used or maintained and the purpose
for which it is to be used. Each application shall contain an agreement by the
applicant to abide by the regulations contained in this Article.
   C.   Permit Fee: The annual fee for a permit under this Article shall be in
an amount as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Code.
   D.   Bond: Each applicant for a permit hereunder shall file with the
application a surety company bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), with surety to be approved by the City Council, conditioned to
save the City harmless from any liability resulting from or caused by such
vault, room or structure. Whenever, in the opinion of the City Council, the
sureties on such bond become insolvent or unlawful, different sureties may be
required by order of the City Council. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
   E.   Issuance of Permit: Permits required by this Article shall be issued by
the City Clerk. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79; 1992 Code)
   F.   Transfer of Permit: No permit issued under this Article shall be
transferred except in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
Whenever any premises abutting on any vault, room, space or structure for which
a permit has been issued shall be conveyed or whenever the interest or lease or
right of occupancy of the person holding the permit shall be transferred or
conveyed, the grantee or transferee must make the application for a transfer of
the permit to him and must furnish a bond as is required in subsection D of
this Section. A fee as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Code shall be required for such transfer, and upon the payment
of the fee and the full compliance with the contents hereof, a new permit shall
be issued.
   G.   Revocation of Permits: Any permit issued under the provisions of this
Article may be revoked by order of the City Council for any violation hereof.
(Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
7-1B-2: CONSTRUCTION OF VAULTS; INSPECTION:
Vaults, rooms, spaces or structures shall be firmly constructed so as to
support the sidewalk or street over them, with the maximum load which the
sidewalk or street will carry, with a margin of safety of fifty percent (50%)
over its maximum load or weight.
The Director of Public Works shall inspect all rooms, spaces, vaults or
structures to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this Section. (Ord.
0-23-79, 11-20-79)
7-1B-3: SAFETY GUARDS:
All openings through the sidewalk or street into any vault, space, room or
structure shall be kept covered and graded. If the opening is a manhole or trap
door, an adequate, strong metal cover must be provided and must be equipped
with a rough surface so that there will be no danger of any pedestrian slipping
on it. If a stairway is provided, the stairway must be properly guarded with a
railing at least three feet (3') high to protect pedestrians from injury. (Ord.
0-23-79, 11-20-79)
7-1B-4: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS OVER VAULT:
The surface of the sidewalk over any vault, space, room or structure shall be
kept free from snow and ice and free from all dirt and obstruction of any kind
by the person holding the permit. Such person must keep the sidewalk over such
vault, space, room or structure in good repair. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
7-1B-5: USE RESTRICTIONS:
No vault, space, room or structure shall be used for the storing of explosives
or flammable liquids nor shall a cesspool be located therein. (Ord. 0-23-79,
11-20-79)
ARTICLE C. DRIVEWAYS
SECTION:
7-1C-1: Driveway Construction Permit
7-1C-2: Maintenance And Repair
7-1C-3: Definitions
7-1C-4: Construction Requirements
7-1C-1: DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION PERMIT 1 :
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct, replace or repair any
driveway in or across any public walk, curb or parkway without first having
obtained a permit therefor from the City Council.
   B.   Application For Permit: An application for a driveway permit shall be
in conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to
applications for licenses and permits 2  and shall state the size, location and
material to be used in such driveway and shall include plans and specifications
therefor. No person shall depart from such plans and specifications or vary
from them without permission of the City Council.
   C.   Permit Fee: The fee for a driveway permit shall be as provided in
Section
3-1A-1 of this Code. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 7-1A-2 of this Chapter for bond and insurance requirements.
2 2. See Title 3, Chapter 1 of this Code.
7-1C-2: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR:
Every person maintaining a driveway shall keep the same free from snow or ice
or any obstruction and shall keep the same in good repair where it crosses any
public sidewalk. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
7-1C-3: DEFINITIONS:
CURB CUT: The location of the transition of a driveway to a public street.
DRIVEWAY: The paved area located beyond the curb of a public street on a lot
which is designed for access to a garage and/or the parking of motor vehicles.
LOT: A parcel of land legally described as a distinct portion or piece of land
of record. (Ord. O-22-99, 12-6-1999)
7-1C-4: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to all other requirements imposed by this Code, all driveways
constructed on any lot in a residential district shall comply with the
following:
   A.   No driveway shall exceed twenty four feet (24') in width except that
the width of a driveway may exceed twenty four feet (24') at the point that the
driveway connects to a garage and from the connection to the garage for a
distance not to exceed thirty feet (30') toward the front lot line.
   B.   No driveway shall have more than one curb cut. Circular driveways are
prohibited.
   C.   No lot shall have more than one driveway.
   D.   The total paved area (including driveway, sidewalks, patios, and
parking pad) of a lot shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total
area of a lot.
   E.   Abutting paved or gravel sidewalks or patios considered as part of
driveway for purposes of determining overall width, size and area of driveway.
   F.   A paved parking pad not to exceed twelve feet by twenty four feet (12'
x 24') may be constructed adjacent to a garage on a lot provided that it
complies with all other requirements of this Section.
   G.   All driveways must be paved with a hard durable surface such as
concrete, asphalt, brick pavers or permeable brick pavers. No gravel, sand or
dirt driveways shall be allowed.
   H.   No driveway located in a front yard of any lot shall extend more than
twelve feet (12') across the front elevation of the residence located on such
lot except when the driveway connects to an attached garage. (Ord. O-22-99, 12-
6-1999; amd. Ord. O-13-2023, 8-14-2023)
CHAPTER 2
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Approval Of Improvements Required
7-2-2: Permit Or Authorization Required; Plans And Specifications
7-2-3: Engineering Fees
7-2-4: Contract Price Placed In Escrow
7-2-5: Benefits To Other Property Owners
7-2-6: Exemptions From Provisions
7-2-1: APPROVAL OF IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
No work involving the construction of any public improvement constructed under
the provisions of this chapter shall be engaged in without the permission of
the Superintendent of Public Works and without notifying the inspector assigned
to the particular improvement. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-36-97, 8-
18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
7-2-2: PERMIT OR AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Any person owning or being interested in any real estate located within the
City and desiring to construct any improvement of or in any street, avenue,
alley or other publicly owned property adjacent to or in the neighborhood of
his privately owned property and for the benefit of such property shall first
obtain a permit or authorization from the City Council for the preparation of
plans and specifications for such improvement by the City Engineer. All plans
and specifications for such proposed improvement must be approved by the City
Council before the letting or execution of any contract for the construction of
such proposed work, the award of such contract must be approved by the City
Council and a copy of such contract, together with copies of any exhibits
attached thereto and of the plans and specifications so approved by the City
Council, must be filed with the City Clerk. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
7-2-3: ENGINEERING FEES:
After authorization for plan and specification preparation is granted by the
City Council, the person owning or being interested in the development of such
real estate shall deposit with the Finance Director for engineering services
for the preparation of such plans and specifications, a sum of money based
either upon an agreement for such service between such owner and such engineer
or based upon the following schedule:
8% of the first $15,000.00 of construction cost, plus
51/2% of the next $15,000.00 of construction cost, plus
41/2% of the next $45,000.00 of construction cost, plus
31/2% of all construction cost in excess of $75,000.00.
(Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
7-2-4: CONTRACT PRICE PLACED IN ESCROW:
   A.   The total amount of the contract price for the construction of such
proposed improvement shall be deposited in escrow with the Finance Director
before any work shall be commenced under such contract. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-
1979; amd. Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
There shall also, at the same time, be deposited by such owner a sufficient
amount of money to pay the engineering charges of the City Engineer for
services to be rendered in connection with the construction of the proposed
improvement, the amount to be based either upon an agreement for such service
between such owner and such engineer or based upon the following schedule:
      1.   For the services of a qualified full-time resident engineer or
inspector, five hundred twenty five dollars ($525.00) to six hundred dollars
($600.00) per month based upon an estimate of the time required for such
inspection prepared by the City Engineer and submitted to the owner and the
City Council.
      2.   On contracts which require the services of a resident engineer or
inspector, two percent (2%) of the first fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00)
worth of construction cost and one and one-half percent (11/2%) of all
construction costs above fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00).
   B.   On contracts which do not require the services of a resident engineer
or inspector, three and one-half percent (31/2%) of the first ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) worth of construction cost and two and one-half percent
(21/2%) of all construction costs above ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
(Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
   C.   Monies so deposited as provided in this section shall be paid by the
Finance Director to the parties entitled thereto on monthly estimates issued by
the City Engineer and only upon the order of the City Council up to ninety
percent (90%) of such estimates furnished. Upon the issuance of a final
estimate so marked, accompanied by letter from the City Engineer stating that
such work has been completed in accordance with plans and specifications and
the acceptance of the completed improvement by the City Council, the final
balance due the contractor or contractors shall be payable. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-
20-1979; amd. Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
7-2-5: BENEFITS TO OTHER PROPERTY OWNERS:
Where the improvement so constructed shall be of benefit to property other than
the property of the person constructing or having such improvement constructed
for the benefit of his property and if the owners of or parties interested in
such additional property so benefited shall not have contributed their
proportionate share of the cost of such improvement, the City shall, by
ordinance, provide that no owner or person interested in such other property so
benefited shall be permitted to connect to such improvement or to receive the
benefit thereof unless and until the owner or owners of such property shall
have contributed a proportionate share of the cost of the construction of such
improvement and deposited the same with Finance Director to be paid to the
owner or owners who have originally paid the cost of such improvement, less two
percent (2%) for the collection and handling of such additional funds to be
deducted from such additional deposits made. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd.
Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
The provision of this section shall not apply to any street paving
improvements. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
7-2-6: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Improvements consisting of the construction of sidewalks costing less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), unless it is a part of the general street
improvement, and the construction of driveway aprons and sewer and water
service connections shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
CHAPTER 3
TREES AND SHRUBS 1
SECTION:
7-3-1: Intent; Tree Defined
7-3-2: Authority; Permission to Plant
7-3-3: Approved Trees
7-3-4: Prohibited Trees
7-3-5: Reforestation
7-3-6: Spacing of Trees
7-3-7: Planting Requirements
7-3-8: Spraying and Pruning; Tree Removal
7-3-9: Construction Procedures Around Trees on City Property
7-3-10: Hedges and Shrubs
7-3-11: Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  11-4-7B of this Code.
7-3-1: INTENT; TREE DEFINED:
Trees, as defined, regulated and protected herein, are declared to be a
natural, public resource, and it is the intent of the City Council to protect
them as herein set out in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the
present and future citizens of the City. For the purpose of this Chapter, a
tree is defined to be a woody plant that attains a height of at least twenty
feet (20') at maturity in a given locality and usually (but not always) has but
a single, self-supporting stem or trunk. (Ord. 0-28-90, 6-4-90)
7-3-2: AUTHORITY; PERMISSION TO PLANT:
The Director of Public Works or his authorized representative is hereby
empowered to superintend, regulate the planting, preservation, protection and
maintenance of trees on all City- owned properties, parkways, rights of way,
easements and utilities easements. No persons hall plant any tree, shrub or any
other woody plant on any City parkway until the Director of Public Works or his
authorized representative has given written permission for such planting. In
the absence of the needed permission, the Director of Public Works or his
authorized representative may require removal of any unapproved tree, either by
the resident or by the City Public Works Department. (Ord. 0-28-90, 6-4-90)
7-3-3: APPROVED TREES:
Trees to be planted in City parkways shall be selected from the following list
of authorized tree species and/or other species as approved by the Director of
Public Works.
(See following pages for authorized tree species list.)
Latin Name Specie Growth
Latin Name                             Specie                       Growth
+Acer campestre                        Hedge Maple                  Up to 35'
+Acer ginnala                          Amur Maple                   Up to 25'
+Acer platanoides `Columnare'          Columnar Norway Maple        Up to 55'
*Acer platanoides `Crimson King'       Crimson King Norway Maple    Up to 45'
*Acer platanoides `Emerald Queen'      Emerald Queen Norway Maple   Up to 60'
* Acer platanoides `Jade Glen'         Jade Glen Norway Maple       Up to 60'
*Acer rubrum `Armstrong'               Armstrong Red Maple          Up to 40'
+ Acer rubrum `Columnare'              Columnar Red Maple           Up to 40'
*Acer rubrum `October Glory'           October Glory Red Maple      Up to 60'
*Acer rubrum `Red Sunset'              Red Sunset Red Maple         Up to 50'
+Acer rubrum `Scanlon'                 Scanlon Red Maple            Up to 35'
*Acer saccharum                        Sugar Maple                  Up to 70'
*Acer saccharum `Green Mountain        Green Mountain Sugar Maple   Up to 70'
+Amelanchier grandiflora (single stem) Apple Serviceberry           Up to 25'
*Betula lutea (single stem)            Yellow Birch                 Up to 70'
* Betula nigra (single stem)           River Birch                  Up to 70'
*Castanea mollisima                    Chinese Chestnut             Up to 60'
*Celtis occidentalis                   Hackberry                    Up to 80'
+Crataegus species and cultivars       Toba Hawthorne               Up to 20'
*Fraxinus americana `Autumn Purple'    Autumn Purple White Ash      Up to 50'
*Fraxinus americana `Rosehill'         Rosehill White Ash           Up to 80'
* Fraxinus excelsior `Hessei'          Hessei Ash                   Up to 60'
*Fraxinus quadrangulata (true)         Blue Ash                     Up to 70'
*Gingko biloba                         Gingko                       Up to 120'
*Gleditsia triacanthos inermis         Imperial Honeylocust         Up to 45'
`Imperial'
*Gleditsia triacanthos inermis         Skyline Honeylocust          Up to 45'
`Skyline'
* Gymnocladus dioicus                  Kentucky Coffeetree          Up to 60'
* Larix decidua                        European Larch               Up to 75'
* Liriodendron tulipifera              Tulip Tree                   Up to 70'
+ Malus `Radiant'                      Radiant Flowering Crab       Up to 20'
+ Malus `Snowdrift'                    Snowdrift Flowering Crab     Up to 20'
+ Malus `Van Esseltine'                Van Esseltine Flowering Crab Up to 20'
+ Ostrya virginiana                    Ironwood                     Up to 40'
*Pinus strobus                         White Pine                   Up to 80'
* Platanus acerifolia                  London Plane Tree            Up to 80'
* Pyrus calleryana `Bradford'          Bradford Callery Pear        Up to 45'
* Quercus prinus (Montana)             Chestnut Oak                 Up to 70'
* Quercus alba                         White Oak                    Up to 80'
* Quercus acutissima                   Sawtooth Oak                 Up to 70'
* Quercus bicolor                      Swamp White Oak              Up to 70'
* Quercus imbricaria                   Shingle Oak                  Up to 60'
*Quercus macrocarpa                    Bur Oak                      Up to 120'
* Quercus robur                        English Oak                  Up to 70'
* Quercus rubra                        Red Oak                      Up to 80'
*Quercus schumardii                    Schumard Oak                 Up to 80'
+Sophora japonica                      Chinese Scholar Tree         Up to 40'
* Tilia cordata                        European Littleleaf Linden   Up to 75'
* Tilia cordata `Greenspire'           Greenspire Littleleaf Linden Up to 75'
*Tilia euchlora `Redmond'              Redmond Linden               Up to 75'
*Tilia tomentosa                       Silver Linden                Up to 60'
*Zelkova sereta `Village Green'        Village Green Zelkova        Up to 50'
 
(Ord. 0-28-90, 6-4-90)
7-3-4: PROHIBITED TREES:
   A.   Species Enumerated: The following listed trees shall not be planted on
City parkways because of commonly acknowledged high maintenance and undesirable
characteristics (e.g. brittle wood, cavity prone, excessive deadwood, disease
susceptible, etc.) associated with the use of these species in the urban
environment:
Acer negundo          Box Elder
Acer saccharinum      Silver Maple
Ailanthus glandulosa  Tree of Heaven
Catalpa - all species Catalpa
Morus - all species   Mulberry
Populus - all species Poplars (except tulip tree)
                      Commonly known as Bradford Pear, new Bradford, Cleveland
Pyrus Calleryana      Select, Autumn Blaze Aristocrat, Capitol, Chanticleer and
                      others
Salix - all species   Willows
Ulmus americana       American Elm
Ulmus pumila          Siberian Elm
 
All types of fruit trees producing fruit typically for human consumption.
   B.   Existing Prohibited Species:
      1.   Where the above-listed trees have been planted and are growing on
City parkways, they shall gradually be removed through normal attrition and
replaced with approved trees.
      2.   The Director of Public Works has the option of excluding the
"undesirable tree" description as a reason for removal when, in his
professional opinion, a particular contested specimen(s) of the listed
undesirable species exhibits redeeming characteristics typical of a desirable
species but uncharacteristic for the contested specimen's species.
   C.   Diseased, Deformed, Dangerous Trees:
      1.   All crippled, deformed and physically damaged trees, whether on City
parkways or private property, regardless of species, if professional opinion
indicates recovery and normal development cannot be expected, may be considered
for removal and replacement. All such trees on private property shall be
removed and replaced at the expense of the owner of the property.
      2.   All trees infected with noncurable disease that will result in (1)
deformation, (2) death and (3) infection of other trees, whether on City
parkways or private property, shall be removed and replaced, if warranted. All
such trees on private property shall be removed or replaced at the expense of
the owner of the property.
      3.   All trees whose condition and/or location is determined to present a
serious present or future potential for endangering life or property, whether
on City parkways or private property, shall be removed and replaced as
warranted. All such trees on private property shall be removed at the expense
of the owner of the property and replaced. (Ord. 0-28-90, 6-4-90; amd. Ord. O-
20-2021, 12-20-2021)
7-3-5: REFORESTATION:
Reforestation and new plantings in parkways shall be confined to a minimum of
different tree species per street in the interest of visual harmony and
continuity. A master planting record shall be on file in the office of the
Director of Public Works. (Ord. 0-28-90, 6-4-90)
7-3-6: SPACING OF TREES:
   A.   All new planting in parkways shall conform to either of the following
spacing, depending on ultimate mature size as indicated in subsection
7-3-4A of this Chapter: * 35' minimum, 50' maximum and + 25' minimum, 34'
maximum between other new and or existing shade trees, whether on City or
private property, and where the new trees would be planted.
   B.   Spacing of existing trees shall be brought into conformity with the
above distances through normal attrition and planned removal of undesirable and
deformed trees as applicable through subsection
7-3-4C of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-28-90, 6-4-90)
7-3-7: PLANTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Trees, when planted, shall have a minimum diameter of two inches (2")
at a distance of six inches (6") above the ground, shall have a continuous
single stem branched at a minimum of four and one-half feet (41/2') above
ground before pruning and shall be free from deformity and indication of
undesirable growth characteristics.
   B.   Trees, when planted, shall be free of infectious disease or insect
infestation.
   C.   Trees shall be planted on the center line of the parkway or in line
with majority of trees established. No trees may be planted on parkways less
than four feet (4') wide, except where conditions are such that off-set
planting may be desirable or beneficial, unless, in the judgment of the
Director of Public Works, the planting and the species of tree approved will
not endanger sidewalk, curb or other physical property.
   D.   Planting of trees is prohibited if such planting will unduly interfere
with existing sewer connections and utility locations, connections and/or
controls and, also, where their repair and maintenance will cause a severe
stress to the tree, especially when mature.
   E.   Species of trees which, by reason of size, spread of crown or other
characteristics, could interfere with existing overhead utility lines are
prohibited. (Ord. 0-28-90, 6-4-90)
7-3-8: SPRAYING AND PRUNING; TREE REMOVAL:
   A.   Spraying Trees: Spraying of trees in parkways for the prevention and
elimination of disease and insect infestation shall be performed to meet the
specific requirements of the species of tree ad the particular disease or
insect infestation which exists or threatens. It shall be the responsibility of
the Director of Public Works or his authorized representative to determine the
need and extent of spraying requirements and make recommendations to the Mayor.
   B.   Trimming or Removing Trees:
      1.   Permission to Prune or Trim: No person shall, without a written
permission from the City, remove, destroy, break, cut, deface, trim, injure or
interfere with any tree, shrub or woody plant growing in any right of way,
parkway or public place within the City.
      2.   Purpose of Trimming and Pruning: Systemic trimming and pruning shall
be carried out to accomplish the following:
         a.   Removal of dead branches, seriously damaged branches and
unbalanced branches and limbs.
         b.   Gradual removal of lower branches to provide a minimum overhead
clearance of eighteen feet (18') over sidewalks and twenty five feet (25') over
streets.
         c.   Removal of one leader or branch when forking of the main trunk
occurs at a height greater than fifteen feet (15') if the structural strength
or typically normal habit and beauty of the tree will be impaired by such
forking.
         d.   Lessen the height and width (drop crotching) of certain trees to
safeguard life and property and the tree from structural damage. This is due to
the tree's development and/or species where visual evidence has shown it to be
highly susceptible to damage from high winds and ice storms.
         e.   Shaping of young trees so that they will develop a single tall
straight trunk, a strong central framework or branch structure and a
symmetrical balanced crown.
         f.   Restore physiological balance between the root system and leaf
surface area at the time of planting.
         g.   Reasonable removal of limbs that seriously interfere with or
hinder proper development of adjacent parkway and/or private trees.
      3.   Pruning Tools:
         a.   All contractors, utilities or contractors employed by utilities
shall sterilize all pruning tools used on and between all trees on the City
parkways, rights of way and public places within the City to minimize the
spread of debilitating, deforming and fatal diseases on same.
         b.   All contractors, utilities or contractors working for utilities
shall not use climbing irons in trees on the City parkway or right of way for
any purpose other than removal of that tree or in an emergency.
         c.   All contractors, utilities or contractors working for utilities
shall not use climbing irons on any private property tree for any purpose other
than removal or for an emergency, due to the spread of disease that may occur
from this practice, not to mention the wounding of the bark on the tree.
      4.   Removal of Dangerous, Undesirable Trees and Limbs: Any tree or limb
of a tree which has become dead or decaying or broken and/or likely to fall on
or across any public way, on adjoining property or has been discarded as an
undesirable or deformed tree as applicable through subsection
7-3-4C of this Chapter shall be removed by the owner of the property on which
such tree stands or grows. Where the owner of the property has been properly
notified of such hazard or undesirable or deformed tree and fails to remove
same within thirty (30) days of such notification, the Director of Public Works
or authorized representative shall cause said tree or limb to be removed, and
the owner of the property shall be billed the City's cost for removing such
hazard or undesirable or deformed tree. (Ord. 0-28-90, 6-4-90; 1992 Code)
7-3-9: CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES AROUND TREES ON CITY PROPERTY:
   A.   During digging operations, no excavation or trench shall occur closer
than a distance of three (3) trunk diameters (measured at 41/2' above ground
level) to any tree. In no case shall an excavation be dug at the above-
specified minimum distance or less on more than one side of the parkway tree.
   B.   Tunneling must leave the top two feet (2') of soil undisturbed.
   C.   The Department of Public Works must first inspect and approve any
digging or trenching near a tree or trees according to specifications in
subsections A and B above. Such trenching can only be permitted for the repair
of existing utilities or installation of same with construction requirements
providing no other location alternatives or due to the nature of the materials
and/or installation procedures necessary. A diligent effort shall be made
during operation of construction equipment (end loader, trencher, back hoe,
etc.) to minimize root and trunk damage to trees and splitting of roots back
into the soil beyond the excavation.
   D.   Backfilling shall follow the criteria specified as follows:
      1.   Except as indicated in subsection D2 herein, soil removed in
tunneling or trenching must be used to backfill same and an attempt made to
return the backfill to its original compactness.
      2.   The Department of Public Works must inspect and approve sites where
gravel or similar material must be used in lieu of original soil backfill in a
trench or excavation within the mature tree's drip line. In cases where the
tree is a species intolerant to an alkaline soil, washed river gravel or
similar neutral material must be used in place of limestone gravel. Also, if
the intolerant tree species is immature, neutral gravel shall be used when the
excavation is located in the area that would eventually be covered by the
mature tree's crown. Finally, the top two feet (2') of the trench or excavation
must be filled with the same soil removed or its equivalent.
   E.   Soils and/or materials must not be stockpiled beneath the crowns of
parkway trees for a period longer than one week. Such aforementioned soil and
material shall not be placed around or against tree trunks.
   F.   Where fill must be added near trees, the finished grade (including sod)
shall be no more than six inches (6") above the original grade. The fill shall
be a good topsoil, loamy in texture and high in organic matter such as peat
moss, etc.
   G.   Care must be taken during construction activities not to damage trees
with any of the materials or machinery used on the job. Planking of tree trunks
with lumber of an adequate height and thickness and secured by wire, strapping
or rope shall be used to protect trees where damage is possible. All damage
must be immediately reported to the Department of Public Works. Low hanging
limbs interfering excessively with construction activities shall be reported to
the Department of Public Works for pruning or removal prior to the start of
construction.
   H.   Equipment or vehicles must not be repeatedly driven or parked beneath
the crowns of trees on City property.
   I.   The City reserves the right to stop a job and prevent further progress
where the above specifications are being violated. Where repeated and flagrant
violations occur, the contractor will forfeit his permit and be billed for
labor and material costs incurred in repairing any damage. (Ord. 0-28-90, 6-4-
90)
7-3-10: HEDGES AND SHRUBS:
   A.   New Plantings Prohibited: No person shall plant shrubs or hedges on the
City parkway.
   B.   Existing Hedges and Shrubs:
      1.   Where such plantings presently exist on the parkway and within
thirty feet (30') of the nearest right-of-way line of any intersecting street,
they shall be maintained at a maximum height of two feet (2'), and they shall
be kept trimmed to the right-of- way line.
      2.   No person shall maintain any hedge, shrub or tree anywhere upon his
premises which interferes with the clear view of traffic by drivers approaching
an intersection.
      3.   No person shall allow a hedge or shrub on his premises to grow out
and interfere with pedestrian traffic in the public sidewalk (where one exists)
abutting his or her premises. (Ord. 0-28-90, 6-4-90)
7-3-11: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day during
which a violation of this Chapter continues shall be considered a separate and
distinct violation. Imposition of any penalty for a violation of this Chapter
shall not be construed as a waiver of the right of the City to collect the
costs of removal of such nuisances in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter where it is necessary for the City to remove such nuisances as
hereinabove provided. (Ord. 0-28-90, 6-4-90; 1992 Code)
CHAPTER 4
CITY HALL
SECTION:
7-4-1: Nonpublic Areas Defined
7-4-2: Loitering in and Wandering Through City Hall Prohibited
7-4-3: Identification Required
7-4-1: NONPUBLIC AREAS DEFINED:
As used herein, the "nonpublic area portions" shall mean all areas of City
Hall, other than the lobby, the City Council Chambers and the public hall in
the basement of the City Hall, when being used for various functions, and the
entry hall of the Northlake Police Station. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
7-4-2: LOITERING IN AND WANDERING THROUGH CITY HALL PROHIBITED:
No person shall loiter in the City Hall, and no person shall wander or walk
through the nonpublic area portions of the City Hall other than on official
business. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
7-4-3: IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED:
All persons who have business with the various departments of the City or its
officials shall identify themselves and request to see the persons they have
business with at the City Clerk's counter in the lobby of the City Hall. (Ord.
0-23-79, 11-20-79)
CHAPTER 5
PUBLIC BENCHES
SECTION:
7-5-1: Findings of Fact
7-5-2: Definition
7-5-3: Private Placement of Benches
7-5-4: Injury to Benches Prohibited
7-5-5: Existing Benches
7-5-6: Penalties
7-5-1: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The City has heretofore provided for the placement of public benches by
companies that acquire permits and otherwise conform with the provisions of
City ordinances; and
   B.   Upon the recommendation of the Northlake Chamber of Commerce and
Industry and the Director of Health and Inspectional Services of the City, a
survey and study was performed in order to evaluate the number, condition and
compliance of the public benches that had been placed throughout the City upon
the public right of way; and
   C.   As a result of that survey, it was noted that the number of benches and
the average number of violations of ordinances of the City and the condition of
the benches and their placement was generally of such a nature so as to create
a potentially hazardous and unsafe condition to the motoring and pedestrian
public utilizing the public right of way; and
   D.   The City Council is in receipt of a recommendation from the Northlake
Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the City Director of Health and
Inspectional Services that the proliferation and activities related to the
placement of the public benches, frequently referred to as "ad benche", should
be discontinued, and that the City may provide sufficient public benches so as
to accommodate the transportation needs of the public; and
   E.   Based upon the information received, it is the findings and
determination of the City Council that the current provisions and procedures
relative to public benches have not been complied with and, given such
noncompliance, have resulted in potential danger to members of the public
utilizing the public right of way, both as to the safety and general condition
of the benches themselves and the location and the failure to procure necessary
insurance and permits, all of which necessitates that the City initiate action
by usurping the function of placing such public benches at places of
accommodation upon the public right of way within the City. (Ord. 0-01-87, 1-
19-87)
7-5-2: DEFINITION:
The word "bench" is hereby defined to be a seat located upon the public
property for purposes of public accommodation. (Ord. 0-01-87, 1-19-87)
7-5-3: PRIVATE PLACEMENT OF BENCHES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, any bench
within the right of way of the public street or roadway within the City. This
prohibition shall apply to all benches, including those displaying advertising
matter, but shall not apply where the placement is with the prior written
direction or authorization of the corporate authorities of the City. (Ord. 0-
01-87, 1-19-87)
7-5-4: INJURY TO BENCHES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly damage, deface or otherwise
cause a public bench lawfully placed upon the public right of way to be
rendered unusable or unsafe for use by the general public. (Ord. 0-01-87, 1-19-
87)
7-5-5: EXISTING BENCHES:
Notwithstanding the effective date hereof, any permittee holding a validly
issued and authorized permit from the City for the placement of a public bench
within the right of way, upon a showing of the validity of such permit, shall
be allowed to leave such bench at its location for the duration of the term of
the permit; provided, said location conforms in all respects with the
ordinances of the City under which said permit was issued, until the earliest
occurrence of the expiration of such permit or April 30, 1987. (Ord. 0-01-87,
1-19-87)
7-5-6: PENALTIES:
Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
fined in an amount not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each of
such violations. Each day that a violation is in existence shall constitute and
be deemed as a separate violation subject to the penalties provided herein.
(Ord. 0-01-87, 1-19-87; 1992 Code)
CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC LIBRARY
SECTION:
7-6-1: Failure to Return Library Books
7-6-2: Injury to Library Property
7-6-1: FAILURE TO RETURN LIBRARY BOOKS:
Any person who shall fail to return any book belonging to the Northlake Public
Library, according to the requirements of the bylaws made and adopted by the
Directors of the library for the government thereof, within the time allowed,
shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
(1976 Code §16-3-12; 1992 Code)
7-6-2: INJURY TO LIBRARY PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
Any person who shall wilfully or maliciously cut, write upon, injure, deface,
tear or destroy any book, plate, newspaper, picture, engraving or other thing
of value belonging to the Northlake Public Library, and any person who shall
wilfully or maliciously commit any injury upon or to the Northlake Public
Library or upon the grounds, buildings, furniture, fixtures or other property
thereof shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. (1976 Code §16-3-11; 1992 Code)
CHAPTER 7
WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
7-7A-1: Water Department Created
7-7A-1-1: Definitions
7-7A-2: Connection To Water System
7-7A-3: Installation Of Buffalo Boxes, Stubs And Crossovers
7-7A-4: Water Meters
7-7A-5: Rates And Charges
7-7A-5-1: Rates And Charges Established
7-7A-5-2: Deposit
7-7A-5-3: Bills For Service; Delinquencies
7-7A-5-4: Liability For Rates And Charges
7-7A-5-5: Water Service Rates For Affected Political Subdivisions
7-7A-6: Use Of Fire Hydrants
7-7A-7: Conservation Measures
7-7A-8: Tampering With System
7-7A-9: Water Service Charge Review
7-7A-10: Payment For Service; Penalty For Delinquency
7-7A-11: Delinquent Bills
7-7A-12: Lien; Notice Of Delinquency
7-7A-13: Foreclosure Of Lien
7-7A-14: Revenues
7-7A-15: Accounts
7-7A-16: Access To Records
7-7A-17: Method For Computation Of Rates And Charges
7-7A-18: Water Service Line Cost Sharing Program
7-7A-19: Groundwater As Potable Water Supply Prohibited
7-7A-1: WATER DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a water department which shall be under the direction
of the director of public services. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-06-
94, 3-7-1994)
7-7A-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATOR: The administrator of the U.S. environmental protection agency.
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The city council of the city of Northlake, Illinois.
BASIC USER CHARGE: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public water
system.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE: A charge levied on users to improve, extend or
reconstruct the public water system.
CITY: The city of Northlake, Illinois.
CURB COCK: A shutoff valve attached to a water service pipe from a water main
to a building installed near the curb, which may be operated by a valve key to
start or stop flow in the water supply lines of a building. Also called curb
stop.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGE: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of
interest, principal and coverage of loan, bond, etc., outstanding.
DIRECTOR: The director of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
FEDERAL ACT: The federal 1996 safe drinking water acts amendments.
LOCAL CAPITAL COST CHARGE: Charges for costs other than the operation,
maintenance and replacement costs, i.e., debt service and capital improvement
costs.
MAY: Is permissible.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER: A unit of the concentration of water constituent. It is
0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand milliliters (1,000 ml) of water.
It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it
is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water analysis.
ORDINANCE: This ordinance.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual,
firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
pH: The logarithm (base-10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA division of laboratories manual
of laboratory methods.
REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories,
or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the works to
maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and
constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement.
SERVICE BOX: A valve box used with corporation or curb cock.
SHALL: Is mandatory.
STATE ACT: The Illinois antipollution bond act of 1970.
STATE LOAN: The state of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of waterworks as provided for by the Illinois antipollution bond
act and for making such loans as filed with the secretary of state of the state
of Illinois.
USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which the waterworks will be operated.
USER CHARGE: A charge levied on users of waterworks for the cost of operation,
maintenance and replacement.
WATER FUND: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received in
the operation of the water system.
WATER SERVICE CHARGE: The charge monthly or bimonthly levied on all users of
the water facilities. The service charge shall be computed to include the total
of the basic user charge and the local capital cost if applicable. (Ord. O-26-
2001, 12-17-2001)
7-7A-2: CONNECTION TO WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   Connection Required; Use Of Wells: All buildings shall be connected
with the city waterworks system. Wells and cisterns shall be permitted to be
used; provided they are used as an auxiliary water supply.
   B.   Permit Required: No person shall tap into, break or connect with any
portion of the waterworks system of the city without first obtaining a permit
so to do from the city clerk.
   C.   Connection Fee: For the purpose of fixing the charge made for the
privilege of connecting to the waterworks system of the city, the city shall be
divided into two (2) sections, namely, a section to be designated as "old
section", being all of the city except that portion east of Roberta Avenue and
south of North Avenue, and the section to be designated as "new section", being
all that portion of the city east of Roberta Avenue and south of North Avenue.
Charges shall be made for the privilege of connecting to the waterworks system
as provided in section
3-1A-1 of this code.
   D.   Installation Of Pipes: All pipes for connection to the waterworks
system of the city may be laid by the residents of the property to be connected
to the system or by sewer and water contractors licensed by the city 1 .
   E.   Inspection Of Connections: Before any person shall be permitted to draw
water from a connection with any water supply pipe of the waterworks system of
the city, all connecting pipes and the connection shall be inspected and
approved by an inspector of the city. Actual tap in for water and installation
of water meters shall be made at the city's expense by employees or contractors
of the city.
Inspection charges for connections shall be as provided in section
3-1A-1 of this code.
   F.   Replacement Of Lead Potable Water Service Lines:
      1.   Whenever the owner of any residential property requests the issuance
of a City transfer stamp within eighteen (18) months of the date that the
property was acquired by the owner then prior to the issuance of the transfer
stamp, the owner shall replace any existing lead based potable water service
lines with copper potable water service lines in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the City Code. Failure to replace the lead potable water service
lines with copper potable water service lines shall result in the denial of the
City transfer stamp. The City may waive this requirement if the City determines
in its sole discretion that the owner occupied the residential property as the
owner's primary residence.
      2.   For a residential property not covered by subsection A whenever the
City determines that a residential property is serviced by a lead based potable
water service line the City may elect to replace the entire lead based potable
water service line with a copper potable water service line at the City's
expense provided, however, that if the property owner refuses to grant the City
or its contractors access to the property the City may replace the lead potable
water service line from the water main to the curb cock serving the property
and the owner shall be responsible for the cost of replacing the remainder of
the lead potable water service line no later than the time such property is
sold or transferred to a new owner. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-34-
90, 6-18-1990; Ord. O-04-2022, 3-21-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 3, chapter 9, article B of this code.
7-7A-3: INSTALLATION OF BUFFALO BOXES, STUBS AND CROSSOVERS:
The city shall furnish, at no expense to the residential property owners,
buffalo boxes, stubs and in those cases when the resident is on the opposite
side of the street from the water main, crossovers, in all cases where the home
as completed and occupied or permit to build the same was issued prior to June
1, 1955. In all other cases, the residential property owner will be required to
pay the expense of installation of buffalo boxes, stubs or crossovers. (Ord. O-
23-79, 11-20-1979)
7-7A-4: WATER METERS:
   A.   Meters Required: No water shall be furnished to a building in the city
until such water service is metered.
   B.   Single-Family Dwelling; Pipes Less Than Three-Fourths Inch: All water
meters for single-family dwellings completed and occupied prior to July 1,
1955, or for which a building permit was issued prior to July 1, 1955, and all
commercial or other meters measuring a water supply line of less than three-
fourths inch (3/4") diameter for structures completed or occupied prior to July
1, 1955, or for which a building permit was issued prior to July 1, 1955, shall
be furnished, without expense to the user, by the city and remain the property
of the city. In the case of homes and other structures completed and occupied
July 1, 1955, or thereafter, for which a building permit issued on July 1,
1955, or thereafter, a charge fixed by the city, based on its cost, shall be
made for furnishing of a water meter. The actual cost of installation in all
cases must be met by the user. The city will, at its own expense, perform any
necessary repair work on such water meter due to ordinary wear and tear. Any
repair work necessitated by the negligence or intentional act of any person
other than the city or its employees shall be paid for by the user.
   C.   Pipes Greater Than Three-Fourths Inch: All water meters for commercial
or other users measuring a water supply line of three-fourths inch (3/4")
diameter or greater shall be purchased by the user from the city. Such meters
shall be of the type designated by the city. All repair work necessitated on
any such meter shall be paid for by the users and shall be billed to them by
the city at actual cost. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
      1.   Exemptions: All single-family residences, two-family residences and
condominiums shall be exempt from this subsection C. (Ord. O-29-96, 5-20-1996)
   D.   Additional Meters Or Water Lines:
      1.   In instances where the supply of water through any service pipe on
which there are installed or maintained for fire protection purposes, and
within the premises of the consumer, either standpipes, fire hydrants, pumps,
fire protection tank, sprinkler system or other outlets or devices from which
water may be drawn to extinguish fires, it shall be required that a meter or
meters be installed that will accurately measure all of the water used through
said service pipe. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
      2.   The superintendent of public works may, at his discretion, or in
instances where the fire protection system has been installed by the consumer
after the initial connection to the city's water supply, require the
installation of additional meters, separate meters and separate lines, or one
or more of such lines to be connected only to fire protection devices;
provided, that the superintendent of public works' determination shall be made
to ensure an uninterrupted flow of water will be available to the consumer's
fire protection lines, and that the water consumed through such lines will be
accurately metered. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. 1992 Code; Ord. O-06-94, 3-
7-1994; Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
      3.   All meters or detecting devices installed on any pipeline to be used
for fire protection, including vaults whenever required, shall be constructed,
installed and maintained by and at the expense of the owner or consumer. (Ord.
O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. 1992 Code; Ord. O-06-94, 3-7-1994)
      4.   All commercial users shall reimburse the city for the cost of
installing such meters as the city may designate. All commercial users shall
also reimburse the city for the cost of installing devices to allow the meters
to be read by telephone, radio or other remote method selected by the city. Any
commercial user whose meter cannot be read by the remote method selected by the
city shall be charged seventy five dollars ($75.00) for each manual reading.
(Ord. O-24-98, 6-1-1998)
   E.   Inspection And Repairs: All commercial and industrial water meters,
vaults, lids and sump pumps shall be in good working order and the vaults shall
be accessible for inspection by the Department of Public Works. The Department
of Public Works may annually inspect commercial and industrial water meters,
vaults, lids and sump pumps. If an inspection reveals that repairs must be
made, the user shall have forty five (45) days to make said repairs. If repairs
are not made by the user within the forty five (45) days, the City or its
contractors shall make the necessary repairs. All costs for repair work
performed by the City or its contractors shall be paid for by the user. If the
user fails to pay the bill within twenty (20) days, the user will be subject to
the remedies set forth in subsections
7-7A-5-3B through E of this article. Cost for the annual inspection shall be
fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. (Ord. O-12-93, 5-17-1993; amd. Ord. O-06-94,
3-7-1994; Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
   F.   Annual Calibration: All industrial users, commercial users and
residential buildings with four (4) or more units shall have their water meters
calibrated annually by a certified meter company. All such users shall provide
proof of compliance with this requirement by sending a copy of the certified
report to the City no later than May 1 of every year. If the user fails to
comply with this subsection, the City may have the water meter certified and
charge the user for all costs relating to the certification. If the user fails
to pay the meter certification charge incurred by the City within twenty (20)
days of the date of the invoice, the user will be subject to the penalties set
forth in subsections
7-7A-5-3B through E of this article. (Ord. O-16-2010, 5-3-2010)
   G.   Right Of Inspection: Upon reasonable belief by the Superintendent of
Public Works that a water meter is not operating properly, he shall have a
right to inspect the meter. The Superintendent shall first send a written
notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the user that the water
meter may not be operating properly, and that in ten (10) days the department
or an agent shall come to the premises to inspect the meter. If the inspection
reveals that the meter is not operating properly, then the user and department
shall follow the procedures set forth in subsections E and F of this section.
There shall be no fee for the initial inspection and the final inspection to
determine compliance. However, if additional inspections are necessitated due
to no fault of the City, the department employees or contractors, the user
shall be charged fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional inspection. (Ord.
O-12-93, 5-17-1993; amd. Ord. O-06-94, 3-7-1994; Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff.
12-1-1997)
7-7A-5: RATES AND CHARGES:
7-7A-5-1: RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Water Rates: The cost of water supplied to City customers shall be
billed at the following rates:
      1.   Single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings and condominium
units (“Residential Users”) located within the corporate limits of the City is
as follows.
         a.   Beginning June 1, 2024 - $10.29 per 1,000 gallons.
      2.   Other users:
         a.   Commercial Users located within the corporate limits of the City
whose water usage is in excess of 50,000,000 gallons per year - $9.13 per 1,000
gallons per month;
         b.   Commercial Users located within the corporate limits of the City
whose water usage is below 50,000,000 gallons per year - $14.00 per 1,000
gallons per month;
         c.   Residential Users that are supplied water by the City for
property that is located outside the corporate limits of the City is as
follows:
            (1)   Beginning June 1, 2024 - $13.11 per 1,000 gallons per month.
         d.   Commercial Users that are supplied water by the City for property
that is located outside of the corporate limits of the City - $15.87 per 1,000
gallons per month.
      The minimum bi-monthly charge for Residential Users located within the
corporate limits of the City is $20.58. The minimum monthly charge for
Commercial Users located within the corporate limits of the City is $28.00. The
minimum bi-monthly charge for Residential Users that are supplied water by the
City for property that is located outside the corporate limits of the City is
$26.22. The minimum monthly charge for Commercial Users that are supplied water
for property that is located outside of the corporate limits of the City is
$31.74.
   B.   Water Demand Charge: Any connected user of the waterworks system of the
city who shall have a private source of water or purchases water from a source
other than the city, in whole or in part, and continues to maintain a water
connection with the city system shall be charged a monthly demand charge of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   C.   Water Use During Building Construction: During the construction of a
residence in the city, the person responsible for such construction shall pay
to the city for unmetered water used during such construction a minimum fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00), and during the construction of any other type of
building, other than buildings which are accessory to a residence, the person
responsible for such construction shall pay a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00)
per month for the use of unmetered water during such construction and the
minimum fee for the use of unmetered water in such case shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00). (Ord. O-42-98, 9-21-1998; amd. Ord. O-09-2019, 5-20-2019;
Ord. O-11-2020, 6-15-2020; Ord. O-14-2021, 9-13-2021; Ord. O-10-2022, 8-15-
2022; Ord. O-12-2023, 8-14-2023; Ord. O-13-2024, 6-20-2024)
7-7A-5-2: DEPOSIT:
The city budget director is hereby authorized to institute a system of deposits
on all water accounts of the city which are not directly billed to the owners
of property to which water is being supplied by the city. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-
1979; amd. 1992 Code)
7-7A-5-3: BILLS FOR SERVICE; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Rendition Of Bills: Effective August 1, 1986, and thereafter, water
usage billing shall be done once a month for industrial and commercial
property, and every two (2) months for all other property. (Ord. O-14-86, 7-21-
1986; amd. 1992 Code)
   B.   Payment Of Bills: All bills for water service shall be paid within
twenty (20) days of the date on which the bill is rendered. If payment is not
made within such twenty (20) days, a penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be
added to each such bill. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-34-90, 6-18-
1990; 1992 Code)
   C.   Delinquencies A Lien: In the event charges for services are not paid
within thirty (30) days after rendition of the bill for such services, such
charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and
thereafter, such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for
which such service shall be supplied, and the city clerk is hereby authorized
and directed to file a sworn statement showing such delinquencies in the office
of the recorder of deeds of Cook County, Illinois, and the filing of such
statements shall be deemed notice for the payment of such services. (Ord. O-18-
93, 6-7-1993)
   D.   Water Shutoff:
      1.   In the event charges for water services are not paid within thirty
(30) days after rendition of the bill for services for the use of water, the
city may cause water service to be shut off. Prior to termination of water
service a user shall have the right to a hearing before the city's hearing
officer or his designee at which the user may contest the reason(s) for
termination of service. Written notice shall be sent by U.S. mail to user whose
water service is subject to termination. The notice shall be mailed to the same
address as the water bill. A user shall have the right to request a hearing
within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice. Requests for a hearing
shall be mailed or delivered to the Northlake city clerk, 55 East North Avenue,
Northlake, IL 60164.
      2.   In the event the user is occupying any premises prior to having
received an occupancy permit from the director of health and inspectional
services for any building to be completed after the effective date hereof, the
city may, after having given written notice ten (10) days prior thereto,
withhold the supply of water from such premises.
      3.   Whenever two (2) or more individuals occupying separate and
independent apartments, suites or rooms, stores or separate floors of any
building, or whenever separate and independent buildings occupied by different
individuals are supplied with water by one service pipe connected with the
distributing water main, the city may cut off and withhold the water supply
from such service pipe for failure on the part of one or more of such connected
users that have not paid for water service within sixty (60) days after
rendition of the bill for such services. (Ord. O-07-2012, 2-13-2012)
   E.   Turn On Of Water; Fees:
      1.   No water shall again be supplied to any building, structure or
premises, as aforesaid, or be permitted to be turned on therein or thereafter
until the violation is corrected or until all unpaid water bills have been
satisfied in full, and a permit for the restoration of service has been
obtained from the city. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
The city shall make a charge for the cost of turning on water in all cases
where water has been shut off for nonpayment of bills according to the
following schedule:
Single-family and two-family dwellings:
Single-family and two-family dwellings:
   First shutoff for delinquency              $ 25.00
   Second shutoff for delinquency             50.00
   Third shutoff for delinquency              75.00
   Fourth and subsequent shutoff for delinquen100.00
All other users of water:
   First shutoff for delinquency              50.00
   Second shutoff for delinquency             100.00
   Third shutoff for delinquency              200.00
   Fourth and subsequent shutoff for delinquen500.00
 
In addition, any user of water whose water has been shut off four (4) or more
times may be required to make a deposit of not less than two (2) months'
average billing. (Ord. O-59-90, 10-15-1990)
7-7A-5-4: LIABILITY FOR RATES AND CHARGES:
A copy of this Section
7-7A-5, properly certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, Illinois, and shall be deemed notice to
all owners of real estate of their liability for services supplied by the City
through its waterworks system to any occupant or user of such service. (Ord. O-
23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-34-90, 6-18-1990)
7-7A-5-5: WATER SERVICE RATES FOR AFFECTED POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   The local political subdivisions affected by the North/Railroad Avenue
Commercial Redevelopment Area Tax Increment Allocation Finance Program, shall
pay to the City a water service charge equal to what the City is charged for
water until September 13, 2014, or until the costs of the project are retired.
The reduced rate shall take effect upon the allocation of the increased taxes,
as a result of the project, to retire the project costs.
   B.   The political subdivisions affected by the North/Wolf Tax Increment
Financing, shall pay to the City a water service charge equal to what the City
is charged for water until the year 2014, or until the costs of the project are
retired.
The reduced rate shall take effect upon the allocation of the increased taxes,
as a result of the project, to retire the project costs. (Ord. O-31-91, 9-13-
1991)
   C.   While this Section is designed to reduce the financial burden of
political subdivisions for loss as a result of the North/Railroad and the
North/Wolf Redevelopment Areas. The City, however, still recognizes the fiscal
responsibility of each political subdivision to its tax payers as a taxing
body. As such, any and all said political subdivisions applying for water rate
reductions must qualify for said reductions by maintaining a current tax levy
not to exceed two and one-half percent (2.5%) over the tax levy of the previous
year for that political subdivision.
   D.   Any local political subdivisions applying for reduced water rates shall
submit to the City their annual tax levy for the years 1994 and 1995 no later
than January 1, 1995, and subsequently submit their annual tax levy no later
than January 1 of each succeeding year. (Ord. O-35-94, 12-5-1994)
7-7A-6: USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS:
   A.   Water To Be Metered: No person, except members of a fire department of
the respective fire protection districts in the City and the Water Department,
shall use water directly from any fire hydrant located within the City without
first attaching thereto a meter supplied by the City.
   B.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required; Fee And Deposit:
         a.   Any person desiring to use water directly from a fire hydrant
must first fill out an application for such use and obtain a permit from the
Water Department. Upon the issuance of a permit, a fee as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Code will be charged for the installing and removal of the meter
to the fire hydrant.
         b.   In addition thereto, a deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
will be required from such applicant, which deposit will be refunded when the
water meter is delivered to the City in proper working condition.
         c.   The fee for metered water from a fire hydrant shall be the fee
charged to industrial users within the City. The one hundred dollars ($100.00)
deposit shall stand as security fee for any unpaid water bills.
      2.   Revocation Of Permit: Any permit issued by the City pursuant to the
provisions of this Section can be revoked at any time. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-
1979)
7-7A-7: CONSERVATION MEASURES:
   A.   Lawn Sprinkling; Washing Cars; Filling Swimming Pools:
      1.   Lawn Sprinkling Schedule: There is hereby established a water usage
schedule to commence on May 15 and remain in effect through September 15 of
each year, for the purpose of regulating the outdoor use of water for
sprinkling lawns, gardens and shrubbery as follows:
         a.   Persons owning or controlling property with an odd-numbered
street address may use water for outdoor lawn, garden and shrubbery purposes on
odd-numbered calendar dates;
         b.   Persons owning or controlling property with an even- numbered
street address may engage in such outdoor water use on even-numbered calendar
dates;
         c.   No outdoor water uses, as set forth herein, shall be undertaken
between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
The sodding, seeding or laying of new lawns and the restoration of existing
lawns is to be discouraged from May 15 through September 15. However, residents
may sprinkle such new or restored lawn for a period of not more than two (2)
weeks, in the event that such installation or restoration of a lawn is not
otherwise practicable or in the event of a demonstrated hardship.
      2.   Definitions: For the purposes of this Section, the phrases "outdoor
use of water", "outdoor purposes" and "outdoor water uses" shall mean the use
of water from the City's Municipal potable water system for watering of a lawn,
garden or shrubbery employing the use of a hose, pipe, duct, sprinkler or
sprinkling system but shall not include the use of rain water or recycled water
for any of the above-named purposes or the watering of plants or shrubbery
using watering cans, buckets or pails. (Ord. O-18-90, 4-16-1990)
      3.   Other Water Use Limited: The Superintendent of Public Services is
hereby authorized to further limit or prohibit the use of water from the City
waterworks for the purposes of sprinkling lawns, gardens or shrubbery, for
washing automobiles, for filling residential swimming pools and other similar
purposes whenever he has reason to believe that a shortage of City water may be
forthcoming or that there is an actual shortage of City water. (Ord. O-18-90,
4-16-1990; amd. 1992 Code; Ord. O-06-94, 3-7-1994; Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997,
eff. 12-1-1997)
   B.   Closed System Air Conditioners: Air conditioning units installed in new
construction and in any remodeling shall be "closed system air conditioning"
only. (Ord. O-09-83, 11-11-1983)
7-7A-8: TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM:
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the City to tamper with,
alter or injure any part of the City waterworks or supply system or any meter
or register. (Ord. O-59-90, 10-15-1990)
7-7A-9: WATER SERVICE CHARGE REVIEW:
The adequacy of the water service charge shall be reviewed, not less often than
annually, by certified public accountants for the City in their annual audit
report. The water service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a
change in local capital costs or OM&R costs. (Ord. O-26-2001, 12-17-2001)
7-7A-10: PAYMENT FOR SERVICE; PENALTY FOR DELINQUENCY:
Said rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly or bimonthly
depending on the classification of service for which bills are rendered. The
owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall
be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises and the
service is furnished to the premises by the City only upon the condition that
the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and
severally liable therefor to the City.
Bills shall be sent out by the City on the first day of the month or quarter
succeeding the period for which the service is billed.
All bills are due and payable twenty (20) days after being sent out. A penalty
of ten percent (10%) shall be added to all bills not paid by the twentieth day
after they have been rendered. (Ord. O-26-2001, 12-17-2001)
7-7A-11: DELINQUENT BILLS:
If the charges of such services are not paid within thirty (30) days after the
rendition of the bill for such services, such services shall be discontinued
without further notice and shall not be furnished until all claims are settled.
(Ord. O-26-2001, 12-17-2001)
7-7A-12: LIEN; NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY:
Whenever a bill for service remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after it has
been rendered, the City shall file with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds a
statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of
the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the City
claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the
period covered by the bill.
If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the City
has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his
address be known to the City, whenever such bill remains unpaid for the period
forty five (45) days after it has been rendered.
The failure of the City to record such lien or to mail such notice or the
failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the foregoing section.
(Ord. O-26-2001, 12-17-2001)
7-7A-13: FORECLOSURE OF LIEN:
Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for nonpayment of
the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges,
after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens.
Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the City. The City
Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the
name of the City in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any
property for which the bill has remained unpaid for forty five (45) days in the
case of a monthly bill or one hundred five (105) days in the case of a
quarterly bill after it has been rendered. (Ord. O-26-2001, 12-17-2001)
7-7A-14: REVENUES:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the water system shall be
deposited in the water account of the Water Fund. All such revenues and monies
shall be held by the Finance Director separate and apart from his private funds
and separate and apart from all other funds of the Finance Director not more
than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent
intervals as may from time to time be directed by the Mayor and City Council.
The Finance Director shall receive all such revenues from the water system and
all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same
may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the account of the fund
designated as the "Water Fund of the City of Northlake". Said Finance Director
shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by the
statute of the "Revised Cities and Villages Act", effective January 1942. (Ord.
O-26-2001, 12-17-2001; amd. Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
7-7A-15: ACCOUNTS:
The Finance Director shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep
proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall
be made of all transactions relative to the water system, and at regular annual
intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern
of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the water system. (Ord.
O-26-2001, 12-17-2001; amd. Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report
shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the water facilities,
including a replacement cost. The financial information to be shown in the
audit report shall include the following:
   A.   Flow data showing total gallons received at the water plant for the
current fiscal year.
   B.   Billing data to whom total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
   C.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
   D.   Number of users connected to the system.
   E.   Number of nonmetered users. (Ord. O-26-2001, 12-17-2001)
7-7A-16: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The IEPA, or its authorized representative shall have access to any books,
documents, papers and records of the City which are applicable to the water
system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts
and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of any State
loan. (Ord. O-26-2001, 12-17-2001)
7-7A-17: METHOD FOR COMPUTATION OF RATES AND CHARGES:
The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges shall be made available to a user within twenty one (21) days of
receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used or
in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the City within twenty one
(21) days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the
discrepancies. (Ord. O-26-2001, 12-17-2001)
7-7A-18: WATER SERVICE LINE COST SHARING PROGRAM:
   A.   Cost Sharing Program: Subject to the terms and conditions established
in this section, a property owner who meets the eligibility standards of this
section may apply to the City for reimbursement of a portion of the costs
associated with the replacement of the water service line connecting the
owner's residence to the City's water main.
   B.   Terms And Conditions Of The Program:
      1.   Participants must meet the eligibility standards established by this
section.
      2.   The maximum reimbursement for the installation of the water service
line shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The City shall record a lien
providing for the repayment of the amount of the reimbursement upon the sale of
the owner's residence.
      3.   Only those costs associated with the installation of the water
service line shall be eligible for reimbursement.
      4.   Reimbursements shall be available only if the City has allocated
funds for such purpose in the annual budget. The City shall retain the sole and
exclusive discretion to determine, for each fiscal year, whether and to what
extent the program shall be funded.
      5.   The cost sharing program is a voluntary undertaking of the City.
      6.   The City reserves the right and shall be entitled to terminate or
suspend the cost sharing program at any time for any reason.
      7.   The cost sharing program shall not be construed as an assumption of
responsibility for, or legal liability arising from the design, installation,
operation, maintenance, repair or replacement of any water service line,
including, without limitation, any damages or injuries arising from the failure
or malfunction of the water service line.
      8.   The cost sharing program shall not be construed as a waiver of any
statutory or common law defense or immunity the City may be entitled to raise
in response to any action or claim of liability for damage to property or
injury to person arising from the design, installation, use, operation or
maintenance of any public or private water service line, including, without
limitation, damages or injuries arising from the failure or malfunction of any
such water service line.
   C.   Eligibility Standards: No person shall be eligible for reimbursement
under this cost sharing program unless all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The applicant must be the owner(s) of record of a single- family
home.
      2.   The reimbursement request must be for the replacement of an existing
water service line.
      3.   The property owner, or a qualified contractor acting on the owner's
behalf, shall procure all necessary permits to replace the water service line.
All work shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Code, including
all provisions relative to inspections, contractor bonds and licenses. The
property owner, or the owner's contractor, shall be responsible for scheduling
all necessary inspections. No reimbursement will be made for work that does not
pass all required inspections.
      4.   The application for reimbursement shall be submitted with the permit
application for the replacement of an existing water service line.
      5.   The application for reimbursement shall include a waiver, signed by
the owner of record, waiving any and all claims against the City for damage to
property or injuries to persons of any kind arising from the installation,
operation, maintenance or repair of the water service line, including, without
limitation, the failure or malfunction of the water service line. The statement
of the waiver shall be prescribed by the City.
      6.   No reimbursement shall be made until the work has been completed and
has passed the final inspection.
      7.   No reimbursement shall be made unless the property owner provides
the City with evidence, in the form of a signed and sworn contractor's
statement, certifying that the contractor has been paid in full for the
completed work by the property owner and the property owner has executed the
notice and acknowledgment of lien prescribed by the City requiring the owner to
repay the money advanced by the City to the owner pursuant to this section.
(Ord. O-08-2016, 4-4-2016)
7-7A-19: GROUNDWATER AS POTABLE WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED:
   A.   Use of groundwater as a potable water supply prohibited. The use, or
attempted use of, groundwater from within the corporate limits of the City of
Northlake, as a potable water supply, by the installation of drilling of wells
or by any other method is hereby prohibited. This prohibition expressly
includes the City of Northlake.
   B.   Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance shall
be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 for each violation.
   C.   Definitions.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, limited
liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agents or assigns. (Ord. O-24-2005, 10-3-2005)
ARTICLE B. SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
7-7B-1: Rules And Definitions
7-7B-2: Use Of Public Sewers Required
7-7B-3: Private Sewage Disposal
7-7B-3-1: Private Sewage Disposal Code
7-7B-3-2: Additional Private Sewage Disposal Regulations
7-7B-4: Building Sewers And Connections
7-7B-5: Use Restrictions
7-7B-5-1: Discharge Of Effluent
7-7B-5-2: Prohibited Substances
7-7B-5-3: Materials Under Special Review
7-7B-5-4: Interceptors
7-7B-5-5: Preliminary Treatment
7-7B-5-6: Measurements, Tests And Analyses
7-7B-5-7: Special Agreements
7-7B-6: Rates And Charges
7-7B-6-1: Basis For Wastewater Service Charges; Computation
7-7B-6-2: Measurement Of Flow
7-7B-6-3: Rates And Charges Established
7-7B-6-4: Review And Revision Of Charges; Notice
7-7B-6-5: Bills For Service; Delinquencies
7-7B-6-6: Disposition Of Revenues
7-7B-6-7: Books And Records; Audit
7-7B-6-8: Effective Date Of Rates And Charges
7-7B-6-9: Appeals
7-7B-6-10: Penalty
7-7B-7: Protection From Damage
7-7B-8: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
7-7B-9: Violations And Penalties
7-7B-10: Sanitary Sewer System Cost Sharing Program
7-7B-1: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
"Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible. Unless the context specifically
indicates otherwise, the meanings of the terms used in this article shall be as
follows:
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
Administrator: The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Federal Act: The Federal Clean Water Act (33 USC 466 et seq.) as amended, (Pub.
L. 95-217).
Federal Grant: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by title II grants for
construction of treatment works, of the Act and implementing regulations.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
Approving Authority: The Director of Public Services.
City: The City of Northlake.
This Code: The Code of the City of Northlake.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
Administrator or, where appropriated by the Director, after enactment of the
Federal Clean Water Act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to
section 402 of the Federal Act.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, Municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
SEWER TYPES AND APPURTENANCES:
Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater,
storm, surface and ground water drainage.
Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
Lift Station: An apparatus or pump used for pumping wastewater or sewage from a
lower to higher elevation, particularly where the elevation of the sources is
not sufficient for gravity flow.
Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the City.
It shall also include sewers within or outside the City boundaries that serve
one or more persons that ultimately discharge into the City sanitary (or
combined) sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed
with City funds.
Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface and ground water or polluted
industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage but
excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
Stormwater Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into the
sewers.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
Director: The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
State Act: The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
State Grant: The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution
Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the
State of Illinois.
TREATMENT:
Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with "waste treatment plant" or "pollution control plant".
TYPES OF CHARGES:
Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer
system.
Capital Improvement Charge: A charge levied on users to improve, extend or
reconstruct the sewage treatment works.
Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of
interest, principal and coverage of outstanding loan, bond, etc.
Local Capital Cost Charge: Charges for costs, other than the operation,
maintenance and replacement costs, i.e., debt service and capital improvement
costs.
Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories
or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment
works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were
designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
Sewerage Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received
in the operation of the sewerage system.
Surcharge: The assessment, in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge, which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in this article.
Useful Life: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated.
User Charge: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement.
Wastewater Service Charge: The charge, per quarter or month, levied on all
users of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as
outlined in this article and shall consist of the total or the basic user
charge, the local capital cost and a surcharge, if applicable.
USER TYPES:
Commercial User: Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments
or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services.
Control Manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are
discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the City representative
to sample and/or measure discharges.
Industrial Users: Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing activities
involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of substance
into products.
Institutional/Governmental User: Includes schools, churches, penal institutions
and users associated with Federal, State and local governments.
Residential User: All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments
and permanent multi-family dwellings.
User Class: The type of user, "residential", "institutional/governmental",
"commercial" or "industrial" as defined herein.
WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter.
Effluent Criteria: Are defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
Floatable Oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated, and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
Industrial Waste: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted
to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business
establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any
natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
Major Contributing Industry: An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment
works that: a) has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per
average workday; or b) has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow
carried by the Municipal system receiving the waste; or c) has in its waste, a
toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section
307(a) of the Federal Act; or d) is found by the permit issuing authority, in
connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned
treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly
or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works
or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand milliliters
(1000 mL) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used, commonly, parts per
million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of
water and wastewater analysis.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division of
Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream.
Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in any
dimension.
Sewage: Used interchangeably with "wastewater".
Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
Suspended Solids (SS): Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA Division of
Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
Unpolluted Water: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria
in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality
standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and
wastewater treatment facilities provided.
Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint, of course, it
may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
Water Quality Standards: Are defined in the water pollution regulations of
Illinois.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
WATERCOURSE AND CONNECTIONS:
Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface or ground water.
Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently. (Ord. O-49-90, 8-20-1990; amd. Ord. O-06-94, 3-7-1994; Ord. O-
23-2013, 11-18-2013)
7-7B-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this Article.
   C.   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   D.   The owner of all the houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the City
and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the City is hereby
required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this Article within ninety (90) days after date of
official notice to do so; provided, that public sewer is within two hundred
feet (200') of property line. (Ord. O-34-90, 6-18-90)
7-7B-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
7-7B-3-1: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file
in the office of the City Clerk being marked and designated as "The BOCA
National Private Sewage Disposal Code, Second Edition, 1990", as published by
the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., is hereby
adopted as the Private Sewage Disposal Code of the City for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National
Private Sewage Disposal Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this Section, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B hereof or as may be
amended by other provisions of this Article.
There is hereby adopted each and every revision of said Code hereinafter made,
said Code being revised annually by BOCA International, Inc., and a new and
revised edition of the Code being published every three (3) years. Said revised
Code and all supplements thereto, when adopted by BOCA International Inc.,
shall supersede all other previous editions, supplements and printings in
conflict therewith. The provisions of such Codes shall govern all matters
covered therein to the extent that the same are not in conflict with any
provisions of this City Code or other ordinances of the City.
   B.   Amendments to Code: The following sections are hereby revised as
follows:
Section PS-100.1. City of Northlake
Section PS-104.1. July 1, 1990
Section PS-114.2. As may be adopted from time to time by the City Council
Section PS-117.4. Misdemeanor,$500.00, 30 days
Section PS-118.2. $50.00; $500.00
Section PS-404.2.5. July 1, 1990; July 1, 1991; July 1, 1992
Section PS-404.2.6. July 1, 1990; July 1, 1991
(Ord. O-33-90, 6-18-90)
7-7B-3-2: ADDITIONAL PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Private System Permitted: Where a public sanitary (or combined) sewer
is not available under the provisions of subsection
 7-7B-2D of this Article, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this Section
7-7B-3-2. Such a system shall be approved by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District of Greater Chicago (MWRD), Cook County Health Department or other
regulatory agency as required.
   B.   Permit Requirements: Before commencement of construction of a private
sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the regulatory
agency. The applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other
information as deemed necessary by the regulatory agency. All permit and
inspection fees shall be paid to the regulatory agency at the time the
application is filed.
   C.   Inspections: A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not
become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
regulatory agency. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
regulatory agency when the work is ready for final inspection and before any
underground portions are covered.
   D.   Construction Specifications: The type, capacities, location and layout
of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of
the State of Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code 1  and
with the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   E.   Connection to Public Sewer:
      1.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection
7-7B-2D of this Article, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this Article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned per the requirements of
the regulatory agency.
      2.   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within sixty (60) days, and the private sewage disposal
system shall be cleaned of sludge and abandoned per the requirements of the
regulatory agency.
   F.   Responsibility of Owner: The owner shall operate and maintain the
private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no
expense to the City.
   G.   Provisions Nonlimiting: No statement contained in this Section shall be
construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by
any regulatory agency. (Ord. O-34-90, 6-18-90)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. ch. 111/2, ¶116.301 et seq.
7-7B-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago (MWRD) and the City.
      2.   Classification of Permits: There shall be two (2) classes of
building sewer permits:
         a.   For residential wastewater service, and
         b.   For commercial or industrial wastewater service. (Ord. O-34-90,
6-18-90)
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Metropolitan Water
Reclamation District. For a residential sewer permit, there shall be a fee of
four hundred dollars ($400.00) payable to the City at the time the application
is filed. For a commercial or industrial sewer permit, there shall be a fee of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) payable to the City at the time the
application is filed. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization,
must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics and type of activity. All other permit and inspection fees must
be paid by the applicant to the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District and the
City, as applicable. (Ord. O-34-90, 6-18-90; 1992 Code)
      3.   Restrictions on Issuance of Permit: A building sewer permit will
only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be
demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump
stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity
to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   B.   Separate Sewer Required: A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building; except, that where one building stands at
the rear of another or an interior lot, and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard
or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building, and the whole considered as one building sewer.
   C.   Use of Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test
by the City, to meet all requirements of this Article.
   D.   Construction Specifications:
      1.   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
Building and Plumbing Codes 1  or other applicable rules and regulations of the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District. In the absence of code provisions or
in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois shall apply.
      2.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by such a means
which is approved in accordance with subsection G1 of this Section.
   E.   Connections to Public Sewers:
      1.   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District and the City when the building sewer is
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall
be made under the supervision of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District
and the City or a representative.
      2.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes 2  or other
applicable rules and regulations of the City or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All such
connections shall be made gas-tight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Metropolitan Water
Reclamation District and the City.
   F.   Excavations: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City.
   G.   Discharges into System:
      1.   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with Federal Standards promulgated pursuant to
the Federal Act and more stringent State and local standards.
      2.   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground
water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   H.   Liability of Owner: All costs and expense incident to the installation
and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. (Ord. O-34-
90, 6-18-90)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 8, Chapter 1, Articles A and B of this Code.
2 1. See Title 8, Chapter 1, Articles A and B of this Code.
7-7B-5: USE RESTRICTIONS:
7-7B-5-1: DISCHARGE OF EFFLUENT:
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water, surface
water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to
a natural outlet approved by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on
approval of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, to a storm sewer,
combined sewer or natural outlet. (Ord. O-34-90, 6-18-90)
7-7B-5-2: PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   A.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
   B.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
   C.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
   D.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
7-7B-5-3: MATERIALS UNDER SPECIAL REVIEW:
   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, that such wastes can
harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The
substances prohibited are:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees (150°) Fahrenheit, (65°C).
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two degrees and one hundred fifty degrees (32° - 150°)
Fahrenheit (0°C - 65°C).
      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District and the City.
      4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or
similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District for such materials.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District as necessary after
treatment of the composite sewage to meet the requirements of the State,
Federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving waters.
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Metropolitan Water
Reclamation District in compliance with applicable State or Federal
regulations.
      8.   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5.
      9.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time except as permitted by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District
in compliance with applicable State and Federal regulations.
      10.   No waste to any public sewer system shall contain more than ten
(10) mg/l total cyanide; provided any sample tested shall not release more than
two (2) mg/l of cyanide when tested at a pH of 4.5 and at a temperature of
sixty six degrees (66°) Centigrade (150°F) for a period of thirty (30) minutes.
Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the Metropolitan Water
Reclamation District of Greater Chicago from imposing more stringent limits on
cyanide discharges.
      11.   Materials which exert or cause:
         a.   Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
         b.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         c.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works;
         d.   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of waste constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
      12.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
   B.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged
to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated herein and/or which are in violation of the
standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, June 26, 1978, and any
amendments thereto, and which, in the judgment of the Metropolitan Water
Reclamation District, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of Section
7-7B-6 of this Article. If the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District permits
the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of
the plants and equipment shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable
codes, ordinances and laws. (Ord. O-34-90, 6-18-90)
7-7B-5-4: INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District and City, they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except, that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District and the City, and shall be located as
to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Ord. O-34-90,
6-18-90)
7-7B-5-5: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT:
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense. (Ord. O-34-90, 6-18-90)
7-7B-5-6: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
   A.   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install
a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District and City. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his own expense, and shall be maintained by him so as
to be safe and accessible at all times.
   B.   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this Article and any special
conditions for discharge established by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District and the City or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
discharge.
The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the
owner shall be as stipulated by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District,
but no less than once per year, the industry must supply a complete analysis of
the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that the Federal, State
and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District at such times and in such a manner as prescribed by the Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses and reporting required by the Metropolitan Water
Reclamation District. At such times as deemed necessary, the Metropolitan Water
Reclamation District and the City reserve the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
   C.   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water
and wastes to which reference is made in this Article shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of
Laboratory Methods and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or
upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The
particular analysis involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls,
where pH's are determined from periodic grab samples. (Ord. O-34-90, 6-18-90)
7-7B-5-7: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this Section shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
Division or the City and any industrial concern, whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Metropolitan Water
Reclamation Division or City for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in
accordance with Section
7-7B-6 of this Article, by the industrial concern; provided such payments are
in accordance with Federal and State guidelines for user charge system. (Ord.
O-34-90, 6-18-90)
7-7B-6: RATES AND CHARGES:
7-7B-6-1: BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES; COMPUTATION:
The sanitary sewer charge for the use of and for service supplied by the
wastewater facilities of the City shall consist of a basic user charge, a debt
service charge, a capital improvement charge and applicable surcharges.
   A.   Basic User Charge: The basic user charge is levied on all users to
recover the operation, maintenance and replacement (O, M & R) costs and shall
be based on water usage as recorded by water meters or sewage meters. The basic
user charge shall be computed as follows:
      1.   Estimate the annual sanitary sewer volume.
      2.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the sewer system, including a replacement fund for the year, for all
works categories (O, M & R).
      3.   Proportion the estimated O, M & R costs to each user class by
volume.
      4.   Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons for normal domestic
strength sewage.
   B.   Debt Service Charge: The debt service charge is computed by
apportioning the annual debt service as a charge per one thousand (1,000)
gallons.
   C.   Capital Improvement Charge: The capital improvement charge is levied on
users to provide for capital improvements, extensions or reconstruction of the
sewage treatment works. The capital improvement charge is computed by
apportioning the annual amount to be accrued as a charge per one thousand
(1,000) gallons.
   D.   Computation of Sanitary Sewer Service Charge: The sanitary sewer
service charge shall be computed by the following formula:
CW = CC + CD + CM + (Vu-X)CU
Where CW = Amount of sanitary sewer service charge ($) per billing period.
CC = Capital improvement charge
CD = Debt service charge
CM = Minimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement
Vu = Wastewater volume for the billing period.
X = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge
CU = Basic user charge for operation, maintenance and replacement.
(Ord. O-49-90, 8-20-90)
7-7B-6-2: MEASUREMENT OF FLOW:
The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges shall
be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increment of tons of
gallons.
   A.   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by
the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago (MWRDGC) for the
purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources.
   B.   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by
the MWRDGC or the City, as applicable, if these volumes cannot otherwise be
determined from metered water consumption records.
   C.   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled,
without the consent of the MWRDGC. (Ord. O-49-90, 8-20-1990)
7-7B-6-3: RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Basic User Charge: There is hereby established a basic monthly user
charge of forty four cents ($0.44) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of metered
water consumption to be applied to all users to recover OM&R costs.
   B.   Capital Improvement Charge: There is hereby established a monthly
capital improvement charge of eleven cents ($0.11) per one thousand (1,000)
gallons to each user of the sanitary sewer system. (Ord. O-33-2003, 12-15-2003)
   C.   Sanitary Sewer Service Charges:
      1.   Residential Users: A charge of four dollars thirty cents ($4.30) per
month shall be applied to all residential users.
      2.   Nonresidential Users: A charge of seventy three cents ($0.73) per
one thousand (1,000) gallons.
      3.   Nonresidential Users Over Fifty Million Gallons: A charge of forty
three cents ($0.43) per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
   D.   Nonmetered Users: All nonmetered residential users of the wastewater
facilities shall pay a flat rate charge of four dollars thirty cents ($4.30)
per month. (Ord. O-20-2011, 11-7-2011)
In the event use of the sanitary sewer services is determined by the City to be
in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) gallons per month, the City may require
such flat rate user to install metering devices on the water supply and sewer
main to measure the amount of service supplied. (Ord. O-33-2003, 12-15-2003)
   E.   Lift Station: In addition to all charges, any residential user serviced
by a lift station shall pay an additional monthly charge of twenty two dollars
($22.00). (Ord. O-23-2013, 11-18-2013)
7-7B-6-4: REVIEW AND REVISION OF CHARGES; NOTICE:
The adequacy of the sanitary sewer service charge shall be reviewed, not less
often than annually, by certified public accountants for the City in the annual
audit report. The sanitary sewer service charge shall be revised periodically
to reflect a change in local capital costs or OM&R costs.
The users of the sanitary sewer services will be notified annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to the sanitary sewer operation, maintenance and
replacement. (Ord. O-49-90, 8-20-1990)
7-7B-6-5: BILLS FOR SERVICE; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Rendering Bills: Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the City
Finance Department on the first day of the month succeeding the period for
which the service is billed.
   B.   Payment Of Bills; Liability For Service: The rates or charges for
services shall be payable monthly or bimonthly depending on the classifications
of service for which bills are rendered. The owner of the premises, the
occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally
liable to pay for the service to such premises, and the service is furnished to
the premises by the City only upon the condition that the owner of the
premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally liable
therefor to the City.
   C.   Delinquencies:
      1.   Discontinuance Of Service: If the charges for such services are not
paid within thirty (30) days after rendition of the bill for such services,
such services shall be discontinued without further notice and shall not be
reinstated until all claims are settled.
      2.   Liens; Notice And Foreclosure:
         a.   Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for sixty (60)
days after it has been rendered, the City Clerk is hereby authorized and
directed to file with the County Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim.
This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the
amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the City claims a lien for this
amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises, and the City
Finance Department has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of
the premises, if his address be known, by the Finance Department whenever such
bill remains unpaid for the period forty five (45) days after it has been
rendered.
The failure of the City Clerk to record such lien or to mail such notice or the
failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned herein.
         b.   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay
the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of the
City. The City Prosecutor is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings in the name of the City in any court having jurisdiction over such
matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid forty five
(45) days after it has been rendered. (Ord. O-49-90, 8-20-1990; amd. Ord. O-18-
93, 6-7-1993)
   D.   Final Payment Upon Transfer Of Property:
      1.   Receipt Of Payment Required: No single-family residence, multiple-
family residence, apartment, business, commercial or industrial structure of
building (hereinafter referred to as "property") shall be sold, leased,
conveyed, assigned or transferred in any way, unless the owner, seller, lessor,
conveyor, assignor or transferor (hereinafter referred to as "transferor")
obtains, from the City Finance Department, a stamped receipt of payment based
upon a final water meter reading (hereinafter referred to as "receipt"). The
receipt shall be presented to the Department of Public Services prior to
issuance of a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of
compliance.
      2.   Application For Final Meter Reading: A transferor shall apply to the
City for a final water meter reading no later than seventy two (72) hours
before the date of closing or transfer. (Ord. O-37-95, 8-7-1995)
7-7B-6-6: DISPOSITION OF REVENUES:
All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall
be deposited in the sewerage account of the Sewerage Fund. The Finance Director
shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system and all other funds
and moneys incident to the operation of such system as may be delivered to him
and deposit the same in the account of the fund designated as the "Sewerage
Fund of the City". The Finance Director shall administer such fund in every
respect in the manner provided by statute of the "Revised Cities and Villages
Act", effective January 1942 1 .
All such revenues and moneys shall be held by the Finance Director separate and
apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the
City, and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered
to the Finance Director not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same,
or at such time be directed by the Mayor and City Council. (Ord. O-49-90, 8-20-
1990; amd. Ord. O-24-2018, 11-19-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS.
7-7B-6-7: BOOKS AND RECORDS; AUDIT:
   A.   Accounts Kept; Annual Audit: The City Finance Department shall
establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and
accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all
transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals,
he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the
books to show the receipts and disbursements of the sewerage system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report
shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system do in fact meet these regulations.
In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall
include the following:
      1.   Flow date showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for
the current fiscal year.
      2.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
      3.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      4.   Number of users connected to the systems.
      5.   Number of nonmetered users.
A list of users discharging nondomestic and industrial wastes and volume of
waste discharged.
   B.   Access To Records: The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its
authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and
records of the City which are applicable to the City system of user charges for
the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof
to insure compliance with the terms of special and general conditions to any
State grant. (Ord. O-49-90, 8-20-1990)
7-7B-6-8: EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES AND CHARGES:
The rates and service charges established for user charges in this section
7-7B-6 shall be effective as of the next fiscal year beginning May 1, 1991, and
on bills to be rendered for the next succeeding month being June 1991 for
monthly users and on bills to be rendered for the next succeeding bi-monthly
period June 1991 for bi-monthly users. (Ord. O-49-90, 8-20-1990)
7-7B-6-9: APPEALS:
The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges in this section
7-7B-6 shall be made available for a user within ten (10) days of receipt of a
written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used in the
computations thereof shall be remedied by the Finance Director within thirty
(30) days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the
discrepancies. (Ord. O-08-2019, 5-6-2019)
7-7B-6-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this section
7-7B-6 shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. O-49-90, 8-20-1990)
7-7B-7: PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. O-34-90,
6-18-1990)
7-7B-8: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   The Metropolitan Water Reclamation District or the City and other duly
authorized employees thereof, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this article. The Metropolitan Water Reclamation District or
the City or their representatives shall have the authority to inquire into any
processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or
other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste
treatment. (Ord. O-34-90, 6-18-1990; amd. 1992 Code)
   B.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection A of this section, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District or
City or duly authorized employees thereof, the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall observe
all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the
company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the aforementioned
employees and shall indemnify the company against liability claims and demands
for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing
out of the gauging and sampling operating, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain conditions as required in
subsection
7-7B-5-6B of this article.
   C.   The Metropolitan Water Reclamation Division and City and other duly
authorized employees thereof, bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds
a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. O-
34-90, 6-18-1990)
7-7B-9: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Notice Of Violation; Permit Revocations: Unless otherwise provided, any
person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section
7-7B-7 of this article shall be served by the City with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The City may revoke
any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of
this article.
   B.   Penalties: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided for in subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day in which any
such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
   C.   Liability Of Violator: Any person violating any of the provisions of
this article shall become liable to the City by reasons of such violation.
(Ord. O-34-90, 6-18-1990; amd. 1992 Code)
7-7B-10: SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM COST SHARING PROGRAM:
   A.   Cost Sharing Program: Subject to the terms and conditions established
in this section, a property owner of a single family detached residence who
meets the eligibility standards of this section may apply to the City for
reimbursement of a portion of the costs associated with the repair or
replacement of the sanitary sewer system in the owner's residence.
   B.   Terms And Conditions Of The Program:
      1.   Participants must meet the eligibility standards established by this
section.
      2.   The maximum reimbursement for the repair or replacement of the
sanitary sewer system is fifty percent (50%) of the cost of repairs or
replacement provided that the total reimbursement shall not exceed five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The City shall record a lien providing for the
repayment of the amount of the reimbursement upon the sale of the owner's
residence.
      3.   Only those costs associated with the repair or replacement of the
sanitary sewer system shall be eligible for reimbursement.
      4.   Reimbursements shall be available only if the City has allocated
funds for such purpose in the annual budget. The City shall retain the sole and
exclusive discretion to determine, for each fiscal year, whether and to what
extent the program shall be funded.
      5.   The Cost Sharing Program is a voluntary undertaking of the City.
      6.   The City reserves the right and shall be entitled to terminate or
suspend the Cost Sharing Program at any time for any reason.
      7.   The Cost Sharing Program shall not be construed as an assumption of
responsibility for, or legal liability arising from the design, installation,
operation, maintenance, repair or replacement of any sanitary sewer system,
including without limitation, any damages or injuries arising from the failure
or malfunction of the sanitary sewer system.
      8.   The Cost Sharing Program shall not be construed as a waiver of any
statutory or common law defense or immunity the City may be entitled to raise
in response to any action or claim of liability for damage to property or
injury to person arising from the design, installation, use, operation or
maintenance of any public or private sanitary sewer system, including without
limitation, damages or injuries arising from the failure or malfunction of any
such sanitary sewer system.
   C.   Eligibility Standards: No person shall be eligible for reimbursement
under this Cost Sharing Program unless all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The applicant must be the owner(s) of record of a single- family
residence and must occupy the residence as their primary abode. One of the
owners must be at least sixty two (62) years old at the time the application
for reimbursement is filed.
      2.   The reimbursement request must be for the repair or replacement of
an existing sanitary sewer system.
      3.   The property owner, or a qualified contractor acting on the owner's
behalf, shall procure all necessary permits to repair or replace the existing
sanitary sewer system. All work shall comply with all applicable provisions of
this Code, including all provisions relative to inspections, contractor bonds
and licenses. The property owner, or the owner's contractor, shall be
responsible for scheduling all necessary inspections. No reimbursement will be
made for work that does not pass all required inspections.
      4.   The application for reimbursement shall be submitted with the permit
application for the replacement of an existing sanitary sewer system.
      5.   The application for reimbursement shall include a waiver, signed by
the owner of record, waiving any and all claims against the City for damage to
property or injuries to persons of any kind arising from the installation,
operation, maintenance, replacement or repair of the sanitary sewer system,
including without limitation, the failure or malfunction of the sanitary sewer
system. The statement of the waiver shall be prescribed by the City.
      6.   No reimbursement shall be made until the work has been completed and
has passed the final inspection.
      7.   No reimbursement shall be made unless the property owner provides
the City with evidence, in the form of a signed and sworn contractor's
statement, certifying that the contractor has been paid in full for the
completed work by the property owner and the property owner has executed the
notice and acknowledgement of lien prescribed by the City requiring the owner
to repay the money advanced by the City to the owner pursuant to this section.
(Ord. O-06-2018, 4-2-2018)
CHAPTER 8
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
SECTION:
7-8-1: Develop Policies, Rules And Regulations
7-8-2: Centerpoint Park
7-8-3: Prohibited Activities
7-8-4: Hours
7-8-5: Dog Park
7-8-6: Penalty
7-8-1: DEVELOP POLICIES, RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   The chief of police and director of public works are appointed to
develop policies and make rules and regulations from time to time to police and
maintain the parks and recreational areas, with the approval of the public
safety committee.
   B.   All policies developed and rules and regulations adopted shall be
reduced to writing and copies shall be kept in city hall. (Ord. O-09-92, 5-18-
1992; amd. 1992 Code)
7-8-2: CENTERPOINT PARK:
   A.   Zones Delineated: In order to promote the maximum orderly use of
Centerpoint Park, the park is hereby divided into three (3) separate zones as
delineated on a map maintained in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. O-06-
2001, 2-5-2001)
   B.   Group Permit Required: A permit is required for any group or
organization of twenty (20) or more persons congregating in Centerpoint Park
for a common purpose. A permit may not be issued to any group or organization
for the use of more than one zone at a time. (Ord. O-14-2012, 4-2-2012)
   C.   Permits, Fewer Than Fifty People: Permit applications for fifty (50) or
fewer persons must be filed with the city clerk not less than three (3)
business days before the use.
   D.   Permits, More Than Fifty People: Permit applications for more than
fifty (50) persons must be filed with the city clerk not less than ten (10)
business days before the use.
   E.   Deposits And Fees: The following deposits and fees shall apply to all
permits issued for Centerpoint Park:
1. Refundable deposit:
   a. 20–50 people   $10.00
   b. 51–100 people  20.00
2. Resident fee:
   a. 20–50 people   10.00
   b. 51–100 people  20.00
3. Nonresident fee:
   a. 20–50 people   25.00
   b. 51–100 people  50.00
 
   F.   Fee Exemptions And Reductions: All Northlake youth and civic
organizations are exempt from the fee requirements imposed hereby. Adult sports
clubs are also exempt provided twenty five percent (25%) of the team members
are residents of Northlake.
   G.   Activity Or Admission Fees Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for anyone
to charge any admission fee, activity fee or any similar fee or charge in
connection with any event at Centerpoint Park. (Ord. O-06-2001, 2-5-2001)
   H.   Portable Toilets: Any person or organization applying for a group
permit shall be required to provide one portable toilet for every twenty five
(25) people expected to be in attendance at the event for which the group
permit is requested. (Ord. O-14-2012, 4-2-2012)
7-8-3: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
With respect to any park property owned by the city, no person shall:
   A.   Deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove or wilfully
mark any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving or paving
material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances
thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments,
stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment,
facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal;
   B.   Dig, or remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down
timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment,
blasting, or other means or agency;
   C.   Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether
permanent or temporary in character, including tents, or run or string any
public service utility into, upon, or across any park property;
   D.   Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure
the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant;
   E.   Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains,
railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or customarily used
for such purposes;
   F.   Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw
missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall he remove or have in his
possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest, or young of any
reptile, bird or animal, except fishing shall be permitted in designated areas;
   G.   Give or offer, or attempt to give to any animal or bird any tobacco,
alcohol or other known noxious substances;
   H.   Bring within, have possession or control of, sell or give away, or
drink any alcoholic beverages as defined in the Illinois liquor control act of
1934 at any time in any said park except in accordance with a liquor license
issued by the liquor control commissioner;
   I.   Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any
park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters,
any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in
the pollution of said waters;
   J.   Bring in, dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes,
paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash.
No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any
park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the
proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so
provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere;
   K.   Camp or sleep overnight;
   L.   Gamble or participate in any game of chance for money or other valuable
thing;
   M.   Solicit alms or otherwise beg;
   N.   Bring, or have in his possession, or set off or otherwise cause to
explode or discharge or burn, any fireworks or explosives of inflammable
material, or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or
highway adjacent thereto;
   O.   Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas as may be
designated for fires. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted
matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable
material, within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or
contiguous thereto. The person building a fire shall care and supervise its
burning, and shall completely extinguish the fire prior to leaving that
location;
   P.   Enter any area where persons are prohibited as indicated by sign or
notice, or enter or attempt to enter any building or park area which is closed
to the public;
   Q.   Call or hold any meeting, exhibition or entertainment involving fifty
(50) or more people except pursuant to a written permit issued pursuant to
section
7-8-2 of this chapter;
   R.   Expose or offer for sale any article or thing for sale or hire;
   S.   Announce, advertise, or call the public attention in any way to any
article or service for sale or hire;
   T.   Drive any vehicle, including go-carts, minibikes, or other motorized
vehicles, on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas;
   U.   Operate any power generator or sound amplification system. (Ord. O-14-
2012, 4-2-2012)
7-8-4: HOURS:
Parks shall be open from sunrise to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. except for lighted
parks which shall be open until ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Ord. O-14-2012, 4-2-
2012)
7-8-5: DOG PARK:
   A.   For purposes of this section, a "dog park" means an enclosed area where
dogs are permitted to be off a leash.
   B.   Any dog park created by the city shall be operated in accordance with
regulation VIII of part II of the Cook County animal and rabies control
ordinance as amended from time to time.
   C.   No dog shall be allowed in the dog park without a permit issued by the
city. The permit fee shall be as follows:
      1.   Residents: Ten dollars ($10.00) for the first dog, five dollars
($5.00) for each additional dog up to a maximum of three (3) dogs per
household.
      2.   Nonresidents: Fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first dog, ten dollars
($10.00) for each additional dog up to a maximum of three (3) dogs per
household.
All permits are nonrefundable and nontransferable and shall expire on April 30
of each year.
   D.   The dog park shall be operated in accordance with the rules which are
attached as exhibit A to ordinance O-09-2009, and incorporated herein by
reference. Any person using the dog park shall be subject to said rules.
   E.   Any person violating any condition of this section shall be subject to
a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. (Ord. O-09-2006, 3-20-2006; amd. Ord. O-14-2012,
4-2-2012)
7-8-6: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter and the rules and
regulations adopted hereunder shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. O-14-
2012, 4-2-2012)
CHAPTER 9
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
SECTION:
7-9-1: Definitions
7-9-2: Registration Of Telecommunications Providers
7-9-3: Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
7-9-4: Collection, Enforcement, And Administration
7-9-5: Compliance With Other Laws
7-9-6: Existing Franchises And Licenses
7-9-7: Penalties
7-9-8: Enforcement
7-9-9: Severability
7-9-10: Conflict
7-9-11: Waiver And Fee Implementation
7-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the City, and
for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether paid
in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of every
kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the
cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or
service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the
amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the City, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within the
City, and charges for that portion of the interstate-interoffice channel
provided within the City. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
   A.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made under:
1) the fee imposed by this Section, 2) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, 3)
amounts collected under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-17, 4) the tax
imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, 5) 911 surcharges, or 6) the
tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
   B.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the City;
   C.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data
or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information
intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not
limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment,
tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of
computers under a time-sharing agreement;
   D.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   E.   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the
Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the City;
   F.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
   G.   Bad debts (bad debt means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable Federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   H.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications
devices; or
   I.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
to the City.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any Municipal street, alley, water or public right of way
dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements
wherein the City has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the
location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities. "Public
right of way" shall not include any real or personal City property that is not
specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include City
buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are
situated in the public right of way.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this State.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to- ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the
customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include "wireless
telecommunications" as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the City
through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: a) Any telecommunications retailer; and b) any
person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates
or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or designed to be
used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail
as defined in this Section. The City may, in its discretion, upon application,
authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer not
maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction of
the City, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the
fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee
upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the City.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)
(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services and paging services. (Ord. O-44-97, 10-20-1997)
7-9-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS:
   A.   Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this Chapter shall
register with the City within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this
Chapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a
form to be provided by the City, provided, however, that any telecommunications
retailer that has filed a return pursuant to subsection
7-9-4C of this Chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with
this Section.
   B.   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the City
pursuant to subsection A of this Section has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by subsection
7-9-4C of this Chapter, as the case may be, to the City within thirty (30) days
from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by
the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return
on file with the City. (Ord. O-44-97, 10-20-1997)
7-9-3: MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
   A.   A City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent (1%)
of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service
addresses within the City for telecommunications originating or received in the
City.
   B.   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this Chapter, the City infrastructure maintenance fee authorized
hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all public
rights of way within the City by telecommunications retailers. Imposition of
the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this Chapter does not,
however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or imposition of any
fees otherwise authorized by law.
   C.   The City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized
by this Section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as set forth in
Section
7-9-4 of this Chapter. (Ord. O-44-97, 10-20-1997)
7-9-4: COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the City infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
   B.   Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, the infrastructure
maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the
City not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which
a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent (2%)
of the City infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself
for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
   C.   Remittance of the Municipal infrastructure fee to the City shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the City, which shall
contain such information as the City may reasonably require.
   D.   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to
this Chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the City. The charge imposed under subsection A
of this Section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this Chapter
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such services.
   E.   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has
been paid that was not due under the provisions of this Chapter, whether as a
result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this Chapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the City may request, and telecommunications
retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no
claim for such credit may be made more than three (3) years after the date of
the erroneous payment unless: 1) the credit is used only to offset a claim of
underpayment made by the City within the applicable statutory period of
limitations, and 2) the credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.
   F.   Amounts paid under this Chapter by telecommunications retailers shall
not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described
immediately below:
      1.   Gross charges for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act;
      2.   Gross receipts for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2;
      3.   Gross charges for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax
as prescribed in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-17;
      4.   Gross revenue for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
   G.   The City shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books
and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this Chapter to
determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the
City for the City infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the
amount of the City infrastructure maintenance fee due to the City by the
telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the City plus five percent (5%) of
the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs
incurred by the City in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed five
percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit.
Said sum shall be paid to the City within twenty one (21) days after the date
of issuance of an invoice for same.
   H.   The City Council or its designee may promulgate such further or
additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this
Chapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time
and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered pursuant
to Section
7-9-2 of this Chapter of such regulations. (Ord. O-44-97, 10-20-1997)
7-9-5: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall excuse any person or entity from obligations
imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Generally applicable taxes; and
   B.   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair
of the public rights of way, including standards relating to freestanding
towers and other structures upon the public rights of way, as provided; and
   C.   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights of way; and
   D.   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning uses
or structures not located on, over, or within the right of way. (Ord. O-44-97,
10-20-1997)
7-9-6: EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES:
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the City entered into before the effective date of this Chapter
regarding the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according to and
for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to
the extent waived. (Ord. O-44-97, 10-20-1997)
7-9-7: PENALTIES:
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject
to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of this Code. (Ord.
O-44-97, 10-20-1997)
7-9-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of this Chapter. (Ord.
O-44-97, 10-20-1997)
7-9-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. O-44-97, 10-20-1997)
7-9-10: CONFLICT:
This Chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto
which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. (Ord. O-44-97,
10-20-1997)
7-9-11: WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION:
   A.   The City hereby waives all fees, charges, and other compensation that
may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the City by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing City franchise, license,
or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the time the
City imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee. This waiver
shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure maintenance fee
provided for in this Chapter is subject to being lawfully imposed on the
telecommunications retailer and collected by the telecommunications retailer
from the customer.
   B.   The City Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to each telecommunications retailer with whom the
City has a franchise.
   C.   The City infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this Chapter
shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not less than
ninety (90) days after the City provides written notice by certified mail to
each telecommunications retailer with whom the City has an existing franchise,
license, or similar agreement that the City waives all compensation under such
existing franchise, license, or similar agreement during such time as the fee
is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected by the retailer and remitted
to the City. The infrastructure maintenance fee shall apply to gross charges
billed on or after the effective date as established in the preceding sentence.
(Ord. O-44-97, 10-20-1997)
CHAPTER 10
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
7-10-1: Purpose And Scope
7-10-2: Definitions
7-10-3: Annual Registration Required
7-10-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
7-10-5: Action On Permit Applications
7-10-6: Effect Of Permit
7-10-7: Revised Permit Drawings
7-10-8: Insurance
7-10-9: Indemnification
7-10-10: Security
7-10-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
7-10-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
7-10-13: General Construction Standards
7-10-14: Traffic Control
7-10-15: Location Of Facilities
7-10-16: Construction Methods And Materials
7-10-17: Vegetation Control
7-10-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
7-10-19: Cleanup And Restoration
7-10-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
7-10-21: Variances
7-10-22: Penalties
7-10-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the city's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city
rights of way and the city as a whole.
   B.   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights of way within the jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and
located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license or similar agreement.
   C.   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The city, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the city
rights of way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the city enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the city may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this
chapter.
   D.   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the city, such franchise, license or similar agreement
shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful
renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the city and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   E.   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   F.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   G.   Sound Engineering Judgment: The city shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the city so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city
to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare. (Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CITY: The city of Northlake.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear runout area.
The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the
roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO roadside design guide.
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The Northlake city code.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a
right of way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The city director of public works or his or her
designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The city engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including track and
rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, communications and video cables and
wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances
thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights
of way under this chapter, except those owned by the city.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
city to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of
persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including,
but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum
products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables,
corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any
federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
ILCC: Illinois commerce commission.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for
the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections
7-9-4 and
7-9-5 of this title.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If no
time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly
used for utility purposes, including utility easements in which the city has
the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the city. "Right of way" shall not include any
real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the
previous sentence and shall not include city buildings, fixtures, and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section
7-10-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications
as defined in the Illinois telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 635/1 et seq. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the city
through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the public right of way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined in this section.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined
in this section.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. O-27-2007,
8-20-2007)
7-10-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies rights of way within the city shall register on
January 1 of each year with the city, providing the utility's name, address and
regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more
contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with
emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty
four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance
as required in section
7-10-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. A
telecommunications provider that has registered under this section, shall be
deemed to have satisfied the registration requirement under section
7-9-2 of this title. (Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter)
any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any city
right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new
facility, 3) disrupts the "right of way" (as defined in this chapter), or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first
filing an application with the city and obtaining a permit from the city
therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit shall be
required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers'
premises where there will be no disruption of the right of way.
   B.   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   C.   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made
by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses, telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city:
         a.   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         b.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the city and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ILCC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
section unless the city finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in section
7-10-8 of this chapter;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section
7-10-10 of this chapter;
      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter; and
      10.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
city.
   D.   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of new electric power, communications or natural gas
distribution system installation, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" has been issued by the ILCC that the applicant is
required by law, or has elected, to obtain;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency,
division of water pollution control and the metropolitan water reclamation
district and other local or state entities with jurisdiction have been
satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum product pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
   E.   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the city within thirty (30) days after
the change necessitating the amendment.
   F.   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits. pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). No
application fee is required to be paid by any telecommunications retailer that
is paying the municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
pursuant to section
7-9-4 of this title or the optional state telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the telecommunications municipal infrastructure
maintenance fee act, or by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity
infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   City Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the city within a
reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the
requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
the city shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons
therefor. If the city is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this chapter and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the city shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.
   B.   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the city not less than ten (10) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The city shall
specify the portion of the right of way upon which the facility may be placed,
used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the city fails to provide such specification of
location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a) ten (10) days
after service of notice to the city by the telecommunications retailer in the
case of work not involving excavation for new construction or b) twenty five
(25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the
case of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications
retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a permit
is required for work pursuant to section
7-10-4 of this chapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city
an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this
section. (Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on city rights of way, and does not
create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the
rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights of way.
   B.   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the city
does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the
city and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within ninety (90) days
after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with section
7-10-21 of this chapter. If the city denies the request for a variance, then
the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify
the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefor. (Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-8: INSURANCE:
   A.   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents,
and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections A1
and A2 of this section:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products completed operations coverage with
limits not less than;
         a.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         b.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         c.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
   B.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may
be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or
umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   C.   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the city within ten (10) days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the city.
   D.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the City Mayor of such intent to cancel or not to
renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event
later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.
   E.   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections
B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide
to the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-
insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection
A of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-
insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
   F.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. (Ord. O-27-2007,
8-20-2007)
7-10-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify, and hold the city and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement.
(Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-10: SECURITY:
   A.   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in
an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and
expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by
the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the city must perform itself or have
completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   B.   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the city in the
form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable
to the city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
city. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection
shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
city and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the city of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the state
of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   C.   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the city, and may also include reasonable, directly
related costs that the city estimates are likely to be incurred if the
permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of
facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple
locations in the city, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities
in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in
another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of
restoration in the previous phase or phases, the city may, in the exercise of
sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which
shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The
amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the
greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this
subsection C for any single phase.
   D.   Withdrawals: The city, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice
clearly stating to exercise withdrawal rights under this subsection, may
withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not
reimbursed the city for such amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period.
Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the city
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   E.   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the city that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund,
the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
subsection C of this section.
   F.   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the city,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the city, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection C of this section.
   G.   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the city as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   H.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the city with respect to the
security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved
by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or
exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other
right the city may have. (Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   City Right To Revoke Permit: The city may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights of way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The city shall send written notice
of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   C.   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the city, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists for
the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the city within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the public rights of way and restore the rights
of way to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal
to the city within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods
provided in this subsection.
   D.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this
section.
   E.   Failure Or Refusal Of the Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the city or its
designee may, at the option of the city: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon
not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject
facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to
the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the city. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city
for all costs of removal. (Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the city not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right of way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city's right of
way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. O-27-2007,
8-20-2007)
7-10-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles,
sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards
set forth in the following IDOT publications:
      1.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
      2.   "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
      3.   "Highway Design Manual";
      4.   "Highway Standards Manual";
      5.   "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
      6.   "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Illinois
administrative code section 545);
      7.   "Flagger's Handbook"; and
      8.   "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
   B.   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the city shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering
judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If
requested, the city shall state which standard or principle will apply to the
construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. (Ord. O-
27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The city's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
   B.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the public right of way.
   C.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   D.   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or
institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section
7-10-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.
   E.   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the city. (Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line
and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
         b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         e.   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right of way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right of way line;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right of way line or as near as practicable.
   B.   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ILCC's
rules entitled, "Construction Of Electric Power And Communication Lines" (83
Illinois administrative code 305);
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The city may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR 192.707 (1989)).
   C.   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The city may
require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
   D.   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right of way.
      2.   The city may require any freestanding facility located within a
right of way to be screened from view.
   E.   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular
locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the highway user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
   F.   Aboveground Installation: Aboveground facilities may be installed only
if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable.
   G.   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved. (Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         a.   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the city from
the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more
than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and
backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are
completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by
barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and
maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that
may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         d.   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the city to be preserved shall be bored under or around
the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction".
         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at anytime unless
special permission is obtained from the city.
         b.   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off road location.
         c.   The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree
designated by the city to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the city, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and
backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly
compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and
driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the city.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is
permitted under section
7-10-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as
practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by
the city.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city.
         c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         d.   For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
city.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed
prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right of way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                            Minimum Cover
Power or communication line (in general)    30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication line installed by the plowed  24 inches (0.6 m)
method
Gas or petroleum products                   30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                                  Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                             protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage    Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                         protection
 
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within city rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code 305 (formerly
general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled "Rules For
Construction Of Electric Power And Communications Lines", and the national
electrical safety code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national
electrical safety code.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a city approved
manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline
safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 - transportation of
natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR
192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", and
all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code
for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current standard specifications for water and sewer main construction in
Illinois.
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the city. With the approval of the city, shrubbery
surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area. The
housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to
blend with the surroundings.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois commerce commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right Of Way: All pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way
prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public
or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and
other property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval
must be obtained from the city.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the city
shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of
the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the city when emergency work is
required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction
are those set forth in section
4-4C-2 of this code.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the city shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights
of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city or by
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act 1 . (Ord. O-27-
2007, 8-20-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
7-10-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming shall not be considered a
normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the
issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this
chapter.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city will require
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without
authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   B.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The city may require
that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm
extensions, covered wire or other means.
   C.   Chemical Use: Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not
be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the city that such spraying is the only practicable method of
vegetation control. (Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   A.   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the city,
a utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the
rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the
construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any city improvement in
or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the rights of way.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public rights of way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the public rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The city retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of
way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior
to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after
cutting or removing a facility.
   D.   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
public rights of way of the city, the utility shall notify the city within
ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the
utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the city determines
that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and
welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the utility that abandoned
the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the city, the
abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of
all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. O-27-
2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the utility
shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain in a timely
manner and to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the city. Such cleanup and repair may be
required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any
other requirement to restore the right of way to a condition substantially
equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project.
(Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   A.   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the city and at the utility's expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance
with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
city of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken
for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with
the free movement of traffic, the city police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the city of a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-21: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the city as a part
of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this
chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance
should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The city shall decide whether a variance
is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in the variance
request on an individual basis.
   C.   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The city may authorize a variance
only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   D.   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the city may require the utility requesting the
variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be
expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the purposes of
this chapter. (Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
7-10-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the city will
incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility
will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless
the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the city's costs of
damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or
removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility who
does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. O-27-2007, 8-20-2007)
CHAPTER 11
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
7-11-1: Purpose And Scope
7-11-2: Definitions
7-11-3: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
7-11-4: Application Fees
7-11-5: Exceptions To Applicability
7-11-6: Annual Recurring Rate
7-11-7: Abandonment
7-11-8: Dispute Resolution
7-11-9: Indemnification
7-11-10: Insurance
7-11-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the City's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the City exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act.
   B.   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances
or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to
the extent of such conflict.
   C.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws
or regulations. (Ord. O-16-2018, 7-23-2018)
7-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes
adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those
codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the City for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5),
as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as
amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group
of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the National
Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their
eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at
47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the City
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or
local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the City in public
rights-of-way.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the City to perform an action or
initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the
State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
Right-of-way does not include City- owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
STATE: The State of Illinois.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic
control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the City.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
O-16-2018, 7-23-2018)
7-11-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
subsection C9 of this section regarding height exceptions or variances, but not
subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1) in rights-of-
way in any zoning district, or 2) outside rights-of-way in property zoned
exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
   B.   Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the
City to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be received
and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions
and requirements:
      1.   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the City, together with the City's Small Cell
Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
         a.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         b.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         c.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
         d.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         e.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         f.   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
         g.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the City, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      2.   Application Process: The City shall process applications as follows:
         a.   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         b.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the City fails to
approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of
a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75)
days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice
shall not preclude the City's denial of the permit request within the time
limits as provided under this section.
         c.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the City fails to approve or
deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission
of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five
(105) days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice
shall not preclude the City's denial of the permit request within the time
limits as provided under this section.
         d.   The City shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
If the City determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that
concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and conditions contained
herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced
before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of
the provider.
The City shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code
provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the
documentation to the applicant on or before the day the City denies an
application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the
revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of denial is sent
to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The City shall
approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to
resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial shall
require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the City's review period.
The applicant must notify the City in writing of its intention to proceed with
the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with
the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited
in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure
requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility.
         e.   Within thirty (30) days after an approved permit to collocate a
small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the City and the applicant
shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement, provided by the City for
the initial collocation on a Municipal utility pole by the applicant. For
subsequent approved permits to collocate a small wireless facility on a
Municipal utility pole, the City and the applicant shall enter into a License
Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
      3.   Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving
an application, the City shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the City must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the City fails to provide notification to the applicant within
thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the City's permit application form are submitted by the applicant
to the City.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the City sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
      4.   Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         a.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the City;
or
         b.   A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      5.   Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the City shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of
small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the City may
remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The City may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
      6.   Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period
of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the City makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or
the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable City codes
or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits
shall be subject to the applicable City Code provisions or regulations in
effect at the time of renewal.
      7.   Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the City by personal
delivery at the City's designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked
on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
   C.   Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
      1.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The City may reserve space on
Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the City's electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the City reasonably determines
that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      2.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      3.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and
frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with
industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable
interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a
public safety agency. If a small wireless facility causes such interference,
and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by
the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall
remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and
resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established
by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672
through 47 CFR 90.675.
The City may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such
interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of
Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the
interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      4.   Location: The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless
facilities on City utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or
the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may
be located in the communications space on the City utility pole and on the top
of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies
with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      5.   Compliance: The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable
codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
      6.   Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written
design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth
in a City ordinance, written policy adopted by the City, a comprehensive plan
or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-
way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
      7.   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this chapter, a wireless
provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless facilities on any
specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to
collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with
respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility
associated with a new utility pole, the City may propose that the small
wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed
collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the
alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate
location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material
costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the City, the applicant
shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the
criteria in this paragraph.
      8.   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small
wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         a.   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the City, that is located within
three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the City, provided the City may designate which
intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed
utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation
for such facility; or
         b.   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
      9.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions
set forth in the City's zoning ordinance.
      10.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the City and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and ground- mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
      11.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      12.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
the City's provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
      13.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the City and the wireless provider agree to extend this
period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility pole or
by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided
the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after
the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the
additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred sixty
(360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void
unless the City grants an extension in writing to the applicant. (Ord. O-16-
2018, 7-23-2018)
7-11-4: APPLICATION FEES:
Application fees are imposed as follows:
   A.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
   B.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
   C.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or City ordinance,
applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the required
application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
   D.   The City shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
      1.   Routine maintenance;
      2.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that
are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider
notifies the City at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement and
includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment consistent
with subsection
7-11-3B1d of this chapter; or
      3.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement
of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
   E.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the City to work within
rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane
closures. (Ord. O-16-2018, 7-23-2018)
7-11-5: EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY:
Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless
facilities on:
   A.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the City or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-
of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without
the consent of the property owner;
   B.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
   C.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to
that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: 1) to obtain a
franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video
service or 2) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or
operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject
to this chapter. (Ord. O-16-2018, 7-23-2018)
7-11-6: ANNUAL RECURRING RATE:
A wireless provider shall pay to the City an annual recurring rate to collocate
a small wireless facility on a City utility pole located in a right-of-way that
equals: a) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or b) the actual, direct and
reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the City
utility pole.
If the City has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the
fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day after the
first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to
collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter. (Ord. O-16-2018, 7-
23-2018)
7-11-7: ABANDONMENT:
A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of
twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt
of written notice from the City notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, by the City to the owner at the last known address of the wireless
provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days
of such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the City if it sells or
transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the City. Such
notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless
provider. (Ord. O-16-2018, 7-23-2018)
7-11-8: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Cook County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve
all disputes arising under the Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning
rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles
within the right-of-way, the City shall allow the collocating person to
collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) per year per City utility pole, with rates to be determined upon
final resolution of the dispute. (Ord. O-16-2018, 7-23-2018)
7-11-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the City harmless against any and
all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or
arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the City
improvements or right-of- way associated with such improvements by the wireless
provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and
privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless provider has no
obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as
may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the City or its employees or
agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have
against the City with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages,
however caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. O-16-2018, 7-23-2018)
7-11-10: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and
expense, the following insurance:
   A.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   B.   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
   C.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities
on the City improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits
consistent with its requirements of other users of City improvements or rights-
of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the City as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation
of inclusion of the City in a commercial general liability policy prior to the
collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage
and limit requirement required by the City. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the City evidence
sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self- insure the insurance
coverage limits required by the City. (Ord. O-16-2018, 7-23-2018)
TITLE 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE A. BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
8-1A-1: Code Adopted
8-1A-2: Amendments To Code
8-1A-3: Exterior Finishing Systems Prohibited
8-1A-4: Visitability Code
8-1A-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The BOCA national building code, 1996 edition, as published by the Building
Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., is hereby adopted as the
building code of the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said BOCA national building code are hereby adopted and
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article.
There is hereby adopted each and every revision of said code hereinafter made,
said code being revised annually by BOCA International, Inc., and a new and
revised edition of the code being published every three (3) years. Said revised
codes and all supplements thereto, when adopted by BOCA International Inc.,
shall supersede all other previous editions, supplements and printings in
conflict therewith. The provisions of such codes shall govern all matters
covered therein to the extent that the same are not in conflict with any
provisions of this article or other ordinances of the city.
As used in the BOCA national building code, the term "code enforcement officer"
shall mean and be defined as the superintendent of public works of the city or
his designee. The designated code enforcement officer shall carry out the
functions of the code enforcement within the city as instructed by the
superintendent of public works. (Ord. O-2-1998, 1-26-1998)
8-1A-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following sections of the BOCA national building code are hereby revised as
follows:
Section 100.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the building code of
the city of Northlake hereinafter referred to as "this code".
Section 103.4 Rehabilitation: Buildings existing prior to November 1, 1989, in
which there is work involving repairs, alterations, additions or changes of
use, shall be made to conform to the code by applying the requirements of
article 32 or the provisions of articles 2 through 31.
Section 114.3.1 Fee Schedule: A fee for each plan examination, building permit
and inspection shall be paid in accordance with the schedule in section
8-2-1 of this title.
Section 117.4 Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of
this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of
an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment
not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 118.2 Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in
or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than
$500.00.
Section 123.3 Compensation Of Board Of Survey: The third member of the board
shall receive for services a fee of $250.00 dollars to be paid by the
appellant.
Section 2906.1 Filing: A person shall not erect, install, remove, rehang or
maintain over public property any sign for which a permit is required under the
provisions of this code until an approved bond has been filed in the sum of
$10,000.00 as herein required and until an insurance policy has been filed for
public liability in the amount of $300,000.00 per accident and for property
damage in the amount of $100,000.00 as herein required.
(1992 Code)
8-1A-3: EXTERIOR FINISHING SYSTEMS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definition: For purposes of this section "synthetic stucco or other
exterior insulated finishing systems" refers to a system of exterior cladding
consisting of:
      1.   An acrylic copolymer technology "stucco like" finish with the color
blended into the coating, the finish being troweled or spray applied to achieve
the appearance desired;
      2.   A water resistant base coat applied to the insulation board with a
reinforced fiberglass mesh embedded in it for added strength; also, the base
coat being the primary barrier for moisture resistance while the finish coat is
primarily for aesthetics;
      3.   A molded polystyrene insulation board (MEPS), an extruded
polystyrene board (XEPS), or a polyisosanurate board ranging from one-half inch
(1/2") to over two inches (2") in thickness; and
      4.   Mechanical or adhesive fasteners to keep the insulation boards on
the wall.
   B.   Use Prohibited: The use, application or installation of synthetic
stucco is hereby prohibited in all residential construction.
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. (Ord. O-22-2000, 7-17-2000)
8-1A-4: VISITABILITY CODE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish minimum
regulations for the design, installation and construction of single-family and
attached single-family homes, providing reasonable criteria for visitability by
persons with disabilities.
   B.   Title: This section shall be known as the visitability code of the city
of Northlake, and is hereinafter referred to as the "visitability code" or
"this code".
   C.   Electrical Wall Switches:
      1.   Height: In all single-family and attached single-family dwellings,
all wall switches controlling light fixtures and fans shall be located at a
height not to exceed forty eight inches (48") above finished floor. Height
shall be determined by measuring from the finished floor to the center of the
switch.
      2.   Exceptions: This requirement does not apply where the use of special
equipment dictates otherwise as required by the manufacturer. This requirement
does not apply to thermostats or breaker panels.
   D.   Electrical Wall Receptacles:
      1.   Height: In all single-family and attached single-family dwellings,
all wall receptacles shall be located at a height no less than fifteen inches
(15") above finished floor. Height shall be determined by measuring from the
finished floor to the center of the receptacle.
      2.   Exceptions: This requirement does not apply where the use of special
equipment dictates otherwise as required by the manufacturer.
   E.   Step Free Entrance:
      1.   Requirements: Every single-family and attached single-family
dwelling shall be provided with at least one step free entrance accessible from
an accessible route from a parking area or public way. This step free entrance
shall be approached by a slope no greater than one in twelve (12) (less steep
is desirable). This entrance can be approached by a sidewalk, a driveway, a
garage floor, or other usable route. The step free entrance may be located at
any entrance to the home. If the step free entrance is located in the garage, a
door bell button shall be located outside the overhead garage door. In a case
where a lot is so steep that it cannot be graded to a maximum slope of one in
twelve (12), the driveway may have to exceed a one in twelve (12) slope. In
this case, upon approval by the building commissioner, the builder may
construct a one in twelve (12) (or less) route leading from the driveway to the
no step entrance.
      2.   Waiver: In addition, the city may waive any of the aforesaid
entrance requirements if it determines that such entrance is not feasible based
on water table elevations.
   F.   Wall Reinforcement: Bathroom walls shall be provided with wood blocking
installed flush within wall framing, to support grab bars as needed. The wood
blocking, when measured to the center, shall be located between thirty three
inches (33") and thirty six inches (36") above the finished floor. The wood
blocking shall be located in all walls adjacent to a toilet, shower stall or
bathtub. All bathrooms, washrooms and powder rooms shall meet all applicable
requirements of this code.
   G.   First Floor Washroom/Powder Room:
      1.   Required: There shall be at least one washroom/powder room,
containing at least one water closet (toilet) and one lavatory (sink), on the
dwelling floor located closest to grade level. This washroom/powder room shall
be designed and constructed in a manner that will provide wheelchair access to
both the water closet and lavatory.
      2.   Exception: If a no step entrance is located at a level other than
the level closest to grade, such as the lower level of a split level home, and
a washroom or powder room that complies with the requirements of this code is
located on the same level as the no step entrance, a first floor washroom/
powder room shall not be required.
   H.   Washroom/Bathroom Design: All washrooms, bathrooms and powder rooms
shall meet all applicable requirements of this code. It is not essential
(although it is recommended) to have a large turning radius inside a
residential washroom, bathroom or powder room. In a small washroom, bathroom or
powder room, the wheelchair user can roll in forward and roll out backward. A
minimum thirty two inch (32") clear path must be provided to all fixtures and
the room must be designed in a manner that will allow the user to be able to
shut the door when using the room. The bathroom, washroom or powder room door
may be hinged to swing out to provide more room, if the hallway design provides
the proper clearances.
   I.   Doors And Hallways:
      1.   Requirements: All exterior and interior doors shall not be less than
three feet (3') in width and six feet eight inches (6'8") in height, and shall
provide a minimum clear opening of thirty two inches (32"). All required exit
doors shall be side hinged. The minimum width of a hallway or exit access shall
not be less than forty two inches (42"), and in no event shall the width of the
hallway be less than required by the 1997 Illinois accessibility code.
      2.   Exceptions: Sliding doors, providing that a minimum thirty two inch
(32") clear opening is maintained. Interior pocket doors, providing that a
minimum thirty two inch (32") clear opening is maintained. Interior doors that
do not require passage for access as determined by the code official, for
example, doors to linen closets and pantries in which the shelves are located
immediately inside the door opening. Any interior door located in a manner that
when fully open, a minimum thirty two inch (32") clear opening is provided.
   J.   Routes Within A Dwelling Unit: Every single-family and attached single-
family dwelling shall have an accessible route through the hallways and
passageways of the floor level served by the step free entrance. Hallways shall
not be less than forty two inches (42") in width. All other passageways, other
than doorways, shall not be less than thirty six inches (36") in width.
   K.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation that violates any provision of
this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each such offense,
and each day on which violation occurs or continues to occur shall be a
separate offense. (Ord. O-08-2005, 3-21-2005, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2005)
ARTICLE B. PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
8-1B-1: Code Adopted
8-1B-2: Amendments To Code
8-1B-1: CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   Code Adoption: The Illinois plumbing code, 1993 edition, as promulgated
by the Illinois department of public health, is hereby adopted as the plumbing
code and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said Illinois plumbing code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof
as if fully set out in this article. (Ord. O-2-98, 1-26-1998)
   B.   Revisions Adopted: There is hereby adopted each and every revision of
said code hereinafter made, when adopted by the Illinois department of public
health, and said revised code shall supersede all other previous editions,
supplements and printings in conflict therewith. The provisions of such code
shall govern all matters covered therein to the extent that the same are not in
conflict with any provisions of this code or other ordinances of the city.
(Ord. O-11-90, 2-19-1990)
   C.   Overhead Plumbing In New Buildings With Basements: All new buildings
with basements, floors, rooms or occupancy areas below ground level at the
building site and served by a public or private sewer system shall have
overhead plumbing. No building permit application will be accepted nor any
permits issued for the construction of any structure unless plans and
specifications therefor provide for overhead plumbing as called for in this
subsection. (Ord. O-10-94, 3-21-1994)
8-1B-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following sections are hereby added to the Illinois plumbing code: (Ord. O-
48-89, 10-16-1989)
1-1.   Permit Fees: Before any plumbing work is started, a plumbing permit fee
must be paid, the plumbing permit fees are ten dollars ($10.00) per fixture. A
fixture is defined as any lavatory, water closet, tub, shower stall, laundry
tray, dishwasher, drinking fountain, floor drain, downspouts, or any opening in
the waste drain or sewer lines used for drainage. The minimum fee for any
single family dwelling is ninety dollars ($90.00); all other buildings are a
minimum of one hundred ten dollars ($110.00).
(Ord. O-27-2004, 12-6-2004)
2-1.   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful to install, extend, alter, repair or
maintain plumbing systems in or adjacent to buildings except in conformity with
this code.
2-2.   Notice: The plumbing inspector shall serve a notice of violation or
order to the person responsible for the installation of plumbing work in
violation of the provisions of this code, or in violation of a detailed
statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct
the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the
violation.
2-3.   Prosecution: If the notice of violations is not complied with promptly,
the plumbing inspector shall request the city attorney to institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such
violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful use of any
plumbing system in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or
direction made pursuant thereto.
2-4.   Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or
shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall install
plumbing work in violation of an approved plan or directive of the plumbing
inspector, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30)
days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
2-5.   Abatement: The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the city attorney of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate
action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a
violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or use of a building or
structure in or about any premises.
3-1.   Notice: Upon notice from the plumbing inspector that work on any
building or structure is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of this
code or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, such work shall be immediately
stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the
owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing
the work. It shall state the conditions under which work will be permitted to
resume.
(Ord. O-48-89, 10-16-1989)
3-2.   Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue any plumbing work in
or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).
(Ord. O-48-89, 10-16-1989; amd. 1992 Code)
3-3.   Fixtures: All new and replacement plumbing fixtures shall be labeled as
a WaterSense product, as specified by the United States environmental
protection agency. In addition, new and replacement sprinkler systems shall be
equipped with a WaterSense labeled irrigation controller and shall be in
compliance with section 2.5(g) of the Illinois plumbing license law (225 ILCS
320).
(Ord. O-12-2015, 4-20-2015)
ARTICLE C. ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
8-1C-1: Code Adopted
8-1C-2: Electrical Inspector And Personnel
8-1C-3: Electrical Permits
8-1C-3-1: Installation Permit
8-1C-3-2: Semiannual Permit
8-1C-3-3: Maintenance Permit
8-1C-4: Electric Signs
8-1C-4-1: Definitions
8-1C-4-2: Permit Required
8-1C-4-3: Supervision And Inspections
8-1C-4-4: Fees
8-1C-4-5: Penalties
8-1C-5: Inspections
8-1C-6: Fee Schedule
8-1C-7: Records Kept
8-1C-8: Enforcement
8-1C-9: Electrical Service Requirements In Residential Buildings
8-1C-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The National Electrical Code, 1996 Edition, is hereby adopted as the Electrical
Code of the City and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said National Electrical Code are hereby adopted and
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Article.
There is hereby adopted each and every revision of said code hereinafter made,
when adopted by the National Fire Protection Association, and said revised code
shall supersede all other previous editions, supplements and printings in
conflict therewith. The provisions of such codes shall govern all matters
covered therein to the extent that the same are not in conflict with any
provisions of this City Code or other ordinances of the City. (Ord. O-2-98, 1-
26-1998)
Any person violating any provisions of the code adopted herein shall, upon
conviction, be fined as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1992 Code)
8-1C-2: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR AND PERSONNEL:
   A.   Office Of Electrical Inspector Established: There is hereby established
the position of Electrical Inspector who shall be responsible for the
regulation of the installation, alteration and use of all electrical equipment
as provided in this Article. The Electrical Inspector shall report to the Chief
Building Official. (Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-1989; amd. Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997,
eff. 12-1-1997)
   B.   Appointments: The Electrical Inspector and such other employees as may
be deemed necessary shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council, and they shall be salaried employees of the City.
(Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-1989; amd. 1992 Code)
8-1C-3: ELECTRICAL PERMITS:
8-1C-3-1: INSTALLATION PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: No electric wiring for light, heat or power shall be
installed in a building or structure nor shall an alteration or extension of an
existing electric wiring system be made, except in conformity with the
provisions of this Article and such other standards and specifications, rules
and regulations of the National Fire Protection Association as contained in the
code known as the National Electrical Code as may be applicable, unless a
permit therefor shall have been issued. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
   B.   Application For Permit: All persons desiring to install wires or other
apparatus for the use of electric current for light, heat or power before
commencing or doing any electrical construction work of any kind whatever,
either installing new electrical apparatus or repairing apparatus already in
use, shall file an application for a permit therefor in the office of the Chief
Building Official. Such application must be filled out in triplicate on special
forms to be obtained from the Chief Building Official and must be accompanied
by proper inspection fees 1 . Such application shall describe in detail the
material and apparatus desired to be used, the class of work to be done, give
the locality by street and number and shall be signed by the contractor or
contractor's authorized representative.
   C.   Plans And Wiring Layout: Where the construction or alteration work is
of such size or importance, the Chief Building Official may require that plans
be submitted as a part of the application for a permit. The applicant shall
furnish with the plans a wiring layout showing both the number and location of
outlets, the size of wire to be used, the location of the control boxes and the
proposed location of the service head. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-
49-89, 10-16-1989; Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
   D.   Payment Of Inspection Fee; Signature On Application:
      1.   Permits will be issued only on the payment, in advance, of the
proper inspection fee.
      2.   All applications for permits must be signed by the supervising
electrician for the registered contractor.
   E.   Issuance Of Permit: Upon the filing of such application and the payment
of the proper inspection fees, if the application is found to be proper, such
permit shall be issued. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  8-1C-5 of this Article.
8-1C-3-2: SEMI-ANNUAL PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Authorized: A semi-annual permit for the installation,
alteration and repair of electrical wires and apparatus may be issued, and
renewal permits issued at the expiration date of original permit, to persons
where, due to their method of operation or the nature of their business, it is
necessary to make frequent alterations and changes of their electrical
equipment. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-79)
   B.   Application for Permit: Before such a permit shall be issued to any
person, he shall fill out an affidavit form of application to be furnished by
the Department of Health and Inspectional Services and shall appoint or employ
a supervising electrician in conformity with this Article and Title 3, Chapter
9, Article A of this Code.
   C.   Certification of Supervising Electrician: When the person employed or
appointed to perform the work or supervise the installation, alteration and
repair of electrical wires and apparatus installed or altered under the
authority of semi-annual permits shall have complied with Section
3-9A-5 of this Code, the Electrical Inspector shall certify him as a
supervising electrician by placing his name on the affidavit form filed by the
person desiring to secure permits to perform electrical work. (Ord. O-23-79,
11-20-79; amd. Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-89)
   D.   Records Kept: A complete record of all installations, alterations and
repairs authorized by semi-annual permits shall be kept by the supervising
electrician in a record book. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-79)
   E.   Penalties: Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article
dealing with semi-annual permits shall be subject to a penalty of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00), and in addition thereto, the Electrical
Inspector shall revoke such semi-annual permits. Notice of revocation shall be
in writing to the person to whom such permit was issued. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-
79; amd. Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-89; 1992 Code)
8-1C-3-3: MAINTENANCE PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Authorized: Maintenance listing for permit privileges may be
extended to persons for the installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of
electrical wires and equipment. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-79)
   B.   Application for Permit: Application for maintenance listing for permit
privileges shall be made in writing on affidavit form to be furnished by the
Department of Health and Inspectional Services. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-79; amd.
Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-89)
   C.   Restrictions on Issuance:
      1.   Permits for the installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of
electric wires and apparatus shall be issued under the authority of this
Article, applicable to maintenance permits, to a person only where such
electrical work is to be performed in or on the premises or property owned or
controlled by such person and used exclusively by him to conduct his business.
      2.   No person shall obtain a permit under the provisions of this Article
dealing with maintenance permits for the installation, alteration, repair or
maintenance of electrical wires or apparatus where such electrical work is
performed under or by contract, either verbal or written.
   D.   Supervising Electricians:
      1.   No permit for the installation, alteration, repair and maintenance
of electrical wires and apparatus, shall be issued to any person under the
provisions of this Article dealing with maintenance permits, until such person
shall have appointed or employed a supervising electrician. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-
20-79)
      2.   When the person employed or appointed to supervise in installation,
alteration, repair and maintenance of electrical wires and apparatus installed,
altered or maintained under the authority of permits issued in conformity with
this Article dealing with maintenance permits shall have been complied with
3-9A-5 of this Code, the Electrical Inspector shall certify him as a
supervising electrician by placing his name on the affidavit form filed by the
person desiring to secure permits to perform electrical work.
   E.   Record of Building and Premises Location: The location of all
buildings, premises or property where electrical work is to be installed,
altered, required or maintained, under authority of permits issued under the
provisions of this Article dealing with maintenance permits, shall be recorded
with the Department of Health and Inspectional Services.
   F.   Penalties: Any person violating any of the provisions dealing with
maintenance permits shall be subject to a penalty of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), and in addition thereto, permit privileges shall be revoked
by the Electrical Inspector. Notice of revocation shall be in writing to the
person listed for maintenance permit privileges. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-79; amd.
Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-89; 1992 Code)
8-1C-4: ELECTRIC SIGNS: 1
 
Notes
1 1. See also Chapter 6 of this Title for additional sign regulations.
8-1C-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them herein:
FLAT ILLUMINATED SIGNS: Illuminated signs placed against a building or
structure running parallel thereto and not projecting obliquely or at right
angles therefrom.
GROUND SIGNS: Illuminated signs supported by a structure from the ground.
ILLUMINATED SIGNS: Signs constructed as follows:
   A.   Signs, all or any part of the letters or characters of which, are made
in an outline of lamps or tubes;
   B.   Signs with painted, flushed or raised letters or characters lighted by
a lamp or lamps or tubes attached thereto;
   C.   Signs having a border of lamps or tubes attached thereto and reflecting
light thereon;
   D.   Glass or plastic signs, whether lighted by electricity or other
illuminant;
   E.   Signs painted, or with flush or raised letters or characters
illuminated by lamps or tubes placed for the purpose of projection or
reflecting light thereon; and
   E.   Signs having any electrical equipment attached thereto.
Illumination of signboard may be from a source attached to the structure or a
source removed.
OUTLINE LIGHTING: An arrangement of incandescent lamps or gaseous tubes to
outline and call attention to certain features such as the shape of a building
or the decoration of a window.
PROJECTING ILLUMINATED SIGNS: Illuminated signs that project at right angles or
obliquely from the building or structure from which same are supported whether
such signs are vertical or horizontal.
PROJECTING SIGNS: Illuminated signs supported by a canopy.
ROOF SIGNS: Illuminated signs erected on the roof of a building. (Ord. O-23-79,
11-20-79)
8-1C-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
The Director of Health and Inspectional Services, or such persons as may be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall
approve applications, issue permits and exercise supervision over illuminated
signs and illumination of signboards which are constructed, erected or being
maintained under the provisions of this Code. A separate electrical permit
shall be required whenever electrical equipment is a component of such
illuminated sign and illumination of signboards. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-79; amd.
Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-89; 1992 Code)
8-1C-4-3: SUPERVISION AND INSPECTIONS:
   A.   The Director of Health and Inspectional Services shall exercise
supervision over all illuminated signs and supporting structures erected or
maintained under the building provisions of this Code and shall cause
inspection by inspectors in his Department of all such signs and supporting
structures to be made once each year and more often where the conditions of
such signs and supporting structures so require.
   B.   The Electrical Inspector shall make an original and subsequent annual
inspection of all illuminated signs with regard to their structural and
electrical safety.
Electrical equipment for illumination of signboards shall be inspected with
regard to its electrical safety. Signs manufactured outside the corporate
limits of the City shall be inspected before erection. No sign shall be re-
erected until approved. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-79; amd. Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-89)
   C.   The Electrical Inspector shall make an annual inspection of all
electric or illuminated signs projecting over the public way, electric or
illuminated signs on private property, illuminated signs flat against a
building (flat signs), illuminated painted wall signs, illuminated signboards,
electric or illuminated roof signs and electric or illuminated ground signs.
(Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-89)
8-1C-4-4: FEES:
   A.   Permit Fees: The original permit fee shall cover the first annual
inspection fee. Subsequent annual inspections shall be subject to the annual
inspection fees. Permit fees shall be computed as follows:
      1.   Projecting Over Public Ways: Electric or illuminated signs
projecting over the public way - $16.00 per sign, plus $0.50 per square foot of
area of each face. The area of an irregular shaped sign shall be computed by
using the area of the outer perimeter design of the sign.
      2.   Private Property: Electric or illuminated signs on private property,
illuminated signs flat against the building, illuminated painted wall signs and
illuminated signboards - $16.00 per sign.
      3.   Roof Signs: Electric or illuminated roof signs - $24.00 per sign,
plus, for each sign over 500 square feet, $0.25 per square foot over 500. The
fee shall be computed on the actual area of the display surface.
      4.   Ground Signs:
         a.   Electric or illuminated ground signs, any part of which projects
over the public way, fees shall be the same as computed for projecting signs.
         b.   Electrical or illuminated ground signs entirely over private
property - $6.00 per sign.
      5.   Re-Erection or Alteration: Permits issued for the re-erection or
alteration of any electric sign, illumination of signboards or illumination of
flat or wall signs - $16.00 per sign.
      6.   Temporary Signs: Permits issued for electric or illuminated signs to
be erected for a period not to exceed 60 days - 1/2 of the sign permit fee. No
fee shall be less than $8.00.
      7.   Cancellation of Permit: The fee for cancellation of any sign permit
shall be $8.00 and shall be deducted before the remaining amount is refunded.
   B.   Sign Plan Examination Fees: The fees for the examination of sign plans
shall be $15.00 per 1/2 hour or fraction thereof.
   C.   Annual Inspection Fees: The annual inspection fee to be charged for the
signs shall be as follows:
      1.   Projecting Over Public Ways: Electric or illuminated signs
projecting over the public way - $0.50 per square foot of area of each face.
The area of irregular shaped signs shall be computed using the area of the
outer perimeter design of the signs.
      2.   Private Property, Walls Signs, Signboards: Electric or illuminated
signs on private property, illuminated signs flat against a building (flat
signs), illuminated painted wall signs and illuminated signboards - $16.00 per
sign.
      3.   Roof Signs: Electric or illuminated roof signs - $24.00 per sign,
plus, for each sign over 500 square feet, $0.25 per square foot for each square
foot over 500. The fee shall be computed on the actual area of display surface.
      4.   Ground Signs:
         a.   Electric or illuminated ground signs, any part of which projects
over the public way, the fees shall be the same as computed for projecting
signs.
         b.   Electric or illuminated ground signs entirely over private
property - $16.00 per sign. (Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-1989)
8-1C-4-5: PENALTIES:
Any person erecting, owning, operating, maintaining or in charge, possession or
control of any electric or illuminated sign, illuminated painted wall sign,
illuminated signboard, electric or illuminated roof sign or its supporting
structure within the city that shall neglect or refuse to comply with the
provisions of this code, in all cases where no specific penalty is fixed
therein, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense, and each sign or structure owned, operated and maintained or
controlled by him so erected, constructed or maintained in violation of any of
the provisions of this code shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
(Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-1989)
8-1C-5: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Entry Powers: The electrical inspector, or his authorized
representative, shall have the right, during reasonable hours, in cases of
emergency only, and without unreasonably interfering with the safe and proper
operation of the apparatus or electrical equipment to be inspected or tested,
to enter any building in the discharge of his official duty. For such purposes
he, or his authorized representative, shall be given prompt access to all
buildings, public or private, on his application to the company or owner, agent
or person in charge or control of such building. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979;
amd. Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-1989)
   B.   Inspections:
      1.   Inspection During Installation: The electrical inspector shall,
during the installation of an electrical wiring system, make or cause
inspections to be made to assure compliance with this code and the rules and
regulations relating to installation.
No work in connection with an electrical wiring system shall be covered or
concealed until it has been inspected and permission to do so has been given by
the electrical inspector. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
      2.   Inspection On Completion Of Work: The electrical contractor shall
notify the department of health and inspectional services whenever the work
shall advance to the point of completion of the installation as shown on the
application for a permit therefor. The electrical inspector shall, within a
reasonable time after notice of the completion of electrical wiring, for which
a permit is required by this code, make or cause to be made an inspection of
such work and such tests as may be necessary to determine that it conforms with
this code and the rules. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-
1989)
   C.   Reinspection: The electrical inspector shall make or cause to be made a
reinspection of an electric wiring installation, whenever he deems it necessary
in the interest of public safety.
If an electrical wiring system, upon reinspection, is found to be defective and
unsafe, the electrical inspector shall revoke all certificates in effect at
that time relating to such system, and the use of such system shall be
discontinued until it has been made to conform to this code and the rules and a
new certificate has been issued by the electrical inspector. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-
20-1979)
8-1C-6: FEE SCHEDULE:
   A.   Electrical Inspection Fee Schedule:
      1.   Summary Of Inspection Fees:
Minimum fee           $ 50.00
100 ampere service    50.00
200 ampere service    60.00
400 ampere service    65.00
600 ampere service    70.00
800 ampere service    80.00
1,000 ampere service  80.00
1,200 ampere service  120.00
1,600 ampere service  130.00
2,000 ampere service  150.00
3,000 ampere service  200.00
4,000 ampere service  260.00
15 And 20 Ampere Branch Circuits
0-50 circuits       $10.00 each
51 or more circuits 5.00 each
Branch Circuits Exceeding 20 Amperes
All circuits        $20.00 each
Motor Or Devices
First motor or device $20.00
Each additional       6.00
 
      2.   Wiring Inspection Fees:
         a.   The inspection fee for each nominal 20 ampere or less, branch
circuit, including fixtures, sockets or receptacles, shall be $10.00 per
circuit for the first 50 circuits and $5.00 for each nominal 20 amp or less,
branch circuit thereafter. The inspection fee for 21 to 50 ampere branch
circuits shall be $20.00 per circuit.
The inspection fee for a 21 ampere to 50 ampere fixed lighting circuit shall be
$16.00 per circuit.
         b.   The inspection fees for the inspection of each electric motor or
current consuming device, other than lighting fixtures, shall be as follows:
 
One motor or current     $20.00
consuming device
Each additional motor or 6.00
current consuming device
 
   (Ord. O-23-2004, 12-6-2004)
         c.   Inspections of temporary installations, underground or overhead
wires and apparatus and all other inspections not specifically provided for
herein shall be charged at the rate of $30.00 per hour or fraction thereof, per
inspector.
         d.   Inspection fees for the reinspection of any existing, previously
approved electrical installation shall be $30.00 per hour or fraction thereof,
per inspector and shall be payable by the electrical contractor who
subsequently obtains a permit to make the requirement corrections to that
electrical installation.
         e.   Where extra inspections are made because of inaccurate or
incorrect information, failure to make necessary repairs or faulty
construction, a charge of $30.00 per hour or fraction thereof shall be made for
each such inspection. (Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-1989)
         f.   No inspection shall be made for an amount less than $50.00. (Ord.
O-23-2004, 12-6-2004)
         g.   The fees for examination of plans shall be $15.00 per 1/2 hour or
fraction thereof, per plan examiner, and the following minimums shall apply:
            (1)   For new buildings, service including new or remodeled loads
in existing building:
1/2 hour for each 100 KVA of service up to 1,000 KVA
1 hour for each 500 KVA of service over 1,000 KVA
            (2)   For emergency lighting and fire alarm:
1 hour per drawing unless the drawing exceeds 1 floor
1/2 hour for each additional floor providing it is the same tenant
            (3)   For equipment, unit batteries, etc.:
2 hours minimum
            (4)   For plenum fixtures:
2 hours for the first fixture
1 hour for each additional fixture submitted at the same time
            (5)   For switchboards and motor control centers:
1 hour per switchboard or motor control center
            (6)   Plans submitted without fee:
1/2 hour additional handling and billing charge (Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-1989)
         h.   The fees for inspection of the electrical work in connection with
displays, exhibitions, carnivals and similar temporary installations shall be
$50.00 per hour or fraction thereof per inspection.
         i.   The fees for the inspection of electrical communication systems
and burglar alarms shall be as follows:
Low voltage burglar alarms - $50.00 per hour or fraction thereof per inspector
Aural communication systems - $50.00 per hour or fraction thereof per inspector
Visual communication systems - $50.00 per hour or fraction thereof per
inspector
Antenna systems - $50.00 per hour or fraction thereof per inspector
         j.   The inspection fees for electrical services shall be as follows:
 
0 to 100 ampere    $50.00
101 - 200 ampere   60.00
201 - 400 ampere   65.00
401 - 600 ampere   70.00
601 - 1,000 ampere 80.00
 
Fees for services in excess of 1,000 amperes shall be computed on the basis of
the rating of the service disconnects installed, prorated according to the
schedule above and shall include feeders, risers and all wiring and equipment
up to the branch circuit distribution panels or motor power panels or control
centers.
         k.   Fees for the inspection of vaults, except for utility vaults,
shall be $50.00 for each vault.
   B.   Sign Permit Fee Schedule:
Sign Types Electrical Structural Compensation
Sign Types                                           Electrical Structural Compensation
Flat signs                                           $20.00
Projecting signs
   Public                                         20.00                 $0.75 square
Mounted on a building                                                      foot
   Private                                        20.00
Mounted on a building
Ground signs
   Public                                                               0.75 square
Less than 24 feet high                               20.00      $16.00     foot
                                                                         
More than 24 feet high                               20.00      80.00      0.75 square
                                                                           foot
   Private                                        20.00      16.00
Less than 24 feet high                                          
                                                    20.00      80.00
More than 24 feet high
Roof signs
   Less than 12 feet high or less than 60 square  30.00      16.00
feet
   More than 12 feet high and more than 60 square 30.00 1    80.00
feet
Signboards
                                                                16.00 up
                                                                to 150
                                                                square
                                                                feet
                                                                20.00 from
                                                                151 to 375
                                                                square
   Less than 24 feet high                         10.00      feet
                                                                6.00 each
                                                                additional
                                                                375
                                                                square
                                                                feet or
                                                                fraction
                                                                thereof
                                                                80.00 up
                                                                to 150
                                                                square
                                                                feet
                                                                84.00 from
                                                                151 to 375
                                                                square
   More than 24 feet high                         20.00      feet
                                                                5.00 each
                                                                additional
                                                                375
                                                                square
                                                                feet or
                                                                fraction
                                                                thereof
Note:
1. Plus $0.50 per square foot of area over 500 square feet.
 
(Ord. O-23-2004, 12-6-2004)
8-1C-7: RECORDS KEPT:
The department of health and inspectional services shall keep complete records
of all permits issued and inspections made and other official work performed
under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-
49-89, 10-16-1989)
8-1C-8: ENFORCEMENT:
The department of health and inspectional services shall be charged with the
duty of enforcing the provisions of this article and shall function under the
immediate supervision and control of the electrical inspector. (Ord. O-23-79,
11-20-1979; amd. Ord. O-49-89, 10-16-1989)
8-1C-9: ELECTRICAL SERVICE REQUIREMENTS IN RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS:
   A.   The construction of any new residential building or gut rehabilitation
of a residential building in the City shall require the installation of
electrical service for all appliances including, but not limited to the water
heater, furnace and stove/oven. Any new garage constructed in connection with
said new construction in any residential district in the City must have fifty
(50) ampere outlet on a dedicated circuit for reach bay of the garage. For the
purposes of this section “gut rehabilitation” is defined as a general
replacement of the interior of a building that may or may not include changes
to structural elements such as flooring systems, columns or load bearing
interior or exterior walls and/or the replacement of any electrical service in
the building not including the replacement of outlets, switches and fixtures.
   B.   Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring the
installation of electrical appliances or prohibiting the use of natural gas
appliances. (Ord. O-11-2022, 9-12-2022)
ARTICLE D. FIRE PREVENTION CODE
SECTION:
8-1D-1: Code Adopted
8-1D-2: Amendments To Code
8-1D-3: Smoke Detector Alarms And Carbon Monoxide Detector Alarms
8-1D-4: Carbon Monoxide Alarm Detectors
8-1D-5: Fire Safety Requirements
8-1D-6: Penalty
8-1D-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The BOCA national fire prevention code, 1996 edition 1 , as published by the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., and the code
for safety to life from fire in buildings and structures (NFPA 101), 1988
edition, commonly known as the "life safety code", as published by the National
Fire Protection Association are hereby adopted as the fire prevention code of
the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
said BOCA national fire prevention code and code for safety from fire in
building and structures are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof
as if fully set out in this article.
There is hereby adopted each and every revision of said codes hereinafter made
by BOCA International Inc., and the National Fire Protection Association. Said
revised codes and all supplements thereto, when adopted by BOCA International
Inc., and the National Fire Protection Association, shall supersede all other
previous editions, supplements and printings in conflict therewith. The
provisions of such codes shall govern all matters covered therein to the extent
that the same are not in conflict with any provisions of this code or other
ordinances of the city. (Ord. O-2-98, 1-26-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  4-1-1 of this code.
8-1D-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The BOCA national fire prevention code is amended and changed in the following
respects:
Section F-100.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the fire prevention
code of the city of Northlake hereinafter referred to as "this code".
Add: Section F.305.4. Underground Storage.
(1992 Code)
   A.   Storage Tank Tests - Generally.
All tanks used for storage of inflammable liquids shall be given a pressure
test at the time of installation of the tank and every twelve months
thereafter. These tests shall be conducted by a person or company qualified to
make such tests. These tests shall include the pressure limits on piping,
valves and fittings as well as the tank. A written copy of these tests shall be
given to the chief building official's office within ten (10) days after the
test is made and shall be in compliance with the National Fire Prevention
Association codes, chapter 2, no. 30-33, section 26, subparagraph 2360, and
chapter 3, no. 30-37, section 36, subparagraph 3610.
(1992 Code; amd. Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
These provisions shall not be applicable to installation and maintenance of a
tank or tanks containing inflammable liquids when such liquids are used solely
for fuel for the purpose of heating a building or other structures in or in
conjunction with which such tank or tanks are installed.
   B.   Same - Penalty For Noncompliance.
Any owner, manager, operator, user or custodian of a tank or tanks who fails to
comply with the regulatory provisions of section A shall be subject to the
following:
(1992 Code)
                  (a)   The chief building official is hereby empowered to
terminate any use of a tank or tanks for which no test has been made or for
which the results of such tests, if made, do not meet the standards required,
and such termination of use shall continue until satisfactory test results have
been secured and approved by the chief building official.
(1992 Code; amd. Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
                  (b)   Any owner, operator, manager, user or custodian
operating or using any tank or tanks in violation of the foregoing shall be
subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense and each day such violation continues shall constitute a distinct and
separate offense.
(1992 Code)
8-1D-3: SMOKE DETECTOR ALARMS AND CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR ALARMS:
   A.   Devices Required; Number: Any residential unit within the city, either
single-family or multi-family units shall install at least one smoke detector
alarm and one carbon monoxide detector alarm, with batteries in each
residential unit.
   B.   Installation: The installation of the smoke detector alarm and carbon
monoxide detector alarm shall be installed with such equipment and in such a
manner as is otherwise set forth in the current editions of the life safety
code and the fire prevention code, which have been adopted by reference as part
of this code. (Ord. O-24-99, 12-6-1999)
8-1D-4: CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM DETECTORS:
   A.   Definitions: The following words shall have the meaning ascribed to
them for the purposes of this article:
APPROVED CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM: A carbon monoxide alarm that complies with all
the requirements of the rules and regulations of the Illinois state fire
marshal, bears the label of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, and
complies with the most recent standards of the Underwriters Laboratories of the
Canadian Standard Association.
DWELLING UNIT: A room or suite of rooms used for human habitation, and includes
a single-family residence as well as each living unit of a multi-family
residence and each living unit in a mixed use building.
   B.   Carbon Monoxide Detector:
      1.   Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with at least one approved
carbon monoxide alarm in an operating condition within fifteen feet (15') of
every room used for sleeping purposes. The carbon monoxide alarm may be
combined with smoke detecting devices provided that the combined unit is an
approved carbon monoxide alarm and provided that the combined unit emits a
warning in a manner that clearly differentiates the hazard.
      2.   Every structure that contains more than one dwelling unit shall
contain at least one approved carbon monoxide alarm in operating condition
within fifteen feet (15') of every room used for sleeping purposes.
      3.   It is the responsibility of the owner of a structure to supply and
install all required carbon monoxide alarms. It is the responsibility of a
tenant to test and to provide general maintenance for the carbon monoxide
alarms within the tenant's dwelling unit or rooming unit, and to notify the
owner or the authorized agent of the owner in writing of any deficiencies that
the tenant cannot correct. The owner is responsible for providing one tenant
per dwelling unit with written information regarding carbon monoxide alarm
testing and maintenance.
      4.   The tenant is responsible for replacement of any required batteries
in the carbon monoxide alarms in the tenant's dwelling unit, except that the
owner shall ensure that the batteries are in operating condition at the time
the tenant takes possession of the dwelling unit. The tenant shall provide the
owner or the authorized agent of the owner with access to the dwelling unit to
correct any deficiencies in the carbon monoxide alarm that have been reported
in writing to the owner or the authorized agent of the owner.
      5.   The carbon monoxide alarms required under this section may be either
battery powered, plug in with battery backup, or wired into the structure's AC
power line with secondary battery backup.
   C.   Prohibitions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to install or maintain a
carbon monoxide alarm as required by this section.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove, destroy
or disconnect any installed carbon monoxide alarm.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove batteries from an
installed carbon monoxide alarm except for the purposes of contemporaneously
replacing such batteries.
   D.   Exemptions: The following residential units shall not require carbon
monoxide detectors:
      1.   A residential unit in a building that: a) does not rely on
combustion of fossil fuel for heat, ventilation, or hot water; b) is not
connected in any way to a garage; and c) is not sufficiently close to any
ventilation source of carbon monoxide, as determined by the building
commissioner, to receive carbon monoxide from that source.
      2.   A residential unit that is not sufficiently close to any source of
carbon monoxide so as to be at risk of receiving carbon monoxide from that
source, as determined by the building commissioner. (Ord. O-03-2007, 1-8-2007)
8-1D-5: FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Fire Sprinkler System Requirements: Automatic fire sprinkler systems
complying with NFPA 13R, with additional protection for bathrooms and closets,
shall be installed in the following buildings:
      1.   All new commercial and industrial buildings.
      2.   All new multi-family residential buildings.
   B.   Retrofitting Of Existing Building Structures: Automatic fire sprinkler
systems complying with NFPA 13R, with additional protection for bathrooms and
closets, shall be installed in all existing multi-family residential premises
containing more than four (4) dwelling units in the following instances:
      1.   In any multi-family residential building containing more than four
(4) dwelling units where the dwelling units have less than two (2) doors
exiting to the exterior of the building. The owner of any building subject to
this subsection shall complete the installation of the fire sprinkler system
required hereunder within three (3) years of the adoption hereof.
      2.   In any multi-family residential building containing more than four
(4) dwelling units where the dwelling units have two (2) or more doors exiting
to the exterior of the building, the common areas and entire basement area
shall be retrofitted with an automatic fire sprinkler system complying with
NFPA 13R. The owner of any building subject to this subsection shall complete
the installation of the fire sprinkler system required hereunder within three
(3) years of the adoption hereof unless such building is subject to condominium
conversion after November 1, 2005, whereupon the installation of the sprinkler
system required hereunder shall be completed prior to the closing of any sale
of a unit within the building.
   C.   Alarm Monitoring Of Fire Sprinkler System: Fire alarm monitoring of
fire sprinkler system shall be in compliance with NFPA 72 audible and visual
alarm devices and shall be required on the exterior of the building and each
apartment shall have at least one visual and audible alarm device within the
living quarters.
   D.   Fire Sprinkler System Valves: All fire sprinkler systems, water control
valves shall be located no less than two feet (2') nor more than five feet (5')
above the finished floor and subject to the approval of the Northlake fire
protection district.
   E.   Backflow Prevention: Backflow prevention devices are required to be
installed on all sprinkler systems, where water source is served by a public
water supply system.
   F.   Fire Department Sprinkler Connection: Fire department sprinkler
connections shall be required and installed per BOCA 916.2, 916.3, 916.4 and
subject to the approval of the Northlake fire protection district. (Ord. O-01-
2006, 2-6-2006; amd. Ord. O-03-2007, 1-8-2007)
8-1D-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of the code adopted herein shall, upon
conviction, be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1992 Code; amd. Ord. O-01-2006, 2-6-2006; Ord. O-03-2007,
1-8-2007)
ARTICLE E. MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
8-1E-1: Code Adopted
8-1E-2: Amendments To Code
8-1E-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The BOCA international mechanical code, 1996 edition, as published by the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., is hereby
adopted as the mechanical code of the city for the control of buildings and
structures as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the said BOCA international mechanical code
are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article.
There is hereby adopted each and every revision of said code hereinafter made.
Said revised code and all supplements thereto, when adopted by BOCA
International, Inc., shall supersede all other previous editions, supplements
and printings in conflict therewith. The provisions of such codes shall govern
all matters covered therein to the extent that the same are not in conflict
with any provisions of this city code or other ordinances of the city. (Ord. O-
2-98, 1-26-1998)
8-1E-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following sections of the BOCA international mechanical code are hereby
revised to read as follows:
Section M-100.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the mechanical code
of the city of Northlake hereinafter referred to as "this code".
(1992 Code)
Section M-114.2 Periodic Inspections: The fees for all periodic inspections
shall be as indicated in the following schedule: $50.00 for each piece of
equipment except there shall be no fee for periodic inspections in a single
family or two family residence.
Section M-114.3 Fee Schedule: The fees for all mechanical work shall be as
indicated in the following schedule: $50.00 for each piece of equipment.
(Ord. O-25-2004, 12-6-2004)
Section M-114.7 Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, construct, alter or repair mechanical equipment or systems in violation
of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment
not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section M-118.2 Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in
or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than
$500.00.
(1992 Code)
ARTICLE F. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
8-1F-1: Code Adopted
8-1F-2: Amendments To Specific Code Sections
8-1F-3: Housing-Property Maintenance Code
8-1F-3-1: Title
8-1F-3-2: Purpose
8-1F-3-3: Scope; Application; Interpretation Of Provisions
8-1F-3-4: Rules And Definitions
8-1F-3-5: Condemnation Of Structures
8-1F-3-6: Environmental Requirements
8-1F-3-7: Space And Occupancy Requirements
8-1F-3-8: Responsibilities Of Occupants
8-1F-3-9: Enforcement Officials
8-1F-3-10: Inspections And Access
8-1F-3-11: Violations; Prosecutions
8-1F-3-12: Appeals; Time For Appeal
8-1F-3-13: Penalties
8-1F-4: Graffiti
8-1F-5: Truss Construction Fire Safety Notifications
8-1F-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, 1996 Edition, as published by the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., is hereby
adopted as the property maintenance code of the City for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National
Property Maintenance Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this Article.
There is hereby adopted each and every revision of said code hereinafter made
by BOCA International, Inc. Said revised codes and all supplements thereto,
when adopted by BOCA International, Inc., shall supersede all other previous
editions, supplements and printings in conflict therewith. The provisions of
such codes shall govern all matters covered therein to the extent that the same
are not in conflict with any provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the
City. (Ord. O-2-98, 1-26-1998)
8-1F-2: AMENDMENTS TO SPECIFIC CODE SECTIONS:
The BOCA National Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised in the
following respects: (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-1989; amd. 1992 Code; Ord. O-2-98, 1-
26-1998)
Section PM-100.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Northlake hereinafter referred to as this code.
Section PM-109.2 Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provisions of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of
not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days, or both, at the discretion of the court. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served, in accordance with the
terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section PM-302.12 Insect screens: During the period from April 15 to October 15
every door, window and other outside opening used or required for ventilation
purposes serving any building containing habitable rooms, food preparation
areas, food service areas, or any areas where products used in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied
with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch and
every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screen doors shall not be required for out-swinging doors or other
types of openings which make screening impractical, provided other approved
means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans are employed.
Section PM-601.1 Residential buildings: Every dwelling shall be provided with
heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 65 degrees F.
(18 degrees C.) at a level of 3 feet (914 mm) above the floor and a distance of
3 feet (914 mm) from the exterior walls in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
toilet rooms based on the outside design temperature required for the locality
by the mechanical code listed in Appendix A.
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more
dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guest room on terms,either express or
implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply sufficient heat
during the period from September 15 to June 1 to maintain a room temperature of
not less than 65 degrees F. (18 degrees C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms
and toilet rooms during the hours between 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day
and not less than 60 degrees F. (16 degrees C.) during other hours. The
temperature shall be measured at a point 3 feet (914 mm) above the floor and 3
feet (914 mm) from the exterior walls. When the outdoor temperature is below
the outdoor design temperature required for the locality by the mechanical code
listed in Appendix A, the owner or operator shall not be required to maintain
the minimum room temperatures, provided the heating system is operating at full
capacity, with supply valves and dampers in a full open position.
PM-601.2 Nonresidential structures: Every enclosed occupied work space shall be
supplied with sufficient heat during the period from September 15 to June 1 to
maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees F. (18 degrees C.) during
all working hours. The temperature shall be measured at a point 3 feet (914 mm)
above the floor and 3 feet (914 mm) from the exterior walls.
Exceptions:
      1.   Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
      2.   Areas in which persons are primarily in vigorous physical
activities. (1992 Code)
8-1F-3: HOUSING-PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
The provisions of this Section
8-1F-3 are amendments to the BOCA Existing Structure Code adopted in Section
8-1F-1 of this Article. The intent of this Section is to establish more
restrictive provisions than those contained in the BOCA Existing Structure
Code. (1991 Code)
8-1F-3-1: TITLE:
This Section
8-1F-3 shall be known as the "Housing Standards and Maintenance Code of the
City of Northlake" for all structures and properties and is herein referred to
as the Housing-Property Maintenance Code. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-89)
8-1F-3-2:PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Section is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
in buildings and on the premises, as hereinafter provided, by:
   A.   Establishing minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for
light, ventilation, space heating and sanitation; for safety from fire; for
space, use and location; and for safe and sanitary maintenance; for cooking
equipment in all structures now in existence.
   B.   Fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of all
structures.
   C.   Providing administration, enforcement and penalties. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-
6-89)
8-1F-3-3: SCOPE; APPLICATION; INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application of Provisions:
      1.   Generally: The provisions of this Section shall apply to all
structures and premises which are now, or may become in the future, substandard
with respect to: structure, premises, protection against fire hazard, equipment
or maintenance, inadequate provisions for light and air, lack of proper
heating, unsanitary conditions, overcrowding or other conditions which may be
deemed to constitute a menace to the safety, health or welfare of their
occupants, except as provided in subsection B2 of this Section. The existence
of such conditions, factors or characteristics adversely affects public safety,
health and welfare and lead to the continuation, extension and aggravation of
urban blight. Adequate protection of the public, therefore, requires the
establishment and enforcement of these minimum standards.
      2.   Travel Trailers and Mobile Homes: All moveable units used for human
occupancy and the areas, grounds or parcels on which they are located, insofar
as they are applicable thereto and not in conflict with, shall comply with the
requirements of this Section.
   B.   Scope:
      1.   Generally: Every portion of a building or premises used or intended
to be used shall comply with the provisions of this Section, irrespective of
when such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired, except as
hereinafter provided.
      2.   Existing Buildings: This Section establishes minimum requirements
for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings and structures and
does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established for the
construction, repair, alteration or use of buildings, equipment or facilities,
except as provided in this Section
8-1F-3-3.
      3.   Existing Remedies: Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to
abolish or impair existing remedies of the City or its officers or agencies
relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be
dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
   C.   Application of Other Provisions:
      1.   Building Code: Any alterations to buildings, or changes of use
therein, which may be caused, directly or indirectly, by the enforcement of
this Section shall be done in accordance with applicable sections of the
Building Code of the City 1 .
      2.   Zoning Regulations: Nothing in this Section shall permit the
establishment or conversion of a multi-family dwelling in any zone except where
permitted by the zoning law 2 , nor the continuation of such nonconforming use
in any zone except as provided therein.
   D.   Conflict with Other Ordinances:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection B2 of this Section
8-1F-3-3, in any case where a provision of this Section is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health
ordinance or code of this City existing on the effective date hereof, the
provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the safety and health of the people shall prevail.
      2.   In any case where a provision of this Section
8-1F-3 is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or
code of this City existing on the effective date hereof which established a
lower standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and health of the
people, the provisions of this Section shall prevail, and such other ordinances
or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be
found in conflict with this Section. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-89)
 
Notes
1 1. See Article A of this Chapter.
2 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
8-1F-3-4: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Rules of Word Construction:
      1.   Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes
the plural and the plural the singular.
      2.   Where terms are not defined in this Section and are defined in the
Building Code, they shall have the same meanings ascribed to them as in the
Building Code. 1
      3.   Whenever the words "multi-family dwelling", "residence building",
"dwelling unit", "rooming house", "rooming unit" or "premises" are used in this
Section
8-1F-3, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or
any part thereof".
      4.   Where terms are not defined under the provisions of this Section or
under the provisions of the Building Code, they shall have ascribed to them
their ordinary accepted meanings or such as the context herein may imply.
   B.   Definitions: Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall, for the purpose of this Section
8-1F-3, have the meanings indicated herein:
APPROVED: As applied to a material device or method of construction shall mean
approved by the Director of Health and Inspectional Services under the
provisions of this Section, or approved by other authority designated by law to
give approval in the matter in question.
BASEMENT: A portion of the building partly underground but having less than
half (1/2) its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
(See "Cellar")
BUILDING CODE: The Building Code officially adopted by the City Council 2 , or
such other code as may, from time to time, be officially designated by the City
Council for the regulation of construction, alteration, addition, repair,
removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings and
structure.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The Director of Health and Inspectional Services or his
authorized representatives.
CELLAR: The portion of the building, partly underground, having half (1/2) or
more than half (1/2) of its clear height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH AND INSPECTIONAL SERVICES: The official designated by the
City to enforce building, zoning or similar laws and this Section
8-1F-3, or his duly authorized representative.
DWELLINGS:
One-Family Dwelling: A building containing one dwelling unit only.
Two-Family Dwelling: A building containing two (2) dwelling units only.
Multi-Family Apartment House: A building containing more than three (3)
dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms arranged, designed, used or intended for the
use of one family, with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities
permanently installed.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The Director of Health and Inspectional Services or his
authorized representatives.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS: The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food, by spraying poison, fumigating,
trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-
6-89)
FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons each related to the other by
blood, marriage or adoption and not more than one other unrelated person living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or a group of not
more than three (3) unrelated persons, living together as a single housekeeping
unit in a dwelling unit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall a
dwelling unit be occupied by more persons than permitted by the minimum
occupancy area requirements as set forth in this Code. (1992 Code)
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The total area of all habitable space in a building or
structure.
HABITABLE ROOM: A room or enclosed floor space arranged for living, eating and
sleeping purposes (not including bathrooms, water closet compartment,
laundries, pantries, foyers, hallways and other accessory floor spaces).
HOTEL or MOTEL: An establishment containing lodging rooms for occupancy by
transient guests, in contradistinction to a lodging house, boarding house or
rooming house, and which provides customary hotel services such as: maid,
telephone and secretarial, bellboy and desk services, and the use and upkeep of
furniture, and furnishings and laundry of linens.
HOTEL APARTMENT: A hotel in which at least ninety percent (90%) of the hotel
accommodations are for occupancy by the permanent guests. An apartment hotel
having not less than fifty (50) guest rooms may have a dining room open to the
public which is accessible only from an inner lobby or corridor.
INFESTATION: The presence, within or contiguous to a structure or premises, of
insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
MULTI-FAMILY (MULTIPLE) DWELLINGS: See "dwellings".
OCCUPANT: Any natural person living and sleeping in a dwelling unit or having
actual possession or control of such dwelling or rooming unit.
OPENABLE AREA: That part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises
which is let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER: The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a
building or of premises, or their duly authorized agents.
PERSON: An individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
PLUMBING OR PLUMBING FIXTURES: Water heating facilities, water pipes, gas
pipes, garbage and disposal units, waste lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths,
installed clothes washing machines or other similar equipment, catch basins,
drains, vents or other similar supplied fixture, together with all connections
to water, gas, sewer or vent lines.
PREMISES: A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or structures
thereon.
RESIDENCE BUILDING: A building in which sleeping accommodations or sleeping
accommodations and cooking facilities as a unit are provided except when
classified as in institution under the Building Code 3 .
ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used
or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking or eating
purposes.
RUBBISH: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and
the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and
other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
STRUCTURE: An assembly of materials forming a construction for occupancy or use
including, among others, buildings, garages, tents, reviewing stands,
platforms, stagings, observation towers, radio towers, water tanks, trestles,
open sheds, coal bins, shelters, fences and display signs.
SUPPLIED: Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator.
VENTILATION: The process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical
means to or from any space.
Mechanical: Ventilation by power-driven devices.
Natural: Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows, skylights, door,
louvers or stacks without wind- driven devices.
WORKMANLIKE STATE OF MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR: Such maintenance and repair shall
be made in a reasonably skillful manner.
YARD: An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or group
of buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level
upward, except as otherwise permitted herein, and which extends along a lot
line and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. (Ord. O-52-89,
11-6-89)
 
Notes
1 2. See Article A of this Chapter.
2 1. See Article A of this Chapter.
3 1. See Article A of this Chapter.
8-1F-3-5: CONDEMNATION OF STRUCTURES:
   A.   Standards for Condemnation: Structures shall be condemned as dangerous
structures or unsafe for human occupancy as herein provided.
      1.   Unsafe Buildings: If all or part of any building or structure
(including, among others, a fence, billboard or sign) or the equipment for the
operation thereof (including, among others, the heating plant, plumbing,
electric wiring, moving stairways, elevators and fire extinguishing apparatus)
shall be found, in the opinion of the Director of Health and Inspectional
Services, to be in an unsafe condition, dangerous to life, limb or property, he
shall proceed to have the same condemned pursuant to the applicable provisions
of codes of the City pertaining to unsafe structures 1 .
      2.   Structures Unfit for Human Occupancy:
         a.   Whenever the Director of Health and Inspectional Services finds
that any structure constitutes a hazard to the safety, health and welfare of
the occupants or to the public because it lacks maintenance or is in disrepair,
unsanitary, vermin- infested or rodent-infested or because it lacks sanitary
facilities or equipment or otherwise fails to comply with the minimum
provisions of this Section
8-1F-3 but has not reached such state of complete disrepair as to be condemned
as a dangerous structure as hereinbefore provided, he may declare such
structure as unfit for human occupancy and order it to be vacated.
         b.   If any structure, or any part hereof, is occupied by more
occupants than permitted under this Section
8-1F-3, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law, such structure
shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the Director of Health and
Inspectional Services may cause such structure to be vacated. It shall be
unlawful to again occupy such dwelling until or its occupations, as the case
may be, have been made to conform to the law.
   B.   Condemnation Notice: Notice of the declaration of any building under
this Section
8-1F-3 as unfit for human occupancy and any order to vacate it shall be served
as provided herein and in such other codes or ordinances of the City pertaining
to unsafe buildings 2 .
      1.   Notice of Declaration:
         a.   Posting of Placard: Any structure declared as unfit for human
occupancy shall be posted with a placard by the Director of Health and
Inspectional Services. The placard shall include the following:
            (1)   Name of the City of Northlake.
            (2)   The name of the authorized department having jurisdiction.
            (3)   The title, chapter and section of this City Code under which
it is issued.
            (4)   An order that the structure, when vacated, must remain vacant
until the provisions of the order are complied with and the order to vacate is
withdrawn.
            (5)   The date that the placard is posted.
            (6)   A statement of the penalty for defacing or removing the
placard.
         b.   Notice to Owner: Whenever the Director of Health and Inspectional
Services has declared a structure as unfit for human habitation, he shall give
notice to the owner of such declaration and placarding of the structure as
unfit for human occupancy. Such notice shall:
            (1)   Be in writing.
            (2)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification.
            (3)   Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being
issued.
            (4)   State the time to correct the conditions.
            (5)   State the time occupants must vacate the structure.
      2.   Notice to Vacate: Service of notice to vacate shall be as follows:
         a.   By delivery to the owner personally or by leaving the notice at
the usual place of abode of the owner with a person of suitable age and
discretion; or
         b.   By certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at his
last known address with postage prepaid thereon; or
         c.   By posting and keeping posted for twenty four (24) hours a copy
of the notice in placard form in a conspicuous place on the premises to be
vacated.
      3.   Removal of Placard or Notice: No person shall deface or remove the
placard from any structure which has been declared or placarded as unfit for
human habitation except by authority, in writing, from the Director of Health
and Inspectional Services. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-89)
      4.   Notice To Vacate Reported: The director of public services shall
furnish a copy of each notice to vacate a building to the mayor, chief of
police and chairman of the licensing committee and any other designated
official of the city concerned therewith. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-1989; amd. Ord.
O-19-92, 7-6-1992; Ord. O-30-93, 10-4-1993; Ord. O-06-94, 3-7-1994; Ord. O-06-
2014, 3-3-2014)
   C.   Vacating Declared Building: Any structure which has been declared and
placarded as unfit for human occupancy by the director of public services shall
be vacated within a reasonable time as required by the director of public
services, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to let any person
utilize, for human occupancy, such structure, and no person shall occupy any
structure which has been declared or placarded by the director of public
services as unfit for human occupancy after the date set forth in the placard.
   D.   Approval For Occupancy Of Declared Building: No structure which has
been declared or placarded as unfit for human occupancy shall again be used for
human occupancy until written approval is secured from the director of public
services. The director of public services shall remove such placard whenever
the defect or defects upon which the declaration and placarding action were
based have been eliminated. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-1989; amd. Ord. O-06-94, 3-7-
1994)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 3 of this Title.
2 1. See Chapter 3 of this Title.
8-1F-3-6: ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Scope: The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum
conditions of property and buildings. Every building or structure, except as
exempted by subsection
8-1F-3-3B2 and the premises on which it stands shall comply with the conditions
herein prescribed as they may apply thereto. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-1989; amd.
1992 Code)
   B.   Exterior Property Areas: No person shall occupy, as owner or occupant,
or let to another for occupancy, any structure or premises which does not
comply with the following requirements. The director of public services of the
city shall cause periodic inspections to be made of all premises to secure
compliance with these requirements. (Ord. O-15-95, 5-15-1995)
      1.   Sanitation: All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage
except in accepted and approved containers.
      2.   Grading And Drainage: All premises shall be graded and maintained so
as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any
building or structure located thereon.
      3.   Noxious Weeds: All exterior property areas shall be kept free from
species of weeds or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to the public
health.
      4.   Insect And Rodent Harborage: Every owner of a structure or property
shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or other
pests in all exterior areas of the premises; except, that the occupant shall be
responsible for such extermination in the exterior area of the premises of a
single-family dwelling. Whenever infestation exists in the shared or public
parts of the premises of other than a single-family dwelling, extermination
shall be the responsibility of the owner.
      5.   Accessory Structures: All accessory structures, including detached
garages, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. (Ord. O-15-
95, 5-15-1995)
      6.   Motor Vehicles 1 :
         a.   No more than one currently unregistered and/or uninspected motor
vehicle shall be parked on any property in a residential district for a period
not to exceed fifteen (15) days in any twelve (12) months, and at no time shall
any vehicle of any type undergo any major overhaul, including body work, nor be
in any state of major disassembly or disrepair nor shall it be in the process
of being stripped or dismantled in a residential zone. (Ord. O-62-95, 11-20-
1995)
         b.   No more than two (2) currently unregistered and/or uninspected
motor vehicles shall be permitted on any property in any business, commercial
or industrial zone, and at no time shall said vehicle be in any state of major
disassembly, disrepair or shall it be in the process of being stripped or
dismantled.
At no time shall any vehicle of any type undergo major overhaul, including body
work, in a business, commercial or industrial zone, except at an approved
automobile establishment. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-1989; amd. 1992 Code)
   C.   Exterior Structure: No person shall occupy, as owner or occupant, or
let to another for occupancy, any structure or portion thereof which does not
comply with the following requirements: (Ord. O-15-95, 5-15-1995)
      1.   Exterior Surface Generally: Every foundation, exterior wall, roof
and all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of
maintenance and repair and shall be kept in such condition as to exclude
rodents or insect infestation.
      2.   Foundations: The foundation elements shall adequately support the
building at all points.
      3.   Walls:
         a.   Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or
rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions which might admit rain or
dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the
building.
         b.   All exterior surface material must be painted in accordance with
acceptable standards, and all siding material must be kept in repair.
         c.   All exterior walls shall be safely tuckpointed.
      4.   Roofs: The roof shall be structurally sound, tight and have no
defects which might admit rain, and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
rainwater from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the
building.
      5.   Stairs, Porches And Railings: Stairs and other exit facilities shall
be adequate for safety as provided in the building code 2  and shall comply
with the following subsections:
         a.   Structural Safety: Every outside stair, every porch and every
appurtenance to every structure shall be so constructed as to be safe to use
and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected, as required by
the building code, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. (Ord.
O-52-89, 11-6-1989; amd. 1992 Code)
         b.   Handrails: Where the chief building official deems it necessary
for safety, every flight of stairs which is more than two (2) risers high shall
have handrails which shall be located as required by the building code, and
every porch which is more than two (2) risers high shall have handrails so
located and of such design as required by building code. Every handrail and
balustrade shall be firmly fastened and shall be maintained in good condition.
(Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-1989; amd. 1992 Code; Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-
1997)
         c.   Exterior Stairs: No new construction, modification or
rehabilitation of a single-family residence in the city shall include an
exterior stairway to provide access to additional floor or floors above the
entry level nearest to the grade of the real property. Any existing exterior
stairway as of the date of the effectiveness of this section used for such
purposes shall be removed or modified to conform with this code upon the
undertaking of improvements valued at an amount greater than fifty percent
(50%) of the current value of the single-family residence. No single-family
residence shall be sold or conveyed in any manner whatsoever unless all
exterior staircases that are part of the residence are first removed. However,
an exterior staircase may remain affixed to a residence provided that the owner
thereof covenants to the city that the exterior stairway will only be used for
emergency egress and consents to annual inspections of the residence by the
city to ensure that the residence is in compliance with all ordinances and
regulations said covenants and consent to be in a form provided by the city.
The fee for such inspection shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) annually.
(Ord. O-04-2002, 1-7-2002)
         d.   Prohibited: Exterior exit stairways are prohibited as a means of
access to any floors above the entry floor nearest to the grade of the real
property zoned or lawfully used for single-family dwellings. (Ord. O-03-98, 1-
5-1998)
      6.   Windows, Doors And Hatchways:
         a.   Generally:
            (1)   Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be
substantially tight and shall be kept in sound condition and repair.
            (2)   Every window, door and frame shall be constructed and
maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude
rain as completely as possible and to substantially exclude wind from entering
the dwelling or structure.
         b.   Windows:
            (1)   Every window sash shall be fully supplied with glass window
panes or an approved substitute which are without open cracks or holes.
            (2)   Every window sash shall be in good condition and fit
reasonably tight within its frame.
            (3)   Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be capable of
being easily opened and shall be held in position by window hardware.
         c.   Doors:
            (1)   Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch shall be
maintained in good condition.
            (2)   Every exterior door, when closed, shall fit reasonably well
within its frame.
            (3)   Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being
opened from the inside easily and without the use of a key unless a key is
readily available.
         d.   Basement Hatchways: Every basement hatchway shall be so
constructed and maintained as to prevent the entrance of rodents, insect
infestation, rain and surface drainage water into the dwelling or structure.
         e.   Screening: Guards and screens shall be supplied for protection
against rodents and insects in accordance with the following requirements:
Every basement or cellar window which is openable shall be supplied with
corrosion resistive, rodentproof shields of not less than no. 22 U.S. gauge
perforated steel sheets or no. 20 B&S gauge aluminum or no. 16 U.S. gauge
expanded metal or wire mesh screens, with not more than one-half inch (1/2")
mesh openings, or with other material affording equivalent protection against
the entry of rodents and insect infestation, including storm windows. (Ord. O-
52-89, 11-6-1989; amd. 1992 Code)
      7.   Gutters: Every gutter shall be maintained and kept in a utilitarian,
sound, safe and aesthetic state of maintenance and repair so as to effectively
carry off water without blockage or leakage.
   D.   Interior Structure: No person shall occupy, as owner- occupant, or let
to another for occupancy, any structure or portion thereof which does not
comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Free From Dampness: In every building, cellars, basements and
crawlspaces shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent
conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure, as required by
the building code 3 .
      2.   Construction And Maintenance Requirements:
         a.   Generally: All interior walls, ceilings and floors shall be
structurally sound, in good repair, free from defects, clean and painted and
decorated.
         b.   Structural Support: The support structural members of every
building shall be maintained structurally sound, showing no evidence of
deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads,
in accordance with the provisions of the building code.
         c.   Stairs And Railings:
            (1)   Stairs shall be provided in every structure, as required by
the building code.
            (2)   All interior stairs of every structure shall be maintained in
sound condition and good repair by replacing treads and risers that evidence
excessive wear or are broken, warped or loose. Every inside stair shall be so
constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable of supporting a
load, as required by the provisions of the building code.
            (3)   Every stairwell and every flight of stairs which is more than
two (2) risers high shall have handrails or railings located in accordance with
the provisions of the building code. Every handrail or railing shall be firmly
fastened and must be maintained in good condition. Properly balustraded
railings, capable of bearing normally imposed loads as required by the building
code, shall be placed on the open portions of stairs, balconies, landings and
stairwells. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-1989)
         d.   Floors: Every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be
constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and so
as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
         e.   Kitchens: No single-family dwelling shall have more than one
kitchen. (Ord. O-03-98, 1-5-1998)
      3.   Sanitary Conditions: The interior of every dwelling and structure
shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage. Rubbish, garbage and other refuse shall be
properly kept inside temporary storage facilities as required under subsection
8-1F-3-7A1e of this article.
      4.   Insect And Rodent Harborage:
         a.   Buildings shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation,
and where insects or rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by
acceptable processes. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
prevent reinfestation.
         b.   Every owner of a dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be
responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests
whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more of the dwelling units or in the
shared or public parts of the structure.
         c.   The occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling or multi- family
dwelling shall be responsible for such extermination within the unit occupied
by him whenever his dwelling unit is the only unit in the building that is
infested.
         d.   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, whenever infestation of
rodents is caused by failure of the owner to maintain any dwelling or multi-
family dwelling in a rodentproof condition, extermination of such rodents shall
be the responsibility of the owner. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-1989)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 6, chapter 7 of this code.
2 1. See article A of this chapter.
3 1. See article A of this chapter.
8-1F-3-7: SPACE AND OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Facilities And Equipment:
      1.   Basic Facilities: No person shall occupy, as owner- occupant, or let
to another for occupancy, any dwelling unit for the purpose of living,
sleeping, cooking or eating therein which does not comply with the following
requirements:
         a.   Sanitary Facilities: The following minimum sanitary facilities
shall be supplied and maintained in sanitary, safe working condition:
            (1)   Water Closet: Every dwelling unit shall contain within its
walls a room, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy and
which is equipped with a water closet.
            (2)   Lavatory: Every dwelling unit shall contain a lavatory which,
when a closet is required, shall be in the same room with such water closet.
            (3)   Bathtub Or Shower: Every dwelling unit shall contain a room
which affords privacy to a person in such room and which is equipped with a
bathtub or shower.
            (4)   Kitchen Sink: Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen
sink apart from the lavatory required under subsection A1a(2) of this section.
         b.   Water And Sewer System: Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin,
bathtub or shower and water closet required under the provisions of subsection
A1a of this section shall be properly connected to either a public water and
sewer system or to an approved private water and sewer system. All sinks,
lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot and cold running
water.
         c.   Water Heating Facilities: Every dwelling unit shall be supplied
with water heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner,
properly maintained and properly connected with hot water lines to the fixtures
required to be supplied with hot water under subsection A1b of this section.
Water heating facilities shall be capable of heating water to such a
temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every
required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower and laundry facility or
other similar units at a temperature of not less than one hundred thirty
degrees Fahrenheit (130°F) at any time needed. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-1989)
         d.   Heating Facilities: Every heating or water heating facility shall
be installed and shall operate in accordance with the requirements of the
building code 1  or the air pollution control ordinances of the city 2 . (Ord.
O-52-78, 11-6-1989; amd. 1992 Code)
         e.   Garbage And Rubbish Storage And Disposal Facilities:
            (1)   Every dwelling, multi-family dwelling and dwelling unit shall
be supplied with approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish, and the
owner, operator or agent in control of such dwelling or multi-family dwelling
shall be responsible for the removal of such rubbish to and from approved
containers 3 . (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-89)
            (2)   Every dwelling or multi-family dwelling and every dwelling
unit shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility, which may be
any adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each
dwelling unit, to be approved by the Director of Public Services in the
structure for the use of the occupants of each dwelling unit, or an approved
outside garbage can or cans. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-89; amd. Ord. O-06-94, 3-7-94)
      2.   Installation and Maintenance: No person shall occupy, as owner-
occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any building or structure which does
not comply with the following requirements:
         a.   Generally:
            (1)   All required equipment and all building space and parts in
every building or structure shall be constructed and maintained so as to
properly and safely perform their intended function in accordance with the
provisions of the Building Code 4 .
            (2)   All building facilities shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition by the occupant so as not to breed insects and rodents or
produce dangerous or offensive gases or odors.
            (3)   In buildings and structures, water lines, plumbing fixtures,
vents and drains shall be properly installed, connected and maintained in
working order and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and
capable of performing the function for which they are designed. All repairs and
installations shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Building
Code or Plumbing Code 5  of the City.
         b.   Plumbing Systems: In buildings and structures, every plumbing
stack, waste and sewer line shall be so installed and maintained as to function
properly and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects to prevent
structural deterioration or health hazards. All repairs and installations shall
be made in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code. (Ord. O-52-89,
11-6-89)
         c.   Heating Equipment: Every space heating, cooking and water heating
device located in a building or structure shall be properly installed,
connected and maintained and shall be capable of performing the function for
which it was designed, in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code.
All multiple-dwelling units shall be required to have an annual maintenance
inspection by a licensed heating and cooling contractor. At the time of the
first inspection, a carbon monoxide (CO) alarm is to be installed. The annual
inspections will take place between June 1 and September 15 with the receipt to
be filed with the Department of Public Services. (Ord. O-20-94, 7-18-94)
         d.   Electrical Outlets and Fixtures: Every electrical outlet and
fixture, as required in subsection C of this Section shall be installed,
maintained and connected to the source of electric power in accordance with the
provisions of the Building Code 6  or the Electrical Code 7  of the City. (Ord.
O-52-89, 11-6-89)
         e.   Correction of Defective Systems: Where it is found, in the
opinion of the Director of Public Services, that the electrical system in a
building constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the building by reason of
inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or
installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, he shall require
the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-89;
amd. Ord. O-06-94, 3-7-94)
   B.   Occupancy Requirements: No person shall occupy or let to another for
occupancy any dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does not
comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Minimum Ceiling Heights: Habitable rooms in existing buildings,
except as provided in subsection
8-1F-3-3B2 of this Section, shall have a clear ceiling height over the minimum
area required by this Section
8-1F-3 at not less than seven and one-third feet (71/3'); except, that in
attics or top half- stories, the ceiling height shall be not less than seven
feet (7') over not less than one-third (1/3) of the minimum area required by
this Section
8-1F-3 when used for sleeping, study or similar activity. In calculating the
floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area of the room
having a clear ceiling height of five feet (5') or more may be included.
      2.   Required Space in Dwelling Units: Every dwelling unit shall contain
a minimum gross floor area of not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet
for the first occupant and one hundred (100) square feet for each additional
occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of
all habitable rooms.
      3.   Access Limitation of Dwelling Unit to Commercial Uses: No habitable
room, bathroom or water closet compartment which is accessory to a dwelling
unit shall open directly into or shall be used in conjunction with a food
store, barber or beauty shop, doctor's or dentist's examination or treatment
room or similar room used for public purposes.
      4.   Location of Bath and Second Sleeping Room: No residence building or
dwelling unit containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms shall have such room
arrangement that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended for
use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had only by going
through another sleeping room nor shall the room arrangement be such that
access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping
room or a bathroom or water closet compartment. Existing one-family dwellings,
where no lodgers are occupants, may be exempt from the requirement concerning
access through a first sleeping room.
      5.   Dwelling Units Below Grade: No dwelling unit partially below grade
shall be used for living purposes unless:
         a.   Floors and walls are watertight.
         b.   Total window area, total openable area and ceiling height are in
accordance with this Section
8-1F-3.
         c.   Required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely
above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area.
   C.   Light and Ventilation: No person shall occupy, as owner- occupant, or
let to another for occupancy, any building or structure for the purpose of
occupancy therein which does not comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Light:
         a.   Natural Light in Habitable Rooms: Every habitable room shall have
at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a
court. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every
habitable room shall be ten percent (10%) of the floor area of such room,
except in kitchens, when artificial light may be provided in accordance with
the provisions of the Building Code 8 . Whenever walls or other portions of a
structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than
three feet (3') from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling
of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors
not to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required
minimum total windows.
         b.   Light in Nonhabitable Work Space: Every laundry, storage and
furnace room and all similar nonhabitable work spaces located in a building or
structure shall have one supplied electric light fixture available at all
times.
         c.   Light in Common Halls and Stairways: Every common hall and inside
stairway in every building, other than one-family dwellings, shall be
adequately lighted at all times with an illumination of at least five (5)
lumens per square foot in the darkest portion of the normally traveled stairs
and passageways.
         d.   Electrical Outlets: Where there is electric service available to
the building or structure, every habitable room of a dwelling or multi-family
dwelling shall contain at least two (2) separate and remote outlets, one of
which may be a ceiling- or wall-type electric light fixture. In a kitchen,
three (3) separate and remote wall-type electric convenience outlets or two (2)
such convenience outlets and one ceiling- or wall-type electric light fixture
shall be provided. Every public hall, water closet compartment, bathroom,
laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one electric light fixture.
In addition to the electric light fixture in every bathroom and laundry room,
there shall be provided at least one electric outlet.
      2.   Ventilation:
         a.   Adequate Ventilation: Every room shall have at least one window
which can be easily opened or such other device as will adequately ventilate
the room. The total openable window area in every room shall be equal to at
least forty five percent (45%) of the minimum window area size required in
subsection C1a above; except, that no openable window shall be required in
bathrooms or water closet compartments equipped with an approved ventilation
system.
         b.   Overcrowding of Rooms: If any room in a dwelling is overcrowded,
the Director of Health and Inspectional Services may order the number of
persons sleeping or living in such room to be so reduced that there shall not
be less than four hundred (400) cubic feet of air per person.
      3.   Ventilation and Light in Bathroom and Water Closet: Every bathroom
and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation
requirements for habitable rooms as required by subsections A1a and A1d above;
except, that no window shall be required in bathrooms or water closet
compartments equipped with an approved ventilation system.
      4.   Eating Facilities: No cooking shall be permitted in any sleeping
room in any dwelling or dwelling unit, and no cooking facility or appliance
shall be permitted in any sleeping room.
   D.   Safety from Fire: No person shall occupy, as owner- occupant, or shall
let to another for occupancy, any structure which does not comply with the
applicable provisions of the fire prevention sections of the building code
ordinances of the City 9  and the following additional requirements for safety
from fire:
      1.   Storage of Flammable Liquids Prohibited: No dwelling, multi-family
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be located within a building
containing any establishment handling, dispensing or storing flammable liquids
with a flash point of one hundred ten degrees (110°) Fahrenheit or lower.
      2.   Cooking and Heating Equipment: All cooking and heating equipment and
components and accessories in every heating, cooking and water heating device
shall be maintained free from leaks and obstructions and kept functioning
properly so as to be free from fire, health and accident hazards. All
installations and repairs shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
the Building Code 10  or other laws or ordinances of the City applicable
thereto. Portable cooking equipment employing flame is prohibited. (Ord. O-52-
89, 11-6-89)
 
Notes
1  1. See article A of this chapter.
2  2. See title 4, chapter 4, article B of this code.
3  3. See subsection
   4-3A-2B of this Code for container specifications.
4  1. For Building Code provisions see Article A of this Chapter.
5  2. For Plumbing Code provisions see Article B of this Chapter.
6  3. For Building Code provisions see Article A of this Chapter.
7  4. For Electrical Code provisions see Article C of this Chapter.
8  1. For Building Code provisions see Article A of this Chapter.
9  1. For Fire Prevention Code provisions see Article D of this Chapter.
10 2. For Building Code provisions see Article A of this Chapter.
8-1F-3-8: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANTS:
Occupants of structures and/or premises and owners or operators of rooming
houses shall be responsible for maintenance thereof as provided in this
Section.
Every occupant of a building or part thereof shall:
   A.   Cleanliness: Keep that part of the building or premises thereof which
he occupies, controls or uses in a clean and sanitary condition.
   B.   Disposal of Garbage and Rubbish:
      1.   Dispose of all his rubbish in clean and sanitary manner by placing
it in the rubbish containers required in subsection
8-1F-3-7A1e(1) hereof.
Every occupant of a building or part thereof shall dispose of all his garbage
in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the garbage disposal
facilities, or if such facilities are not available, by removing and securely
wrapping such garbage and placing it in tight metal garbage storage containers
as required by subsection
8-1F-3-7A1e(2) hereof or by such other disposal method as may be required by
applicable laws or ordinances of the City 1 .
   C.   Plumbing Fixtures 2 :
      1.   Use and Operation of Supplied Plumbing Fixtures: Every occupant of a
building or part thereof shall keep the supplied plumbing fixtures therein
clean and sanitary and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care
in their proper use and operation.
      2.   Installation and Care of Plumbing Fixtures Furnished by Occupant:
Every plumbing fixture furnished by the occupant of a building or structure
shall be properly installed and shall be maintained in good working condition,
kept clean and sanitary, and free of defects, leaks or obstructions. (Ord. O-
52-89, 11-6-89)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  4-3A-2 of this Code.
2 2. See Article B of this Chapter for Plumbing Code.
8-1F-3-9: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
   A.   Enforcement Officer: It shall be the duty and responsibility of the
Director of Health and Inspectional Services to enforce the provisions of this
Section
8-1F-3 as herein provided to determine, in his sound discretion, violations,
with or without internal inspections, and to issue a notice of violation when,
in such judgment, he determines and reasonably believes a violation to exist.
   B.   Coordination of Enforcement: Inspection of premises and the issuing of
orders in connection therewith under the provisions of this Section
8-1F-3 shall be the exclusive responsibility of the Department and Director of
Health and Inspectional Services of the City. Wherever, in the opinion of the
Director of Health and Inspectional Services, it is necessary or desirable to
have inspections of any condition by any other department, he shall arrange for
this to be done in such manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall
not be unreasonably subjected to visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple
or conflicting orders. No order for correction of any violations under this
Section
8-1F-3 shall be issued without the approval of the Director of Health and
Inspectional Services, and it shall be the responsibility of that official,
before issuing any such order, to determine that it has the concurrence of any
other department or official of the government concerned with any matter
involved in the case in question.
   C.   Administrative Liability:
      1.   Except as may otherwise be provided by statute or local law or
ordinance, no officer, agent or employee of the City charged with the
enforcement of this Section
8-1F-3 shall render himself nor shall he be personally liable for any damage
that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of his duties hereunder.
      2.   No person who institutes or assists in the prosecution of a criminal
proceeding under this Section
8-1F-3 shall be liable to damages hereunder not believing that the person
accused or prosecuted was guilty of any unlawful act or omission.
      3.   Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the City
as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties
hereunder, shall be defended by the legal representatives of the City until the
final determination of the proceedings herein. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-89)
8-1F-3-10: INSPECTIONS AND ACCESS:
   A.   Inspections: The Director of Health and Inspectional Services shall
make or cause to be made inspections to determine the conditions of all
structures and premises in order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of
the public under the provisions of this Section
8-1F-3.
   B.   Entry Powers:
      1.   The Director of Health and Inspectional Services is authorized to
enter any structure or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of
performing his duties hereunder.
      2.   The owner, occupant or operator of every structure or premises or
the person in charge thereof shall give the Director of Health and Inspectional
Services free access thereto and to all parts thereof and to the premises on
which it is located at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection,
examination and survey.
      3.   If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a structure
subject to the provisions of this Section
8-1F-3 refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts or obstructs
entry and free access to any part of the structure or premises where inspection
authorized hereby is sought, the administrative authority may seek, in a court
of competent jurisdiction, an order that such owner, occupant or other person
in charge cease and desist with such interference.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entrance to or to
impede an inspector or officer authorized under this Section
8-1F-3 in the performance of his duties, and every such inspector or officer
shall have the right to enter, examine and survey all premises, grounds and
structures and every part thereof at all reasonable times upon display of
proper identification.
   C.   Access by Owner or Operator: Every occupant of a structure or premises
shall give the owner or operator thereof, or his agent or employee, access to
any part of such structure or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose
of making such inspection, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary
to comply with the provisions of this Section
8-1F-3. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-89)
8-1F-3-11: VIOLATIONS; PROSECUTIONS:
   A.   Notice of Violation:
      1.   Service of Notice: Notice of violation shall be served upon the
owner of record; provided, that such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner if a copy thereof is delivered to him personally or, if
not found, by leaving a copy thereof at his usual place of abode with a person
in excess of twelve (12) years of age who shall be informed of the contents
thereof or by sending a copy thereof by mail to his last known address or, if
the letter with the copy is returned showing it has not been delivered to him,
by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the structure
affected by the notice.
      2.   Contents of Notice: Whenever the Director of Health and Inspectional
Services determines that there has been or is a violation or that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been or is a violation of any
provision of this Section
8-1F-3, he shall give notice of such violation or alleged violation to the
person or persons responsible therefor. Such notice shall:
         a.   Be in writing.
         b.   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification.
         c.   Specify the violation which exists and the remedial action
required.
         d.   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires.
   B.   Prosecution of Violation: In case any violation order is not promptly
complied with, the Director of Health and Inspectional Services may request the
legal representative to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law or
in equity against the person responsible for the violation, ordering him:
      1.   To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any
further execution to work;
      2.   To restrain or correct the erection, installation or alteration of
such building;
      3.   To require the removal of work in violation;
      4.   To prevent the occupation or use of the building structure or part
thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in
compliance with, the provisions of this Section
8-1F-3 or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval,
permit or certificate was issued; or
      5.   To enforce the penalty provisions of this Section
8-1F-3. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-89)
8-1F-3-12: APPEALS; TIME FOR APPEAL:
   A.   Authority: Any owner or person who is aggrieved with the ruling or
decision of the Director of Health and Inspectional Services in any matter
relative to the interpretation or enforcement of the provisions of this Section
8-1F-3 may appeal the decision or interpretation.
   B.   Filing Appeal: This appeal must be filed with the City Clerk, in
writing, within ten (10) days of the date of the rendition of the decision or
interpretation.
   C.   Hearing: Upon receipt of such appeal, the City Clerk shall forward the
same to the Committee on Licensing and Inspectional Services which shall fix a
reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, for the hearing of the appeal,
give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the same within a reasonable
time.
   D.   Decisions by City Council: The Committee on Licensing and Inspectional
Services may recommend, in writing, to the City Council who may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination as, in its opinion, ought to be made in the premises and, to that
end, shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal was taken. (Ord.
O-52-89, 11-6-89)
8-1F-3-13: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
or imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both, at the
discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues after due notice
has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be
deemed a separate offense. (1992 Code)
8-1F-4: GRAFFITI:
   A.   Graffiti Prohibition: It is unlawful for any person to inscribe, draw
or otherwise place upon the surface of any structure or wall that is publicly
or privately owned any word, phrase, diagram, symbol, sketch or letters wherein
the contents thereof are visible to any member of the general public and
contains references to sexual activity, diagrams relating to sexual activity or
sexual organs, references to criminal activities or groups which promote or are
involved in criminal activity, swearing or fighting words, defamatory materials
about any person or references to relationships. The above list is not to be a
limitation, but is merely illustrative of items known as graffiti.
It shall be an affirmative defense to the alleged violation of the foregoing
provision if such activity was undertaken with the prior written consent of the
owner of the property, demonstrating that the owner was aware of the content
and method of the inscription to be placed on the structure or wall. (Ord. O-
52-89, 11-6-1989)
   B.   Removal Of Graffiti:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the owner of the structure or wall upon
which any inscription or representation prohibited in subsection A of this
section is made to remove, eradicate or eliminate such inscription or
representation, and restore the damaged premises to its original condition
within forty eight (48) hours of notification from the city. (Ord. O-07-96, 1-
22-1996)
      2.   In the event the owner has failed to eliminate such graffiti, the
city shall eliminate such graffiti and shall bill the owner of the structure or
wall a minimum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or the cost of the job,
whichever is greater, for such removal. (Ord. O-37-96, 8-5-1996)
      3.   In the event the owner can show to the city there is a reasonable
likelihood that the person responsible for placement of the graffiti will be
required to make restitution or restore the premises to its previous condition,
the owner may be given additional time by the superintendent of public works to
meet the removal requirements without charges being filed. In no event shall
the owner be granted more than thirty (30) days' time to cause the removal of
the graffiti. (Ord. O-52-89, 11-6-1989; amd. Ord. O-19-92, 7-6-1992; Ord. O-06-
94, 3-7-1994; Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
   C.   Possession Of Etching Materials, Paint Or Marker With Intent To Deface
Unlawful:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess etching materials, a
spray paint container, liquid paint or any marker containing a fluid which is
not water soluble and has a point, brush, applicator or other writing surface
of three-eighths of an inch (3/8") or greater, on the property of another or in
any public building or upon any public facility. It shall be a defense to an
action for violation of this subsection that the owner, manager or other person
having control of the property, building or facility consented to the presence
of the etching materials, paint or marker.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a spray paint
container, liquid paint or any marker containing a fluid which is not water
soluble and has a point, brush, applicator or other writing surface of three-
eighths of an inch (3/8") or greater, or any etching equipment or etching
materials, on the public way with intent to use the same to deface any
building, structure or property.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or
have any spray paint container, liquid paint or any marker containing a fluid
which is not water soluble and has a point, brush, applicator or other writing
surface of three-eighths of an inch (3/8") or greater, or any etching equipment
or etching materials, in or upon or about any motor vehicle with intent to use
the same to deface any building, structure or property.
      4.   For purposes of this code, "etch" means to cut, bite, corrode or
engrave on metal, glass, plastic, concrete or stone, and "etching equipment"
means any tool, device, or equipment used to etch. "Etching materials" means
any acid or like substance used to etch.
   D.   Penalties And Restitution: Upon a finding of guilty for violation of
this section, there shall be imposed a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). Additionally, the court may require that the party guilty
of violating the provisions of subsection A of this section make full and
complete restitution to the owner of the property for expenses incurred in the
removal of the graffiti and/or restoration of the structure or wall to its
previous condition. Said owner shall submit receipts evidencing payments for
costs regarding the removal or repair of the graffiti. The court may also
require the party guilty of violating the provisions of subsection A of this
section to perform some reasonable public service work as provided by 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1. (Ord. O-27-2008, 11-3-2008)
8-1F-5: TRUSS CONSTRUCTION FIRE SAFETY NOTIFICATIONS:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section:
TRUSS: A framed structural unit made up of a group of triangles arranged in a
single plane in such a manner that if loads are applied at the points of
intersection of the truss members, only comprehensive or tensile (nonbending)
forces will result in the members.
TRUSS CONSTRUCTION: A framework of wooden beams, arranged in triangles to
support a roof, floor or other structure.
   B.   Display Requirement:
      1.   The owner or occupant of any real property located within Northlake
that is improved with wood truss construction, including residential
structures, shall be required to affix a truss construction emblem to the front
of any such structure in the location specified in subsection D of this
section.
      2.   The owner of any real property which is part of a planned unit
development or subdivision containing individual structures with wood truss
construction shall be required to display the truss construction emblem at each
entrance to the development or subdivision as well as on each individual
structure.
   C.   Inspections; Fee: The city will inspect or cause the inspection of all
structures subject to this section.
   D.   Truss Construction, Emblem:
      1.   The truss construction emblem shall have a bright and reflective
color or be made of reflective material. The shape of the emblem shall be an
isosceles triangle and the size shall be twelve inches (12") horizontally by
six inches (6") vertically. The following letters shall be printed on the
emblem in a conspicuous size and color:
"F" to signify a floor with truss construction;
"R" to signify a roof with truss construction; and
"F/R" to signify both a floor and roof with truss construction.
      2.   The emblem shall be permanently affixed to the left of the main
entrance door at a height between four (4) and six feet (6') above the ground
and shall be provided by the city or its designee. (Ord. O-01-2000, 1-3-2000;
amd. Ord. O-17-2000, 4-17-2000)
ARTICLE G. ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
SECTION:
8-1G-1: Code Adopted
8-1G-2: Penalty
8-1G-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The CABO Model Energy Code, 1995 Edition, is hereby adopted as the Energy
Conservation Code of the City for the control of buildings and structures as
herein provided, and each and all the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said CABO Model Energy Code are hereby adopted and made
a part hereof as if fully set out in this Article.
There is hereby adopted each and every revision of said code hereinafter made,
by CABO International, Inc. Said revised codes and all supplements thereto,
when adopted by CABO International, Inc., shall supersede all other previous
editions, supplements and printings in conflict therewith. The provisions of
such codes shall govern all matters covered therein to the extent that the same
are not in conflict with any provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the
City. (Ord. O-2-98, 1-26-1998)
8-1G-2: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this code adopted herein shall, upon
conviction, be fined as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1992 Code)
ARTICLE H. CABO ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING CODE
SECTION:
8-1H-1: Code Adopted
8-1H-1: CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   The CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code, 1995 Edition, is hereby
adopted as the One and Two Family Dwelling Code of the City for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said CABO One and Two Family
Dwelling Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this Article subject to the following deletions:
Chapter 27 Special Piping and Storage
Chapter 29 Plumbing Administration
Chapter 30 Plumbing Definitions
Chapter 32 General Plumbing Requirements
Chapter 32 Plumbing Fixtures
Chapter 33 Water Heaters
Chapter 34 Water Supply and Distribution
Chapter 35 Sanitary Drainage
Chapter 36 Vents
Chapter 37 Traps
Chapter 38 Private Sewage Disposal
Chapter 39 General Requirements
Chapter 40 Electrical Definitions
Chapter 41 Services
Chapter 42 Branch Circuit and Feeder Requirements
Chapter 43 Wiring Methods
Chapter 44 Power and Lighting Distribution
Chapter 45 Devices and Lighting Fixtures
Chapter 46 Appliance Installation
Appendix D Engineered Procedure for
Appendix C Detailed Procedure for Sizing the Building Water Supply System
 
   B.   The CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code is further amended as
follows:
      1.   Section 112 Plans: Section 112 is amended to read as follows: "Plans
and Surveys".
      2.   Section 303.1 Habitable Rooms: The following exceptions are added as
3 and 4:
3.   Provide light and ventilation by windows and doors in exterior walls with
both glazed and ventilating area of not less than two (2%) percent of the
basement floor area.
4.   When the floor of a recreation room is below grade level, provide light
and ventilation by windows or glazed doors in the exterior walls of not less
than four (4%) percent of the floor area.
      3.   Section 309.2 Separation Required. Section 309.2 is amended by
changing "1/2 inch (12.7 mm)" in Line 2 and 3 to "5/8 inch Type X".
      4.   Section 309.4 Separation. Section 309.4 is added as follows:
Detached garages and all other detached accessory structures shall maintain a
ten (10) foot (3048 mm) fire separation from all other structures.
      5.   Section 310.5 Basement Emergency Egress. Section 310.5 is added as
follows:
Either a door providing exit directly to the outside or an escape type window
located in an exterior wall approximately 26" x 32" (660.4 mm x 812.8 mm) in
size with adequate area-way well with a removable steel grate is to be provided
in each basement. The sill of the escape opening shall be a maximum of 44"
(1118 mm) above adjacent floor level.
      6.   Section 314.2 Treads and Risers. Section 314.2 is amended by
changing "73/4 inches (197 mm)" in line 2 to "81/4 inches (210 mm)" and "10
inches (254 mm)" in line 3 to "9 inches (229 mm)".
      7.   Section 316.1 Smoke Detectors. Delete "in each sleeping room".
      8.   Section 403 Footings. Delete "Solid Masonry" and "Wood Foundations"
in first sentence.
      9.   Section 403.1a Concrete and Masonry Foundation Details. The notes
are amended as follows:
2.   Add "but in no case to be less than 16 inches".
3.   Change 6 inches to 8 inches.
      10.   Section 404 Table 404.1a: Under column "Nominal Thickness", 6" is
amended to 8".
   C.   The CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code is further amended by adding
the following:
      1.   Section 502.10.1 Floor Truss Designs. All floor truss design for
prefabricated trusses must bear the seal of a State of Illinois Structural
Engineer, and shall be filed with the Building Official.
      2.   Section 602.7 Firestopping Required. Delete existing Note 1 from
subsection and add the following:
1.   In concealed spaces of stud walls and partitions, including furred spaces
at each floor or ceiling level and at the junction of roof rafters and wall.
      3.   Section 602.9 Wall Bracing. Delete "or approved metal strap devices
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications" from third and
fourth line of subsection.
      4.   Section 703.2 Weather-Resistant Sheathing Paper. Delete "as required
by Table 703.4" in fifth line of subsection.
      5.   Section 703.2.1 Felt or Material. Delete notes 2, 3 and 5 from
subsection.
The CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code is further amended by adding the
following:
      6.   802.11.1 Truss Designs. All prefabricated trusses shall bear the
seal of a registered State of Illinois structural engineer and shall be filed
with the Building Official.
   D.   There is hereby adopted each and every revision of this Code
hereinafter made by CABO International, Inc. Said revised Codes and all
supplements thereto, when adopted by CABO International, Inc., shall supersede
all other previous editions, supplements and printings in conflict therewith.
The provisions of such codes shall govern all matters covered therein to the
extent that the same are not in conflict with any provisions of this Code or
other ordinances of the City. (Ord. O-2-98, 1-26-1998)
ARTICLE I. CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-1I-1: Code Adopted
8-1I-2: Penalty
8-1I-1: CODE ADOPTED:
Sections 29 CFR 1926.650, 1926.651 and 1226.652 of the code of federal
regulations are hereby adopted by reference as regulations applicable to all
open excavations made in the earth's surface within the corporate limits of
Northlake. (Ord. O-12-2001, 5-7-2001)
8-1I-2: PENALTY:
Any person violating any portion of this article shall, upon conviction, be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. O-12-2001, 5-7-2001)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Permit Fees
8-2-2: House Numbers
8-2-3: Lodging And Rooming Houses
8-2-4: Inspection Of Improved Real Estate
8-2-5: Roll Roofing
8-2-6: Detached Garages
8-2-7: Orientation Of Single-Family Residence On Lot
8-2-8: Electrical Services; New Residential Construction
8-2-9: Impervious Surface Requirements
8-2-10:    Repair Of Roofs Of Single-Family Residences
8-2-1: PERMIT FEES:
The following fees shall be charged for permits for certain buildings,
structures or work regulated by this title:
 Contractor Homeowner
                                                   Contractor     Homeowner
Examination Of Plans:                                             
Single-family                                      Actual cost    Actual cost
Multi-family                                       Actual cost    Actual cost
Commercial                                         Actual cost    Actual cost
Industrial                                         Actual cost    Actual cost
Residential Construction – New:
Single-family residence
0–800 square feet                                $100.00        $100.00
801–1,500 square feet                            125.00         125.00
Each additional square foot                        5.00           5.00
Addition, dormer or 3 season room
Less than 100 square feet                          50.00 minimum  50.00 minimum
Each additional square foot                        3.00           3.00
Garage and garage additions
Up to 400 square feet                              30.00 minimum  30.00 minimum
Each additional 10 square feet                     1.00           1.00
Garage slabs
Costing less than $1,000.00                        50.00          25.00
Each additional $1,000.00                          10.00          5.00
Miscellaneous:
Driveways - asphalt, concrete and brick pavers                    
Costing less than $1,000.00                        50.00 minimum  25.00 minimum
Each additional $1,000.00                          10.00          5.00
Sidewalks, patio - concrete and brick pavers                      
Costing less than $1,000.00                        50.00 minimum  25.00 minimum
Each additional $1,000.00                          10.00          5.00
Siding, soffit, gutters, etc.
Costing less than $1,000.00                        50.00 minimum  25.00 minimum
Each additional $1,000.00                          10.00          5.00
Roofing                                                           
Costing less than $1,000.00                        50.00 minimum  25.00 minimum
Each additional $1,000.00                          10.00          5.00
Replacement windows and doors                                     
Costing less than $1,000.00                        50.00 minimum  25.00 minimum
Each additional $1,000.00                          10.00          5.00
Porches and decks                                                 
Costing less than $1,000.00                        50.00 minimum  25.00 minimum
Each additional $1,000.00                          10.00          5.00
Miscellaneous                                                     
Costing less than $1,000.00                        50.00 minimum  25.00 minimum
Each additional $1,000.00                          10.00          5.00
Fence                                              50.00          25.00
Shed                                               25.00          10.00
Swimming pools                                     50.00          25.00
Condominium Construction - New:
2 and 3 unit condo building - per unit             100.00
Each additional unit                               75.00
Commercial Construction - New:
First 30,000 cubic feet                            300.00 minimum
Each additional 10,000 cubic feet or fraction      50.00
thereof
Over 500,000 cubic feet                            25.00           
Addition or accessory building
Up to 20,000 cubic feet                            150.00 minimum  
Each additional 10,000 cubic feet over 20,000      50.00           
cubic feet
Industrial Construction - New:
First 3,000 square feet                            300.00 minimum  
Next 497,000 square feet/per 1,000 square feet     40.00           
Next 500,000 square feet/per 1,000 square feet     20.00           
All over 1,000,000 square feet/ per 1,000 square   10.00           
feet
Alteration Or Remodeling Or Fire Repair - All
Buildings Or Structures:
Costing less than $1,000.00                        50.00 minimum   
Each additional $1,000.00                          10.00           
Underground Tanks Installation:
Costing less than $1,000.00                        100.00 minimum  
Each additional $1,000.00                          25.00           
Tank Testing:
Each tank                                          50.00           
Moving, Raising, Shoring Or Underpinning Of
Structure:
For each 1,000 cubic feet of volume or fractional  2.00            
part
Minimum charge                                     100.00          
Wrecking:
For the first 25,000 cubic feet of volume          125.00          
For each additional 25,000 cubic feet of volume or 20.00           
fraction thereof
 
(Ord. O-24-2004, 12-6-2004)
Construction must be started under each permit within thirty (30) days after
date of issuance, and if such construction is not started, the permit shall be
void and the amount paid shall not be refunded. (Ord. O-17-93, 5-17-1993)
Each applicant shall provide on the permit, the date by which all construction
shall be started and the date it will be completed. The completion date shall
not exceed twelve (12) months after the starting date. If construction is not
completed by said completion date, the applicant shall apply to the chief
building official for an extension. An extension fee of one-half (1/2) of the
original permit fee shall be required upon approval of the extension. Approval
of an extension will not unreasonably be withheld by the chief. (Ord. O-17-93,
5-17-1993; amd. Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
8-2-2: HOUSE NUMBERS:
   A.   Lot And House Number Plat: The plat of house and lot numbers now on
file with the chief building official and identified by the chief as "Lot and
House Number Plat of the City of Northlake" is adopted as the official
designation of lot and house numbers in the city. The chief building official
shall have charge of such plat and shall assign to each building hereafter
erected its proper number or numbers as shown thereon. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-
1979; amd. Ord. O-36-97, 8-18-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
   B.   House Numbers Required; Size: The owner, agent or occupant of every
building shall number the same as provided by such plat. Each of the figures of
every number shall be not less than two and one-half inches (21/2") in length
so marked as to be easily and distinctly read.
   C.   Placement Of Numbers: The numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous
place on or at the side of, or above the front door of the building to which
the same are attached.
   D.   Penalties: Any agent, owner or occupant of any building who shall, for
thirty (30) days, neglect or refuse to number any building owned or occupied by
him in conformity with the plat herein referred to shall be subject to a
penalty of five dollars ($5.00) and a similar penalty for every thirty (30)
days thereafter, if he shall neglect or refuse to number such building or that
such building shall be without its number according to the requirements of this
section. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
8-2-3: LODGING AND ROOMING HOUSES:
   A.   Definition: As used herein, "lodging house" or "rooming house" shall
mean any house or building, or portion thereof, other than a licensed motel,
hotel or hospital, in which persons are harbored, received or lodged for hire
in a single night or for less than a week at a time or any part of which is let
for any person to sleep in for any period less than a month. (1976 Code § 13-2-
1)
   B.   Lodging Or Rooming Houses Prohibited: The operation and maintenance of
a lodging house or a rooming house is hereby prohibited within the city. (1976
Code § 13-2-2)
   C.   Penalties: Any person violating this section shall be fined not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day in which a lodging house or a
rooming house is maintained or operated shall constitute a separate offense.
(1976 Code § 13-2-3; amd. 1992 Code)
8-2-4: INSPECTION OF IMPROVED REAL ESTATE:
   A.   Certificate Of Compliance Required:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection B2 of this section, no single-
family residence, business, commercial or industrial structure or building
(hereinafter referred to as "property") shall be sold, leased, conveyed,
assigned or transferred in any way, unless the owner, seller, lessor, conveyor,
assignor or transferor (hereinafter referred to as "transferor") obtains a
certificate of compliance from the city based upon an inspection made of the
property. (Ord. O-19-98, 4-20-1998)
      2.   If the property is transferred through foreclosure, court
proceedings, an estate proceeding or any involuntary proceeding, the transferee
shall not occupy the property until a certificate of compliance is issued.
(Ord. O-20-92, 7-6-1992)
   B.   Inspection; Correction Of Violation:
      1.   A transferor shall apply to the city for inspection by the
department of public services within two (2) months of the date of contract,
but in any event no later than one month prior to the date of closing or
transfer. A certificate of zoning shall accompany all applications. Upon
inspection of the property, the inspector shall issue an inspection report
setting forth the findings of the inspector that the property either complies
with all building, zoning, health and safety regulations and ordinances of the
city or, in the alternative, listing the violations thereof. If the property
passes inspection and the transferor has presented a stamped receipt of final
water payment from the city finance department, a certificate of compliance
shall be issued. Otherwise, the transferor shall correct the violations before
closing or transfer of the property and upon reinspection and a finding that
all the violations have been corrected, and the transferor has presented a
stamped receipt of final water payment from the city finance department the
certificate of compliance shall be issued. (Ord. O-34-95, 7-17-1995)
      2.   A conditional certificate of compliance shall be issued in the event
that the buyer, lessee, assignee or transferee agrees to correct the violations
listed in the inspection report and the transferor has presented a stamped
receipt of final water payment from the city finance department. The
conditional certificate of compliance shall provide that the buyer, lessee,
assignee or transferee shall correct the violations in lieu of transferor and
shall not occupy the property until a certificate of compliance is issued,
unless the buyer, lessee, assignee or transferee within seventy two (72) hours
of closing applies for the necessary permits to correct the said code
violations, or the property is a commercial occupied building or rental
property, then buyer, lessee, assignee or transferee shall have one hundred
twenty (120) days to correct the violations. (Ord. O-25-96, 4-1-1996)
   C.   Nonliability Of City: The inspection of any building pursuant to the
terms of this section by the department of public services is for the purposes
of the city only, and the results of said inspection are not to be construed as
a representation to any person of the condition of same or a guarantee that the
property is free of mechanical or structural defects. The city shall not be
liable as a result of said inspection or for any claims arising from such
defects. (Ord. O-20-92, 7-6-1992; amd. Ord. O-06-94, 3-7-1994)
   D.   Fee For Inspection And Certificate Of Zoning: The fee for inspection
and certificate of zoning made at the request of any buyer, seller or real
estate broker or other agent shall be at the following rate schedule, payable
in advance at the time of the request:
Residential buildings:    
 Apartment building                      $200.00 plus $30.00 for each unit
 Condominium unit                        $250.00
 Single-family                           250.00
Commercial buildings; square footage:    
 0 to 3,000                              200.00
 3,001 to 5,000                          250.00
 5,001 to 8,000                          300.00
 8,001 to 10,000                         350.00
 10,001 to 15,000                        400.00
 15,001 to 25,000                        450.00
 25,001 to 100,000                       500.00
 100,001 and over                        550.00
Industrial buildings; square footage:    
 0 to 3,000                              400.00
 3,001 to 5,000                          450.00
 5,001 to 8,000                          500.00
 8,001 to 10,000                         550.00
 10,001 to 15,000                        600.00
 15,001 to 25,000                        650.00
 25,001 to 100,000                       700.00
 100,001 and over                        750.00
 
(Ord. O-23-2011, 11-21-2011)
   E.   Penalty: Any person who participates in the sale or transfer of the
property, including seller, buyer, real estate broker, real estate agent, legal
agent or title company in violation of this section shall be fined not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for such offense on each day the violation
occurs. (Ord. O-20-92, 7-6-1992)
   F.   Residential Real Property Disclosure Report:
      1.   The residential real property disclosure report, pursuant to 765
Illinois Compiled Statutes 77/1 et seq. (residential real property disclosure
act), a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, be and is
hereby adopted as the residential real property disclosure report for the city
for the purpose of providing prospective buyers with information about material
defects in the residential real property as herein provided; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said report, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
subsection. A copy of said disclosure report form is hereby attached thereto
and made a part hereof.
      2.   Effective October 1, 1994, sellers are required, pursuant to 765
Illinois Compiled Statutes 77/1 et seq. (residential real property disclosure
act), to provide both sides of said report form to all prospective buyers
before a purchase contract is signed.
      3.   The seller shall certify that the information provided is based on
the actual notice or actual knowledge of the seller without any specific
investigation or inquiry on the part of the seller. The seller shall authorize
any person representing any principal in the transaction to provide a copy of
said report, and to disclose any information contained in said report to any
person in connection with any actual or anticipated sale of the property. (Ord.
O-28-94, 11-7-1994)
      4.   This disclosure report shall be made available to the prospective
buyer within the time frame and period provided for by the Illinois department
of professional regulations. (Ord. O-30-94, 11-21-1994)
8-2-5: ROLL ROOFING:
The use of roll roofing on roofs with a pitch of three to twelve (3/12) or
greater is hereby prohibited. (Ord. O-27-2003, 11-17-2003)
8-2-6: DETACHED GARAGES:
The following requirements shall apply to the construction of all detached
garages in any area zoned residential:
   A.   All garages must have a roof pitch of three to twelve (3/12) or
greater.
   B.   No garage shall have a wall height in excess of nine feet (9') as
measured from the top of the foundation. (Ord. O-27-2003, 11-17-2003)
8-2-7: ORIENTATION OF SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE ON LOT:
The following requirements shall apply to the construction of all single-family
residences:
   A.   The front elevation and front door of the residence shall face the
public street;
   B.   A newly constructed single-family home may not be located next to,
across the street from or cater corner from another such newly constructed or
existing residential structure which has the same front elevation or the same
configuration of building materials or the same colors facing the public
street. (Ord. O-40-2006, 12-18-2006)
8-2-8: ELECTRICAL SERVICES; NEW RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION:
The following requirements shall apply to the construction of all single-family
residences:
   A.   The wiring providing electrical, phone, cable and all other services to
the home shall be placed underground;
   B.   The electrical service shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) amps.
(Ord. O-01-2007, 1-8-2007)
8-2-9: IMPERVIOUS SURFACE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Impervious Surfaces: For purposes of this section "impervious surfaces"
shall include all areas in a lot of record covered by the principal building,
any accessory buildings and any hard surfaced, non-naturally occurring area
that does not readily absorb water, including, but not limited to, any paved,
asphalt or concrete areas, swimming pools and sidewalks.
   B.   Limitation On Impervious Surfaces: The following limitations shall
apply to any lot of record located in a residential zoning district:
      1.   For lots between 5,000 and 6,000 square feet in size no more than
sixty five percent (65%) of the lot may be covered by impervious surfaces.
      2.   For lots between 6,001 and 8,000 square feet in size no more than
fifty five percent (55%) of the lot may be covered by impervious surfaces.
      3.   For lots that are 8,001 square feet in size or larger no more than
fifty percent (50%) of the lot may be covered by impervious surfaces. (Ord. O-
01-2021, 1-11-2021)
8-2-10: REPAIR OF ROOFS OF SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCES:
Whenever the roof of a single family residence is damaged by less than fifty
percent (50%) the roof may be repaired with roofing materials of a similar
composition and color, to match as closely as possible, an exact match not
being required. (Ord. O-05-2025, 3-3-2025)
CHAPTER 3
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definition
8-3-2: Dangerous Buildings Prohibited; Nuisance Declared
8-3-3: Abatement Procedures
8-3-4: Dangerous Buildings in Fire Limits
8-3-1: DEFINITION:
As used herein, "dangerous building" shall mean any building, shed, fence or
other man-made structure which:
   A.   Is dangerous to the public health because of its condition and which
may cause or aid in the spread of disease or injury to the health of the
occupants of it or of neighboring structures;
   B.   Because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other
cause, is especially liable to fire, and constitutes or creates a fire hazard;
   C.   By reason of faulty construction or any other cause, is liable to cause
injury or damage by collapsing or falling of any part of such structure;
   D.   Because of its condition or lack of doors or windows, is available to
and frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who are not lawful
occupants of such structure. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
8-3-2: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS PROHIBITED; NUISANCE DECLARED:
No person shall maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous building in
the City, and no owner, occupant or person in custody of any dangerous building
shall permit the same to remain in a dangerous condition or occupy such
building or permit it to be occupied while it is or remains in a dangerous
condition.
Any dangerous building in the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 1
(Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  4-2-2B of this Code.
8-3-3: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notice to Abate: Whenever the Director of Public Works, the Fire
Marshal or the Director of Health and Inspectional Services shall be of the
opinion that any building or structure in the City is a dangerous building, he
shall file a written statement to this effect with the City Clerk. The Clerk
shall, thereupon, cause written notice to be served upon the owner thereof and
upon the occupant thereof, if any, by registered or certified mail or by
personal service. Such notice shall state that the building has been declared
to be in dangerous condition, and that such dangerous condition must be removed
or remedied by repairing or altering the building or by demolishing it, and
that the condition must be remedied at once. Such notice may be in the
following form:
"To                      (owner-occupant of premises) of the premises known and
described as                     .
You are hereby notified that (described building) on the premises above
described has been condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous building after
inspection by                     .
The causes for this decision are (here insert the facts as to the dangerous
condition.).
You must remedy this condition or demolish the building immediately, or the
City will proceed to do so."
   B.   Abatement by the City: If the person receiving such notice has not
complied therewith or taken an appeal from the determination of the officer or
employe finding that a dangerous condition exists within ten (10) days from the
time when this notice is served upon such person by personal service or by
registered mail, the Director of Public Works may, upon orders of the Council,
proceed to remedy the condition or demolish the dangerous building. (1976 Code
§5-3-4)
8-3-4: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS IN FIRE LIMITS:
   A.   Any building or structure within the fire limits of the City which has
or may be damaged by fire, decay or other cause to the extent of fifty percent
(50%) of its value shall be torn down and removed.
   B.   Upon written notice filed with the City Clerk by the Director of Public
Works, the Director of Health and Inspectional Services or the Fire Marshal,
the Clerk shall notify the Council of the receipt of such notice. The Council
shall then appoint three (3) persons to determine whether or not such building
or structure has been damaged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its
value.
   C.   A copy of the notice of the appointment of this board of three (3)
persons to determine the damage shall be served upon the owner of the premises
by personal service or by registered or certified mail to his last known
address. Such notice shall be in substantially the following form:
"To                     
"You are hereby notified that                      has determined that the
building owned by you at                      located within the fire limits of
the City has been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise to the extent of fifty
percent (50%) of its value and that a board of three (3) persons has been
appointed to verify this finding, which board will hold its first meeting, in
the City Hall on the       day of            at the hour of       o'clock, at
which time it will determine whether this finding is correct.
If this finding is verified by the board, you must tear down and remove said
building."
   D.   If the board members determine that the building in question has been
damaged to the extent fifty percent (50%) of its value, the owner shall tear
down or remove the building within twenty (20) days after the finding of the
board. No person shall occupy or permit such building to be occupied after such
finding. (1976 Code §5-3-5)
CHAPTER 4
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Permit to Move Buildings
8-4-2: Building Moving Operations
8-4-3: Time Limit for Building Removal
8-4-1: PERMIT TO MOVE BUILDINGS:
The person with a house mover's license 1  shall, in each and every instance,
before moving any building, obtain a written permit to do so from the Director
of Health and Inspectional Services and shall pay the requisite fee as
prescribed under this Code. 2  Thereupon, the Director of Health and
Inspectional Services shall issue a permit stating specifically the conditions,
prescribing the route to be taken and limiting the time for the removal.
No permit shall be issued for the removal of any building in the City, except
under the requirements of the provisions of the Building Code. 3  (1976 Code
§6-21-5)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 3, Chapter 9, Article D of this Code.
2 2. See Section
  3-1A-1 of this Code.
3 3. See Chapter 1, Article A of this Title.
8-4-2: BUILDING MOVING OPERATIONS:
Every house mover, while using any portion of the street or sidewalk, shall
cause at least one red light to be placed in a conspicuous place in front and
one in rear of any building or any other obstruction placed in the street by
him from sunset to sunrise of each night. He shall also leave all streets and
alleys over which he has moved any building in as good condition as they were
previously to being used by him and shall strictly comply with the terms of his
permit. (1976 Code §6-21-6)
8-4-3: TIME LIMIT FOR BUILDING REMOVAL:
The owner of any building or the contractor of its removal, either or both, who
shall suffer the same to be or remain in any of the streets or alleys or upon
any of the public grounds of the City for any time longer than may be specified
in his permit shall forfeit a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) and a like
penalty for every twenty four (24) hours the same shall be continued. Unless
such building is removed within such reasonable time as the Mayor may
determine, he may declare the same to be a nuisance and cause its removal.
(1976 Code §6-21-7)
CHAPTER 5
FENCES
SECTION:
8-5-1: Definitions
8-5-2: Permit Required; Application; Fee
8-5-3: Construction Requirements; Restrictions
8-5-4: Authority To Review All Fence Variances
8-5-5: Penalty
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ANIMAL RUN: A completely enclosed fence for the exercising or containment of an
animal.
BARRIER: Any obstacles or obstruction, natural or otherwise, erected to bar
passage.
BARRIER AREA: That area derived by multiplying the length times the height
measured at the topmost member.
BARRIER HEIGHT: The height of the barrier shall be measured to the topmost
member including any ornamental member located on the top of the fence.
CORNER BARRIER: Any open barrier extending in one or two (2) directions
parallel to said property lines, driveways, or sidewalks, not exceed five feet
(5') in either direction.
CORNER SIDE LOT LINE: On corner lots, one side of the lot shall be defined as
being a front lot line, the other lot line, adjacent to street, shall be the
corner side lot line.
FENCE: A structure or growth not otherwise a part of any building or structure,
which enclosed or partially encloses any parcel of land.
FRONTAGE: That portion of a lot between the front building setback line and the
street right of way. Every lot shall have only one front lot line and shall be
the narrowest side of the lot line which adjoins a street. Where such lot lines
are not obviously evident, the Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning and Economic
Development Commission shall determine the front lot line.
OPEN BARRIER: A barrier in which the openings between the materials of which
the barrier is constructed represents more than seventy percent (70%) of the
total barrier. (Ord. O-12-2000, 3-6-2000)
8-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE:
   A.   No person, firm, corporation, or trust owning or occupying land or
premises within the City, nor shall other persons or contractors construct upon
said premises any fence, barrier, or other structure without having first
obtained a permit from the City.
   B.   All applications for fence or barrier permits shall be made to the
Building Department and shall include such information as will be sufficient to
show compliance with this Chapter.
   C.   Working without a permit or not requesting the required inspections
shall be charged an additional fee. This fee shall be computed to an amount
that is equal to twice the initial application and permit fee and/or an amount
that is equal to twice the initial inspection fees.
   D.   The fee for a fence, barrier, or other structure shall be as per City
fee schedule. (Ord. O-12-2000, 3-6-2000)
8-5-3: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Any fence or barrier shall be constructed of harmonious material to be
designated at the time of application; provided, that no barrier or fence may
be constructed or maintained which is composed in whole or part of any
dangerous or hazardous material or containing any wire which is charged with
electric.
   B.   Any type of chain-link fence or barrier shall be constructed with the
sharp points pointed down.
   C.   Any fence or barrier that is determined by the Building Commissioner to
have different types of sides, shall be constructed so the attractive side
faces away from the property on which the fence or barrier is constructed.
   D.   All fences or barriers shall be maintained in a safe, neat and
attractive condition, free from rot or deterioration and shall not be leaning.
   E.   No fence shall be built in the area between the front of a house and
the street. For corner lots, if there are homes fronting the street on the same
block and same side on which the adjacent side yard is located, no fence shall
be constructed in such corner side yard which protrudes past the front yard
setback of the homes on the adjacent street.
   F.   A fence shall be constructed in such a fashion so that all portions of
the fence shall be located within the owner's property and shall be a minimum
of three inches (3") from the owner's property line. The owner shall be
responsible for maintaining the minimum setback of three inches (3"). A barrier
or fence may be erected or maintained upon a public utility or drainage
easement provided that the owner agrees in writing at the time of permit
application that the utility company and/or City may not be refused the right
to use of the said easements, and that if the fence or any portion thereof is
required to be removed for such utility company's or City's use of the
easement, the cost of such removal and replacement of the fence shall be at the
expense of the owner. No fence shall be constructed in such a manner as to
impede or alter the natural surface water drainage of the property upon which
the fence is constructed or any adjoining property. The bottom of the fence
shall be a minimum of three inches (3") above the drainage area.
   G.   No more than four (4) corner fences on a lot is permitted. Front or
corner side yards shall have only open type barriers. Front yard or corner side
yard open fences shall be a maximum of thirty inches (30") in height and shall
not exceed five feet (5') in either direction. Rear yard fences shall be a
maximum of six feet (6') in height.
   H.   If the Building Commissioner considers a fence to be a public safety
hazard, either prior to, during, or after construction he may stop the
construction of the fence and submit his recommendations to the Zoning Board of
Appeals, Planning and Economic Development Commission who may declare such
fence to be a public nuisance and direct removal of such fence as may be
permitted by law.
   I.   No fences may be placed in the landscaping easement that may interfere
with City-approved landscaping, berms, or drainage. The Building Commissioner
will make a determination as to whether or not a fence can be installed in the
easement. Any growth or previous plantings in the easements must remain intact
unless deemed necessary for removal by the Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning
and Economic Development Commission.
   J.   Animal runs shall not be allowed in front or side yards and the
perimeter of such animal run shall not be closer than five feet (5') from the
adjoining property lines. On corner lots, no animal run shall be in that area
between the corner side lot line and the building setback line. Said animal
runs shall have an area not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet and not
more than six feet (6') in height.
   K.   When the owner's fence is to be attached to a neighbor's fence, written
permission from the neighbor shall be obtained and submitted with the permit
application.
   L.   A rear yard fence or barrier shall be a maximum height of six feet
(6'). Alterations to the existing grade level preceding the use of a fence for
the purpose of altering the height of the fence shall not be permitted.
   M.   (1)   Every fence to be erected within the City shall be designed and
constructed to resist and withstand a wind pressure of at least twenty (20)
pounds per square foot of the gross proposed area of the fence, less any
opening from any angle of approach.
      (2)   All fence posts used in the construction of a fence shall be buried
in the ground to a depth of at least two feet (2') or one-third (1/3) of the
total length of said fence post in greater than two feet (2'). Said posts shall
be set in concrete.
      (3)   All fence parts and anchors made of wood or other organic material
shall be treated with a chemical treatment to protect them from deterioration
when they are placed in or upon the ground.
      (4)    Fence posts for chain-link or split rail fences shall be buried in
the ground to a minimum depth of at least two feet (2') or one-third (1/3) the
total length of said post, whichever is greater. The posts shall be set in
concrete. Fence posts for all other fences shall be buried in the ground to a
minimum depth of forty-two inches (42") or one-third (1/3) the total length of
said post, whichever is greater. The posts shall be set in concrete. When
setting posts in concrete, the post shall be set on a bed of gravel at least
six inches (6") in depth with concrete pored around the posts as a "collar" and
not under post, to allow for drainage.
   N.   Chicken wire, square welded mesh wire, barbed wire, temporary snow
fence, solid concrete block, and sharp-edged material long the top or sides are
considered non suitable.
   O.   Any existing fence along a property line must be removed before the
owner of the existing fence may construct a replacement fence. (Ord. O-21-2020,
12-21-2020; amd. Ord. O-12-2021, 5-17-2021)
8-5-4: AUTHORITY TO REVIEW ALL FENCE VARIANCES:
The Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning and Economic Development Commission shall
have the authority to hear appeals from and review any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Building Commissioner/Inspector charged
with enforcement of this Chapter, or hear applications for variances from this
Chapter. The process shall be held in accordance with policies and procedures
of the Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning and Economic Development Commission as
regulated by the City zoning code. (Ord. O-12-2000, 3-6-2000)
8-5-5: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation, or trust violating any of the provisions of this
Chapter, shall, upon conviction, be fined in a sum not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each
day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. O-12-2000, 3-6-2000)
CHAPTER 6
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
ARTICLE A. SIGNS 1
SECTION:
8-6A-1: Rules And Definitions
8-6A-2: Fees
8-6A-3: Prohibited Signs
8-6A-4: Permitted Signs
8-6A-5: Sign Regulations In Zoning Districts
8-6A-5-1: Signs In R-1 And R-2 Districts
8-6A-5-2: Signs In R-3 District
8-6A-5-3: Signs In B-1, B-2, B-3 And B-4 Districts
8-6A-5-4: Signs In I-1 And I-2 Districts
8-6A-6: Compliance Of Existing Signs
8-6A-7: Portable Signs
8-6A-8: Design And Construction Standards
8-6A-9: Location And Placement
8-6A-10: Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-1C-4 of this title for electric signs.
8-6A-1: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
In the interpretation of this article, the rules and definitions contained
herein shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
The definitions of the following terms shall be applicable when interpreting or
construing the provisions of this article:
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign no longer correctly advertising a bona fide business,
institution, lessor, owner, product or activity available or located on the
premises where the sign is displayed.
ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by
any movement or rotation.
ARCADE SIGN: A wall or projecting sign attached to the roof or wall of an
arcade and totally within the outside limits of the structural surfaces which
are delineating the arcade.
AREA: The total exposed surface devoted to the sign message or graphic,
including all ornamentation, embellishment and symbols, but excluding the
supporting structure which does not form part of the sign proper or of the
display. The area of a graphic composed of characters or words attached
directly to a large, uniform building wall surface shall be the smallest
rectangle which encloses the whole group. In the case of a sign or graphic
designed with more than one exterior surface containing items of information,
the area shall be computed as including only the maximum single display surface
which is visible from any one ground position.
AREA DEFINITIONS:
   R-1 Single-family residence district
   R-2 Two-family residence district
   R-3 General residence district
   B-1 Retail business district
   B-2 Retail and service business district
   B-3 Office business district
   B-4 High rise hotels and motels
   I-1 Limited industrial district
   I-2 General industrial district
ATTENTION GETTING DEVICE: Any pennant, flag, valance, banner, propeller,
spinner, streamer, searchlights, balloon, audio device and similar device or
ornamentation designed for the purposes of attracting attention, promotion or
advertising.
AWNING: Any structure made of cloth, metal or other material attached to a
building when the same is so erected as to permit its being raised or retracted
to a position against the building when not in use.
BILLBOARD OR POSTERBOARD: A single or double faced sign, permanently fixed or
placed on the premises, which may have changeable copy, pictures or other
indicia; or a graphic used for the display of information not associated with
the establishment located on the same premises as the graphic.
BUILDING LINE: The line as established by the face of the building.
BUILDING SIGN: A sign attached to and supported by the exterior of any part of
a building except the roof.
CANOPY: A structure, other than an awning, made of cloth, metal or other
material with frames attached to a building and carried by a frame supported by
the ground or sidewalks.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign whereon provision is made for letters or
characters to be placed in or upon the surface area either manually or
electronically to provide a message or picture.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: Director of health and inspectional services.
EXTERIOR RATE SIGN: Any sign upon which is designated or written out in words,
numbers or figures, describing rates, price or any combination thereof.
EXTERIOR WALL SURFACE: The most exterior part of a wall, sunscreen or any
screening material covering a building.
EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign illuminated by a source of light which is
cast upon or falls upon the surface or face of the sign to illuminate by
reflection only.
FESTOON LIGHTING: A group of two (2) or more incandescent light bulbs hung or
strung overhead, not from a building or structure, which are exposed to persons
on a public right of way or which are not shaded or hooded to prevent the
direct rays of light from being visible from the property line.
FLASHING SIGNS: Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign, either stationary
or animated, which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color
effects by any means whatsoever.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign completely or principally self-supported by posts or
other supports independent of any building or other structure and anchored in
or upon the ground. This term also includes those signs commonly known as
"ground sign" and "pole sign".
GRAPHIC: Any item of information, word or message attached directly to a
surface.
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign, all or part of which, is made of
incandescent or other types of lamps, or a sign with painted, flush or raised
letters lighted by an electric lamp or lamps attached thereto, or a sign having
a border of incandescent, fluorescent or vapor lamps thereto attached and
reflecting light thereon, or a transparent sign, whether lighted by electricity
or other illuminant.
ITEM OF INFORMATION: Any of the following: a syllable of a word, an
abbreviation, a number, a symbol, a geometric shape. In addition, graphics
combining several different geometric or nongeometric shapes or shapes of
unusual configuration are to be assessed one additional item for each
noncontinuous plane.
MARQUEE: Any hood of permanent construction projecting from the wall of a
building but not supported by the ground or sidewalk serving the purpose of
providing shelter and protection from the weather.
MOVING SIGN: Any sign which rotates or moves or gives the visual impression of
rotation or moving.
NAMEPLATE: A sign which displays only the name and/or address of the occupant,
is nonelectrical and does not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a use, business,
commodity, service or activity not conducted, sold or offered upon the premises
where the sign is located. This term also includes those signs commonly known
as "advertising signs", "billboards" and "posterpanels".
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign which relates solely to a use, business or profession
conducted or to a principal commodity, service or entertainment sold, provided
or offered upon the premises where the sign is located. This term also includes
those signs commonly known as "business signs".
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign that is not permanently affixed to a building,
structure or the ground; a sign designed to be moved from place to place. These
signs primarily include, but are not limited to, signs attached to wood or
metal frames designed to be self-supporting and movable, paper, cardboard or
canvas signs wrapped around supporting poles. Also included are those signs,
commonly trailer mounted, and designed to be moved from place to place and
signs or graphics displayed on vehicles. This term also includes those signs
commonly known as "sandwich signs" or "A-frame signs".
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign supported by a building or other structure which
projects over any street, sidewalk, alley or public way or public easement or
which projects more than twelve inches (12") from the face of any building,
structure or supporting wall. This term also includes those signs commonly
known as "overhanging signs" or "side mounted signs".
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign located for purposes of advertising a parcel or
building to be available for sale, rental or lease.
ROOF SIGN: A sign erected, constructed or maintained, in whole or in part, upon
or over the roof of a building or structure.
ROOFLINE: Either the edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever
forms the top line of the building silhouette, and where a building has several
roof levels, this roof or parapet shall be the one belonging to that portion of
the building on whose wall the sign is located.
SHOPPING CENTER: Any concentration of retail stores and service establishments
in one or more buildings, under single ownership or management, with common
parking facilities.
SIGN: Any object, device, display or structure or part thereof situated
outdoors which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event or location by means including words, letters, figures, designs,
symbols, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination or projected images. The term
"sign" includes, but is not limited to, every projecting sign, wall sign,
painted sign, roof sign, billboard, posterboard, freestanding sign, ground
sign, pole sign, window sign, vehicle sign, awning, canopy, marquee, changeable
copy sign, temporary sign, portable sign, pennants, banners, streamers or any
other attention getting device or other display, whether affixed to a building
or separate from any building.
SIGN STRUCTURE: A structure constructed for the purpose of displaying a sign.
SIGN SURFACE AREA: The area of a sign shall be computed by the customary
applicable mathematical formula for the shape of the sign face including both
copy, background and any frame or boxed display or, in the case of a sign made
up of separate letters or characterizations connected in meaning, by computing
the area lying within straight lines connecting the extreme projections,
corners or edges of the letters, characters and other figures composing the
sign taken as a whole. Where a sign has two (2) or more display faces of
unequal dimensions, the area of the largest face shall determine the sign
surface area.
STREET BANNER: Any banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed
of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials,
with or without frames.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display
constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light
materials, with or without frames, for use for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days.
TIME AND/OR TEMPERATURE SIGNS; DIGITAL, ALPHABETICAL OR GRAPHIC READOUT:
   A.   "Time signs" shall be permitted to change no more frequently than
thirty (30) second intervals.
   B.   "Temperature signs" shall not change except when the temperature
changes one degree (1o).
   C.   "Time and temperature signs in combination": If the same surface area
is provided for both time and temperature, the frequency of change shall be no
more frequently than five (5) second intervals. If separate space is provided
on the sign surface area for time and temperature, then subsections A and B of
this definition shall apply.
UNDER CANOPY SIGN: Any sign suspended beneath a canopy or marquee. These signs
are intended, generally, to attract pedestrian traffic.
UNUSUALLY SHAPED SIGNS: Signs of unusual shapes such as globes or portions of
globes, cylinders or pyramids shall be considered double faced signs, and the
area of the sign shall be computed as the total of the exposed surfaces.
VEHICLE SIGN: Any advertising or business sign attached to a motor vehicle
which is parked or placed in position for the purpose of displaying the same to
the public.
WALL SIGN: A sign mounted, attached to or painted on the exterior wall surface
in a place parallel to that of the supporting wall. A wall sign may not project
more than twelve inches (12") from the plane of the structure to which it is
attached.
WINDOW SIGN: A sign visible from the exterior of a building or structure which
is painted on a window, depicted upon a card or paper or other material and
placed on or taped on the window or displayed from a window for the specific
purpose of identifying the proprietor or name of business to the passerby.
(Ord. O-06-2011, 2-14-2011)
8-6A-2: FEES:
The fees charged for all permitted signs as provided for in this article shall
be those fees as provided for by the applicable ordinances of the city 1 .
(Ord. O-06-2011, 2-14-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-1C-4-4 of this title.
8-6A-3: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs are prohibited anywhere within the city:
   A.   Inflatable signs except that inflatable signs are allowed once per
calendar quarter for no more than three (3) consecutive days;
   B.   Portable roof signs;
   C.   Street banners and festoon lights not authorized by the city council;
   D.   Commercial signs which promote an enterprise not in existence, or
product or service no longer sold;
   E.   Moving signs;
   F.   Signs which contain statements, words or pictures of obscene, indecent
or immoral character and which offend public morals or decency;
   G.   Miscellaneous signs, graphics or street banners other than those which
conform to the provisions of this code;
   H.   Signs in conflict with traffic signals;
   I.   Signs, graphics or street banners within the public right of way or
easements for public utilities, except as hereinafter specifically provided;
   J.   Vehicle signs, except as hereinafter specifically provided;
   K.   Signs that are of a size, shape, location, movement, content, coloring
or manner of illumination which may be confused with or construed as a traffic
control device or which hides from view any traffic or street sign or signal;
   L.   Signs that move in any manner or have a major moving part;
   M.   Flashing signs. (Ord. O-06-2011, 2-14-2011)
8-6A-4: PERMITTED SIGNS:
The following signs shall be permitted anywhere within the city and, except as
specifically provided, shall not require a permit:
   A.   Construction signs, identifying the architects, engineers, contractors,
but not including the advertisement of any product, and announcing the intended
character of the building; up to a maximum area of four (4) square feet for
each firm. The signs shall be confined to the site of the construction, and
shall be removed within fourteen (14) days after the issuance of an occupancy
permit for the building under construction.
   B.   Real estate signs not exceeding a total area of four (4) square feet
advertising the sale or rental of all, or part, of the premises on which the
signs are displayed. These signs must be removed within seven (7) days after
the sale is closed or the lease signed.
   C.   Political campaign signs, announcing the candidates seeking public
political office and other data pertinent thereto, and/or relating to issues to
be voted upon in an upcoming election, which are confined exclusively within
private property anywhere in the city.
   D.   Street banners and spotlights advertising a public entertainment or
event, if specially approved by the corporate authorities and then only for
locations designated by said council, during fourteen (14) days before and
three (3) days after the event.
   E.   Pennants or streamers or signs or flags specifically approved by the
corporate authorities after a showing that the pennants, streamers or signs or
flags are an integral part of a campaign or program for the promotion of a
specific product or event, such as an anniversary, new product, termination of
business, grand opening or other like functions and then only upon written
request for the location and period of time designated by the corporate
authorities, which period of time shall not exceed fifteen (15) days. Any sign
permitted to be displayed shall not be in excess of twenty (20) square feet in
area. No flashing or sequential lights shall be allowable and any business,
person or location shall be entitled to only one such approval by the corporate
authorities within any single calendar year. Any signs, pennants, streamers or
flags so used shall be mounted in a secure fashion and shall in all other
respects comply with all other applicable provisions of this chapter and other
ordinances of the city.
   F.   Signs advertising remodeling on the premises where the work is being
performed must be removed within seven (7) days following completion of the
remodeling work. (Ord. O-06-2011, 2-14-2011)
8-6A-5: SIGN REGULATIONS IN ZONING DISTRICTS:
8-6A-5-1: SIGNS IN R-1 AND R-2 DISTRICTS:
The following special purpose and temporary signs shall be permitted in the R-
1 and R-2 zoning districts subject to the limitations set forth below:
   A.   Traffic control signs, as defined in the motor vehicle act of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes 1  subject to the provisions of said act.
   B.   Signs required to be maintained or posted by law or government order,
rule or regulation.
   C.   Memorial plaques, historical tablets and the like.
   D.   Directional signs, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, intending
to facilitate the movement of pedestrians and vehicles within the site upon
which such signs are located.
   E.   Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area located upon private
property and directed toward the prevention of trespassing.
   F.   Signs, pertaining to campaigns, drives or events of a political, civic,
philanthropic, educational or religious nature; provided, that permission of
the city council must be obtained to erect such signs upon or over public
property.
   G.   Flags or emblems of a political, civic, philanthropic, educational or
religious nature. (Ord. O-06-2011, 2-14-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS.
8-6A-5-2: SIGNS IN R-3 DISTRICT:
The special purpose and temporary signs permitted in the R-1 and R-2 zoning
districts are permitted in the R-3 district with the same restrictions.
   A.   Signs For Apartments: To facilitate the business pursuit of apartment
buildings, each such apartment building is permitted to have an externally
illuminated, internally illuminated or nonilluminated sign pertaining to
services or vacancies or features of the apartment building to which it is
attached. Such sign shall not exceed an area of two feet by four feet (2' x
4'), and such sign can be pole mounted in front or on the side of the building
on the property belonging to the building as outlined in the Northlake
electrical code 1 , sections 59-5.5-4233 to 59-5.5-4275. (Ord. O-06-2011, 2-14-
2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 1, article C of this title.
8-6A-5-3: SIGNS IN B-1, B-2, B-3 AND B-4 DISTRICTS:
The following regulations shall be applicable to the areas B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-
4 zoning districts of the city:
   A.   Signs are permitted, subject to the following general restrictions:
      1.   Frontage Area: Each side of a building or a lot facing a street
constitutes a separate frontage area.
      2.   Location:
         a.   Except as herein specifically provided, all signs must be on or
over private property with no portion protruding over public property.
         b.   No sign shall be permitted on the rear of a building with the
exception of a nonilluminated nameplate and directory sign protruding no more
than three-fourths inch (3/4") and not to exceed eight inches by twenty four
inches (8" x 24"). Messages on such directory signs shall be restricted to
direction giving legends, such as "Delivery Dock" or "Employee Parking".
      3.   Size:
         a.   An on premises sign for any business occupying less than twenty
five feet (25') of street frontage shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet
in area. The maximum may increase by increments of sixteen (16) square feet for
each story.
         b.   The maximum area of an on premises sign for a business with a
street frontage greater than twenty five feet (25') shall increase by twenty
five percent (25%) for each additional fifteen feet (15') of frontage.
         c.   On a corner location, the total frontage of all streets may be
used to determine the maximum area of a sign.
         d.   The gross area of an off premises sign shall not exceed two
thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet.
   B.   Freestanding Signs: Except for signs intended to be shown to a raised
roadway, the height of freestanding signs shall not be greater than one hundred
twenty five percent (125%) of the maximum height of any building permitted in
the same zone. The height of a freestanding sign intended to be shown to a
raised roadway shall be limited to forty feet (40') above the roadway to which
the sign is intended to be shown. Should a pole mounted graphic be mounted in
an area where motorized traffic is possible, the minimum height above ground
level to bottom of the sign must be fourteen feet (14').
   C.   Wall Signs: Wall signs must be on premises signs.
   D.   Graphics:
      1.   Graphics, other than directional arrows pertaining to the flow of
traffic, parking stripes and stripes indicating a thoroughfare or a cautioning
light or a stoplight, shall not be painted on or affixed to a street, sidewalk
or parking lot.
      2.   Building fascias or roof fascias may not be painted to form, in
their total concept, a graphic or be part of a sign.
      3.   Graphics painted on a bench for public use shall be permissible 1 ,
provided no day-glo or retro reflective paints or materials are used.
   E.   Vehicle Signs: Vehicle signs for a temporary charitable or political
purpose or markings announcing the type of business or service to which the
vehicle pertains such as name, service or business, address and telephone
numbers are permitted. (Ord. O-06-2011, 2-14-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 7, chapter 5 of this code for public benches.
8-6A-5-4: SIGNS IN I-1 AND I-2 DISTRICTS:
All regulations, restrictions and uses applicable to the R-1, R-2, R-3, B-1, B-
2, B-3 and B-4 zoning districts of the city shall be applicable to the I-1 and
I-2 industrial districts. (Ord. O-06-2011, 2-14-2011)
8-6A-6: COMPLIANCE OF EXISTING SIGNS:
All signs presently existing in the city not in compliance with the terms of
this article shall either be removed or made to comply herewith within the
period of three (3) years from the effective date hereof. (Ord. O-06-2011, 2-
14-2011)
8-6A-7: PORTABLE SIGNS:
   A.   Permit And Fee Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to erect, maintain, operate or
use a portable sign in the city without first obtaining a permit therefor.
      2.   Term Of Permit: Unless otherwise authorized by the city, a permit
for a portable sign may be issued for a period not to exceed ten (10) days.
      3.   Permit Fee: The fee for such permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00)
for a not for profit organization and fifty dollars ($50.00) for all others. In
addition, all applicants for illuminated portable signs shall pay the
applicable fees for inspection and permits as scheduled by the electrical code
of the city 1 .
      4.   Number Of Permits: Unless authorized by the city, no more than two
(2) 10-day permits per calendar year shall be issued for any specific location.
   B.   Compliance With Regulations: All portable signs for which permits are
issued in the city shall comply with all of the applicable ordinances relating
to signs. Portable signs shall contain no flashing lights or beacons and shall
be placed on private property where the business or activity that is advertised
on the sign is located and shall be placed in such a position so as not to
cause or create a hazardous or dangerous condition to the public or vehicular
traffic. No portable sign shall exceed five feet (5') from the bottom of the
sign to the top or ten feet (10') from one side to the other. The top of a
portable sign shall not be more than eight feet (8') above ground level. (Ord.
O-06-2011, 2-14-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 1, article C of this title.
8-6A-8: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Compliance: All signs erected, constructed, altered, relocated or
maintained within the city shall comply with the building code, the national
electrical code and all other ordinances. All electronic signs shall be
hardwired in accordance with the national electrical code.
   B.   Design Standards:
      1.   All signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind loads
of at least thirty (30) pounds per square foot on all parts of the sign face
and structure.
      2.   Angle irons, chains, wires, supports and braces shall be hidden from
public view to the extent technically feasible.
      3.   All signs shall comply with the construction standards of the most
recently adopted edition of the International Code Council building code and
the national electric code.
      4.   Electrical equipment or apparatus causing interference with radio
and television reception are prohibited.
      5.   All signs shall have permanently attached a clearly legible plate
identifying the owner of the sign, the person, firm or corporation responsible
for erecting the sign and the date of erection.
      6.   All structures and poles supporting ground signs shall be self-
supporting and erected on or permanently anchored to concrete foundations.
      7.   No signs shall be suspended by chains or other means that could
allow lateral movement.
   C.   Area Computation And Height Limitations:
      1.   The area of building wall, fascia, or canopy (marquee) sign shall
consist of the entire sign area within a single continuous perimeter composed
of a square, rectangle or other geometric configuration which encloses the
extreme limits of the advertising message announcement or decoration of a sign.
When individual letters are used, the sign area shall be determined by the
above procedure and shall include all of the blank space, as well as the
individual letters, in the square foot area thus determined.
      2.   The area of the ground mounted sign shall consist of the entire sign
area within the single continuous perimeter composed of a square, rectangle or
other configuration which encloses the extreme limits of the sign including any
supports and embellishments which form an integral part of the display. If the
sign consists of more than one section or module, all areas will be totaled.
(Ord. O-06-2011, 2-14-2011)
8-6A-9: LOCATION AND PLACEMENT:
   A.   No sign shall obstruct a fire escape, exit, door or window intended as
a means of ingress and egress.
   B.   No sign shall obstruct an opening required for ventilation.
   C.   Signs shall maintain clearance from all surface, aboveground and
underground utilities and facilities and shall not interfere with drainage.
   D.   No sign shall interfere with or obstruct the view to or from traffic
control devices, intersections, driveways, roadways, sidewalks, alleys or
crosswalks.
   E.   No sign shall interfere with or obstruct the circulation and flow of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   F.   No roof sign shall be placed so as to interfere with movement on or
access to a roof.
   G.   No sign shall project over a public right of way without the prior
approval of the city.
   H.   Sign locations accessible to vehicles shall have a minimum vertical
clearance of sixteen feet (16') above grade.
   I.   Canopy signs and other signs located over pedestrianways shall have a
minimum vertical clearance of eight feet (8') above grade.
   J.   No roof sign shall extend more than ten feet (10') above the highest
point of the roof on which it is installed.
   K.   Signs should comply with the restrictions established in table 1, "Sign
Standards By Zoning District", which is attached to the ordinance codified
herein and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. O-06-2011, 2-14-2011)
8-6A-10: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any provision of this article, or any provision of any
rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto shall, upon conviction, be punished
by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for such violation.
Each day's failure to comply with this article and any rule or regulation
adopted hereby shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. O-06-2011, 2-14-
2011)
ARTICLE B. BILLBOARDS
SECTION:
8-6B-1: Rules And Definitions
8-6B-2: Billboard Regulations And Restrictions
8-6B-3: Permit Fees And Performance Bonds
8-6B-4: Removal Of Certain Billboards; Costs
8-6B-5: Nonconforming Billboards
8-6B-6: Exemptions From Provisions
8-6B-7: Penalties
8-6B-1: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
In the interpretation of this article, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the content clearly
indicates otherwise.
   A.   Rules Of Word Construction:
      1.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and the
words used in the singular number shall include the plural number and plural
the singular.
      2.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
      3.   The word "may" is permissive.
      4.   The word "lot" shall include the words "plat" and "piece" and
"parcel".
      5.   The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for",
"designed for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for".
   B.   Definitions: When used in this article, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
BILLBOARD: A board, poster, panel, structure or device of any kind used or
intended to be used for advertising or display painted therein or for the
affixment, attachment or support of printed posters or other advertising matter
consisting of an area more than thirty two (32) square feet and constructed,
erected and located on any premises or attached to a wall or placed on a roof
of a building or structure not owned or occupied by the person for whose use
such billboard is constructed, erected, located or attached and when used for
purposes other than advertising the business conducted on such premises or in
such building or structures.
GROUND SIGN OR GROUND BILLBOARD: A sign or billboard which is supported by one
or more uprights or braces in or upon the ground.
ROOF SIGN OR ROOF BILLBOARD: A sign or billboard erected, constructed and
maintained on or above the roof of any building or structure.
WALL SIGN OR WALL BILLBOARD: A sign or billboard affixed or attached directly
to the exterior wall of a building or structure and extending not more than ten
inches (10") from the exterior wall of the building or structure. (Ord. O-46-
73, 10-23-1973)
8-6B-2: BILLBOARD REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Billboards of any size up to twenty feet by eighty feet (20' x 80')
maximum 1  approved by the director of health and inspectional services shall
be permitted in the B-4, I-1 and I-2 industrial zoning districts west of the
Chicago and Northwestern Railroad tracks to the eastern portion of the tri-
state tollway right of way and bounded on the north by Grand Avenue and to the
city limits on the south. (Ord. O-03-75, 2-11-1975)
   B.   Billboards, not to exceed six feet by twelve feet (6' x 12') in size
with additional embellishments not to exceed a total of one hundred (100)
square feet, shall be permitted in the I-1 limited industrial district north of
Lake Street from the Chicago and Northwestern Railway tracks on the west to
one-half (1/2) block past Lakewood Avenue on the east.
   C.   All billboards constructed in the areas defined in subsections A and B
of this section are not for graphics applied to a paper surface.
   D.   It is the intent of the provisions of this section to prohibit graphics
pasted on or brushed on to a paper surface. (Ord. O-46-73, 10-23-1973)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-6B-3 of this article.
8-6B-3: PERMIT FEES AND PERFORMANCE BONDS:
The following schedule of fees and surety bonds shall be required:
Size Square Footage Annual Permit Fee Per Single Surety Bond To Be Deposited
                    Face                         With The City
Size      Square Footage Annual Permit Fee Per Surety Bond To Be Deposited
                         Single Face           With The City
6' x 12'  72             $ 260.00              $10,000.00
(With embellishments not to exceed 100 square feet)
12' x 24' 288            400.00                10,000.00
14' x 48' 672            660.00                10,000.00
15' x 54' 810            860.00                10,000.00
20' x 60' 1,200          1,000.00              10,000.00
20' x 80' 1,600          1,000.00              10,000.00
 
Late penalty: If an applicant fails to pay the permit fee within thirty (30)
days of the billing date, the permit fee shall be assessed an amount equal to
one-half (1/2) the permit fee provided in the fee schedule. (Ord. O-21-2004,
12-6-2004)
8-6B-4: REMOVAL OF CERTAIN BILLBOARDS; COSTS 1 :
   A.   Any billboard now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a
bona fide business or a product sold or is dilapidated or out of repair shall
be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial
use of the building, structure or land upon which such a billboard may be found
within ten (10) days after written notification from the director of health and
inspectional services and upon failure to comply with such notice within the
time specified in such order, the director of health and inspectional services
is hereby authorized to cause removal of such billboard, and any expense
incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building, structure or land
to which such billboard is attached. In the event such cost and expenses are
not paid within ten (10) days from the date of billing, then the costs and
expenses incurred for such removal shall be assessed against the real estate
upon which such billboard is located.
   B.   Any billboard not in conformity with the provisions of this article
which is constructed after the effective date hereof shall be removed by the
owner, agent or person within five (5) days of notice of removal by the
director of health and inspectional services by registered mail.
   C.   In the event that the owner, agent or person of such billboard cannot
be ascertained by the director of health and inspectional services, then such
notice shall be given to the owner of the real estate upon which billboard is
located. In the event that the owner of such real estate does not pay the
amount thereof within ten (10) days from the billing, then such cost and
expense shall be assessed against the real estate upon which such billboard is
located. (Ord. O-46-73, 10-23-1973)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
   4-2-3 of this code for nuisance abatement procedures.
8-6B-5: NONCONFORMING BILLBOARDS:
Every "billboard", as defined by this article, which does not conform to the
provisions hereof shall be removed within five (5) years of the effective date
hereof. In the event that any billboard is not removed within the time limit
herein provided, the director of health and inspectional services may cause the
removal thereof forthwith and without any notice to the owner and the cost and
expenses incurred in the removal of such billboard shall be assessed against
the owner of the real estate upon which the billboard is located and collected
by the city. (Ord. O-46-73, 10-23-1973)
8-6B-6: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The following signs shall be exempted from this article: traffic or other
municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger and such
temporary emergency or nonadvertising signs, as may be approved by the city
council. (Ord. O-46-73, 10-23-1973)
8-6B-7: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any provision of
any rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for such
violation, and each day's failure to comply with any such provision shall
constitute a separate violation. (Ord. O-46-73, 10-23-1973; amd. 1992 Code)
CHAPTER 7
SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
8-7-1: Definitions
8-7-2: Compliance With Provisions
8-7-3: Permit Requirements
8-7-4: Location
8-7-5: Design And Construction
8-7-6: Recirculation And Filtering
8-7-7: Water Supply And Conditioning
8-7-8: Electrical Requirements
8-7-9: Pool Structures And Apparatus
8-7-10: Operation And Maintenance; Safety Precautions
8-7-11: Inspections
8-7-12: Penalty
8-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
PERMANENT POOL: Any private pool that is not removable when not in use.
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL: A manmade, rigid or semirigid receptacle for
water, having a depth at any point of twenty four (24) or more inches, intended
for the purpose of swimming, wading or bathing including all appurtenant
equipment, constructed, installed and maintained in or above the ground and
used for a single-family dwelling unit. This includes portable or temporary
type pools of plastic, rubberized cloth or similar materials. Such private
residential swimming pool is maintained by an individual primarily for the sole
use of his household and guests and not for the purpose of profit or in
connection with any business operated for profit.
TEMPORARY POOL: A private pool that is removable when not in use. (Ord. O-23-
79, 11-20-1979)
8-7-2: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
Every private residential swimming pool shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this chapter and with the provisions of the building and health
ordinances and codes of this city. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-20-1979)
8-7-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct, install, enlarge, use or
alter any private residential swimming pool, whether permanent or temporary,
without first having obtained a permit therefor from the city.
   B.   Application For Permit: Written application for such permit shall be
filed with the director of health and inspectional services and shall be
accompanied by plans and specifications sufficiently detailed to enable
determination of whether the proposed pool complies with the requirements of
this Chapter. Manufacturers' instructions and/or specifications are sufficient
for temporary pools.
   C.   Permit Fee: The fee for a permit for the erection or construction of a
temporary or permanent swimming pool shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Code.
   D.   Existing Swimming Pools; Permit Renewals: No such permit for an
existing pool shall be granted by the Director of Health and Inspectional
Services until compliance with this Chapter is demonstrated to his
satisfaction. Once such permit is issued, no renewal shall be required for the
same pool. In the event such later alterations are contemplated in the
construction of a pool for which a permit has been issued, a new permit shall
then be required for such alteration. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
8-7-4: LOCATION:
   A.   Private residential swimming pools shall be permitted only in single-
family zoning use districts.
   B.   No portion of a private residential swimming pool shall be located at a
distance less than five feet (5') from any side or rear lot line and shall be
at least ten feet (10') from the main building. Pumps, filters and pool water
disinfection equipment installations shall be located at a distance not less
than eight feet (8') from any side property line. Pools and appurtenant
equipment shall not be permitted in the front or side yard between dwellings.
(Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
8-7-5: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Structural Design: Residential swimming pools hereafter constructed
shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within and to resist the
pressure of the earth when empty. The slope of the bottom of any part of a
permanent-type, below-grade pool in which the water is less than five feet (5')
in depth shall not be more than one foot (1') in each ten feet (10'). The
maximum slope where water is five feet (5') or more in depth shall not exceed
one foot (1') in two feet (2').
   B.   Construction Materials:
      1.   Private residential swimming pool walls and floor shall be
constructed of any impervious material which will provide a tight tank with
white or light colored finished, easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom
surface of the pool shall have a nonslip finish as smooth as possible. In the
case of permanent pools below grade, the side and end walls of such pool shall
present a smooth finish and shall be vertical to a depth of at least six feet
(6') or shall have a slope or curvature meeting one of the following
conditions:
         a.   The pool wall may be vertical for thirty inches (30") from the
water level below which the wall may be curved to the bottom with a radius at
any point equal to the difference between the depth, at that point, and thirty
inches (30").
         b.   To a depth of six feet (6'), except as in 1a above, the wall
slope shall not be less than one foot (1') horizontal and six feet (6')
vertical.
      2.   Permanent, below-grade pool walls that are to be lined with a
plastic line shall be constructed of masonry or reinforced concrete. (Ord. 0-
23-79, 11-20-79)
8-7-6: RECIRCULATION AND FILTERING:
   A.   Recirculation Required: All private residential swimming pools shall be
of the recirculation type in which circulation of the water is maintained
through the pool by pumps, the water drawn from the pool being filtered,
clarified and disinfected before being returned to the pool. Such pumps and
recirculating equipment must have underwriters laboratory approval.
   B.   Recirculation System and Appurtenances:
      1.   Every private residential pool shall be equipped with a water
recirculation system. The recirculation system shall consist of pumping
equipment; a hair and lint catcher; when required, rapid pressure filters,
together with all necessary pipe connections to the pool inlets and outlets
and/or backwashing the filters; and equipment for disinfecting the pool water.
      2.   The recirculation pump and filter tank and surface area shall be
sufficient to achieve the minimum turnover, filtration and backwashing rates
required by this Code.
      3.   There shall be one turnover of the entire contents of the pool every
two (2) hours or less at a filtration rate of not more than three (3) gallons
per square foot of filter area per minute.
      4.   A hair and lint catcher shall be installed on the suction side of
the recirculation pump to prevent hair, lint and other extraneous matter from
reaching the pump and filters. The hair and lint catcher shall be so designed
that it can be easily dismantled for cleaning and inspection and shall be so
located as to be easily accessible for cleaning.
      5.   The filters, other than the disposal type, shall be backwashed at
regular intervals at a minimum rate of ten (10) gallons per square foot of
filter area per minute or at the manufacturer's recommended backwash flow rate,
whichever is greater. The backwash cycle shall be continued until the backwash
water is clear. All backwash water and effluents shall be discharged to the
storm sewer through an indirect connection.
   C.   Inlets: Private residential swimming pool water recirculation system
inlet shall be located so as to produce, so far as possible, uniform
circulation of water throughout the pool without the existence of dead spots
and to carry pool bottom deposits to the outlets and shall discharge at a
minimum depth of ten inches (10") below the pool overflow level.
   D.   Outlets:
      1.   In private residential swimming pools, water circulation system
outlets shall be located so as to provide at least one outlet at the deepest
point of the pool.
      2.   All pool drain outlets on a permanent pool shall be equipped with
gratings.
      3.   Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the
pool.
      4.   No water shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer. Water drained
from the pool shall be discharged to the storm sewer during periods of rain or
storms. At no time shall the rate of drain water discharge exceed a flow of two
hundred fifty (250) gallons per minute. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
8-7-7: WATER SUPPLY AND CONDITIONING:
   A.   The water supply must conform to City health standards.
   B.   Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool water. Any
disinfection method using materials other than chlorine compounds shall be
subject to the approval of the health officer. Disinfection equipment installed
for the use of chlorine compounds shall have sufficient capacity to maintain a
minimum free chlorine residual of five-tenths (0.5) parts per million. The
disinfectant shall be introduced into the recirculation system ahead of the
filters.
A test kit with permanent color standards shall be provided at every private
pool and shall be used at frequent intervals to check on the adequacy of the
chlorine treatment.
   C.   Gaseous chlorination systems shall not be made use of as a disinfection
method for pool water. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
8-7-8: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in conjunction
with private residential swimming pools shall be in conformance with the
National Electrical Code. 1  (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  8-1C-1 of this Title.
8-7-9: POOL STRUCTURES AND APPARATUS:
   A.   Steps or Ladders:
      1.   Means of ingress and egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be
provided for all private residential swimming pools. At least one such means of
ingress and egress shall be located on a side of the pool.
      2.   Steps and ladders shall have a handrail on both sides.
      3.   For aboveground-type pools, whether temporary or permanent,
removable ladders or steps or devices used for entering the pool must be
removed to a minimum distance of five feet (5') from the pool when the pool is
not being used. Nonremovable steps or ladders shall be secured against entry by
gate or other device.
   B.   Diving Board: Where a swimming pool has a diving board or diving
apparatus for the purpose of diving into the pool, there shall be a clear area
of not less than eight foot (8') radius ahead of the furthermost projection of
the diving board.
   C.   Fence: Every person in possession of land within the City, either as
owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or license, upon which is
situated a private residential swimming pool, shall at all times maintain on
the lot or premises upon which such pool is located and completely surrounding
such pool, a fence or other structure to prevent small children from
inadvertently wandering into the pool. Such fence or other structure shall
conform with the ordinances of the City relating to fence height requirements 1
with no gaps or apertures (other than doors or gates) more than four inches
(4") square. All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be
equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep and
capable of keeping such door or gate securely closed and locked at all times
when not in actual use to prevent small children from opening said door or
gate; provided, that the door of any dwelling and forming any part of the
enclosure hereinabove required need not be so equipped.
   D.   Walks: Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty six inches (36")
wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the pool. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-
20-79)
 
Notes
1 2. See Section
  8-5-1 of this Code.
8-7-10: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE; SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
   A.   Lighting: Adequate lighting must be provided at night, lighting to be
such as not to interfere with or violate the privacy of adjoining property.
   B.   Protective Cover: A suitable substantial protective cover shall be
provided and installed over all outdoor private residential swimming pool
surfaces when not being used, if no fence is provided around periphery of the
pool. Such cover shall be of suitable material sufficiently strong when pulled
taut to sustain the weight of at least one hundred (100) pounds and shall be
securely attached to the outer side of the pool when same is unattended or not
in use.
   C.   Buoyant Objects: Every private residential swimming pool shall be
equipped with one or more buoyant objects.
   D.   Sanitary Condition: Every pool shall be so designed and constructed as
to facilitate cleaning and shall be maintained and operated in such a manner as
to be clean and sanitary at all times.
   E.   Nuisance or Dangerous Conditions: No private residential swimming pool
shall be used, kept, maintained or operated in the City if such use, keeping,
maintaining or operating shall be the occasion of any nuisance or shall be
dangerous to life or detrimental to health.
   F.   Lifeguard Required: An adult or any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years who is a certified lifeguard shall be present at all times that
private residential swimming pools are in use. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-20-79)
8-7-11: INSPECTIONS:
The Director of Health and Inspectional Services, periodically, shall inspect
all private residential swimming pools to determine whether or not the
provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the City regarding health,
sanitation and safety applicable thereto are being complied with. For this
purpose, he is hereby authorized to enter upon any premises in the City to
investigate the existence of a swimming pool and to determine whether or not
any such pool complies with the requirements of this Code. (Ord. 0-23-79, 11-
20-79)
8-7-12: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter, upon conviction, shall be
fined as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1992 Code)
CHAPTER 8
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8-8-1: Accessory Buildings
8-8-1: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Requirements: The following building requirements shall apply to the
construction of accessory buildings:
      1.   No wall of an accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in
length with the total square footage of floor not to exceed one hundred twenty
feet (120') in area.
      2.   The uppermost part of the roof of an accessory building shall not
exceed ten feet (10') in height.
      3.   No walls of an accessory building may be attached to an existing
wall of another building.
      4.   No common walls shall exist between an accessory building and
another building.
      5.   No accessory building shall be located in any front yard or nearer
than three feet (3') from the rear or side lot lines or within any utility
easement.
      6.   No accessory building shall be located less than ten feet (10') from
the principal building on the lot.
      7.   Accessory buildings shall be placed on a pad constructed of solid
wood, gravel or concrete. The base of the accessory building shall be flush
against the pad.
      8.   No accessory building shall be built in any utility or other
easement without the prior written permission of beneficiary of such easement.
   B.   Approval; Inspections; Fee For Permit:
      1.   An inspection is required prior to construction of an accessory
building and a final inspection is required after the accessory building's
completion.
      2.   The fee for a building permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00) when the
accessory building is being constructed by the property owner and twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) when the accessory building is being constructed by a
contractor.
   C.   Restrictions: No accessory building shall be used for the parking or
storage of any licensed motor vehicle.
   D.   Limitations: On lots of record in a residentially zoned area no more
than two (2) accessory buildings may be located on a lot containing at least
seven thousand (7,000) square feet of area. No more than one accessory building
may be located on a lot of record containing less than seven thousand (7,000)
square feet of area. (Ord. O-23-98, 5-18-1998; amd. Ord. O-19-2018, 8-13-2018;
Ord. O-21-2020, 8-17-2020; Ord. O-05-2022, 3-21-2022)
CHAPTER 9
MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL UNITS 1
SECTION:
8-9-1: Definitions
8-9-2: License Requirements
8-9-3: License Application
8-9-4: Inspection By City
8-9-5: Certificate Of Occupancy
8-9-6: Revocation Or Denial Of License Or Certificate Of Occupancy
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 13 of this title.
8-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The person designated by the city as being responsible for
the enforcement of this chapter.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING STRUCTURE: A dwelling structure containing three (3) or
more dwelling units. (Ord. O-19-98, 4-20-1998)
8-9-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No dwelling structure shall be operated as a rental multi- family
dwelling structure unless the owner or landlord of such structure holds a
current, unrevoked license issued by the city, in his or its name for the
specific multi-family dwelling structure.
   B.   Every license shall be issued for a period of one year from its date of
issuance unless sooner revoked, and may be renewed for successive annual
periods.
   C.   No license shall be issued or renewed unless the owner or manager has
first made application therefor on an application form provided by the city.
Initial application for a license shall be filed with the city within thirty
(30) days after the effective date of this chapter. The city's building
official shall organize and schedule the timing of the inspection on an annual
basis that allows for the continual inspections over the year.
   D.   The city's building official is hereby authorized to investigate and to
issue licenses and renewals in the names of applicant owners or managers of
multi-family dwelling structures. No license shall be issued unless the multi-
family dwelling structure in connection with which the license is sought, is
found after inspection by the building official or his designee, to meet the
applicable requirements of this code. Each applicant shall be notified by the
city in advance of the date and time of such inspection. (Ord. O-19-98, 4-20-
1998)
   E.   No license shall be issued or renewed unless the completed application
form is accompanied by payment of an annual license fee. The annual fee for
licenses for multi-family dwellings shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per
dwelling unit. No inspection fee shall be charged for any owner occupied unit.
(Ord. O-26-2004, 12-6-2004)
   F.   No license shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant has first
designated an agent for the receipt of service of complaints for violation of
the provisions of any of the city's codes, and for service of process for all
notices, complaints and lawsuits that may be filed in connection with the
dwelling. Such designation shall be made in writing and shall accompany each
application form.
   G.   An application for renewal of a license shall be made thirty (30) days
prior to the expiration of the present license.
   H.   Each license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the
common area of the multi-family dwelling. Every person holding a license shall
give notice in writing to the city's designated building official within five
(5) days after having transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of
any registered multi-family dwelling. Such notice shall include the name and
address of the person or persons succeeding to the ownership or control of such
multi-family dwelling. (Ord. O-19-98, 4-20-1998)
8-9-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
   A.   Each applicant for a license to maintain a multi-family dwelling
structure shall file a written application with the city stating:
      1.   The full legal name, address and home and work telephone numbers of
each and every legal and beneficial owner.
      2.   The address of the multi-family dwelling.
      3.   The number of dwelling units within the structure.
      4.   In the case of an owner who is not a resident of the city, then
either:
         a.   The name, address and phone number of an agent within the city
with authority to accept service of any notice or summons; or
         b.   A statement by the owner that service by regular mail upon the
owner at the address stated in the application will be considered sufficient
service for all purposes.
   B.   All license fees shall be due and payable at the time the license
application is filed. All licenses shall expire on the first annual
anniversary, next after the date of issue. (Ord. O-19-98, 4-20-1998)
   C.   Each license application shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per unit for multi-family dwelling. If an application for a
renewal of an existing license is received after the expiration of the existing
license, the license fee shall be increased to fifty dollars ($50.00) per unit.
Fee includes inspection and one reinspection. If more than one reinspection per
unit is required the fee for each reinspection shall increase by twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per inspection per unit. (Ord. O-26-2004, 12-6-2004)
   D.   Whenever there is a change in the ownership of a multi- family dwelling
or a change in the owner's manager, the owner shall, within fifteen (15) days
of such change, file a written notice with the city indicating such change.
   E.   Application for license renewal shall be made in the same manner as a
new application except that the application shall state that it is for renewal.
(Ord. O-19-98, 4-20-1998)
8-9-4: INSPECTION BY CITY:
   A.   Each multi-family rental building, and each dwelling unit within the
building shall be subject to inspection for compliance with all applicable
regulations. A license shall be denied if the property has been inspected and
is not in compliance with this code. In such a case, the licensee may apply for
a conditional license.
   B.   Initial and subsequent annual licensing inspections shall include the
building exterior, common areas, basement and of the individual dwelling units.
   C.   The owner as designated agent will be given at least thirty (30) days'
notice by regular mail prior to any inspection being conducted. Upon receipt of
the notice of inspection, the owner shall notify the tenant, on a form provided
by the city, of the date and time of the inspection by either placing the
completed form under or on the door of the dwelling unit at least seventy two
(72) hours prior to the inspection. The form shall contain a certification that
the owner has served the notice as set forth in this subsection. Each notice
shall inform the owner and occupant of their right to refuse to consent to the
inspection and to require the city to obtain an administrative search warrant.
   D.   If any owner, manager, tenant or other person in control of a multi-
family rental residential structure or dwelling unit fails or refuses to
consent to free access and entry to the property or dwelling unit for any
inspection pursuant to this chapter, the building official may apply to the
circuit court for an administrative warrant or other appropriate court order
authorizing such inspection. Such an application shall not be a waiver of the
city's right to seek other remedies pursuant to this chapter.
   E.   When a licensing inspection reveals any violation, a time period for
compliance shall be set by the building official in accordance with city
property maintenance code. The code official shall send notice of the
violations and the compliance period to the property owner or the listed
property agent by regular U.S. mail at the address provided on the most recent
license application. The notice shall include the following:
      1.   Identification of the property.
      2.   A statement listing the violations and applicable codes sections.
      3.   The time period for compliance.
      4.   An explanation that if all violations have not been corrected within
the compliance time period the license is subject to revocation and nonrenewal.
   F.   A licensing reinspection will be conducted at the request of the owner
or the owners.
   G.   The building official shall, prior to entering an occupied apartment,
give the owner or manager a reasonable opportunity to be present during the
inspection. Unless otherwise specified in a court order or warrant, the
building official will not inspect or search any personal property of the
occupant. The building official, while performing the duties of office, will
otherwise fully consider the privacy and dignity of the occupant and will not
enter or open closets, medicine cabinets or the other closed cabinets or
lockers unless the inspector has reasonable grounds to believe that to do so
would establish evidence of code violations. If a resident desires to be
present for an inspection and it would result in an unusual hardship for that
resident to be present during regular city business hours, the building
official shall attempt to conduct the inspection at a time reasonably
convenient to the resident. (Ord. O-19-98, 4-20-1998)
8-9-5: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or landlord of any multi-family
building to lease a dwelling unit contained therein without having first
tendered to the lessee a valid license for the dwelling. (Ord. O-19-98, 4-20-
1998)
   B.   (Rep. by Ord. O-46-98, 9-21-1998)
   C.   Where no consent has been given to enter or inspect any property, no
entry or inspection shall be made without the procurement of a warrant from the
circuit court of Cook County. The court may consider any of the following
factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in its decision as
to whether a warrant shall issue:
      1.   Eyewitness account of violation.
      2.   Citizen complaints.
      3.   Tenant complaints.
      4.   Plain view violations.
      5.   Violations apparent from city records.
      6.   Property deterioration.
      7.   Age of property.
      8.   Nature of alleged violation.
      9.   Similar properties in the area.
      10.   Documented violations of similar properties in the area.
      11.   Passage of time since last inspection.
      12.   Previous violation on the property.
Cause of issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist in light of reasonable
legislative and administrative standards which show that there is reason to
believe that a condition of nonconformity exists with respect to a particular
property in violation of a city ordinance.
   D.   The city does not guarantee the condition of any property which is the
subject matter of this chapter, and the city is not responsible for any claims
arising out of the subject property or the condition thereof. (Ord. O-19-98, 4-
20-1998)
8-9-6: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Whenever, upon inspection of a multi-family dwelling for an initial
license or renewal of a license under the provisions of this section, the
building official finds that conditions or practices exist which are in
violation of the provisions of this chapter, or of any applicable provisions of
this code, or of any applicable rules or regulations pursuant thereto, the
building official shall serve the owner or operator with notice of such
violation or violations. Such notice shall state that unless the violations
cited are corrected within a reasonable time of not less than seven (7) days,
except for emergency situations, the license may be suspended.
   B.   At the end of the time the building official has allowed for correction
of any violation cited, the building official shall reinspect the multi-family
dwelling and if he determines that such conditions have not been corrected, he
may issue an order suspending the license to take effect five (5) days
following service upon the landlord unless, in the interim, the owner or
manager requests, in writing, a hearing.
   C.   Any person whose license for a multi-family dwelling is subject to
suspension pursuant to a suspension order shall be entitled to a hearing on the
suspension action by filing with the city clerk, a written request for a
hearing by the mayor within five (5) business days following the receipt of the
suspension order. Upon receipt of said request, a hearing shall be scheduled to
be held by the mayor at a date not more than ten (10) business days thereafter.
Upon completion of the hearing, the mayor may either:
      1.   Confirm the suspension; or
      2.   Suspend the suspension and allow additional compliance time; or
      3.   Rescind the suspension.
   D.   If no petition for reconsideration of a suspension order is filed as
provided in subsection C of this section, then the suspension order is filed as
provided in this section, then the suspension order shall remain in effect
until the violations in question have been corrected, as determined by the
building official upon inspection of the structure.
   E.   In the event a license is suspended, and such suspension is affirmed
after hearing, if any, during the period of suspension:
      1.   No existing rental agreement shall be renewed and no new rental
agreement shall be entered into with respect to any unit located within the
dwelling.
      2.   The city shall have the right to seek enforcement of any other
applicable law. (Ord. O-19-98, 4-20-1998)
CHAPTER 10
TRAMPOLINES
SECTION:
8-10-1: Definitions
8-10-2: Compliance With Provisions
8-10-3: Permit Requirements
8-10-4: Location
8-10-5: Fences
8-10-6: Inspections
8-10-7: Penalties
8-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
TRAMPOLINE: A sheet of strong, taut canvas, or other similar material attached
with springs to a metal frame and used for acrobatic tumbling or other similar
activities. (Ord. O-07-2002, 2-4-2002)
8-10-2: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
Every private residential trampoline shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this chapter and with the provisions of the building and health
ordinances and codes of the city. (Ord. O-07-2002, 2-4-2002)
8-10-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct, install, enlarge, use or
alter any trampoline, whether permanent or temporary, without first having
obtained a permit therefor from the city. All existing trampolines shall be
permitted within sixty (60) days of the effective date hereof.
   B.   Application For Permit: Written application for such permit shall be
filed with the director of health and inspectional services and shall be
accompanied by plans and specifications sufficiently detailed to enable
determination of whether the proposed trampoline complies with the requirements
of this chapter.
   C.   Permit Fee: The fee for a permit for the construction of a trampoline
shall be ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. O-07-2002, 2-4-2002)
8-10-4: LOCATION:
   A.   Trampolines shall be permitted only in single-family zoning use
districts.
   B.   No portion of a trampoline shall be located at a distance less than
five feet (5') from any side or rear lot and shall be at least ten feet (10')
from the main building. Trampolines shall not be permitted in the front or side
yard between dwellings.
   C.   No trampoline shall be located under an electric line, telephone line
or any other utility line. (Ord. O-07-2002, 2-4-2002)
8-10-5: FENCES:
Every person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser
under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is situated a trampoline
shall at all times maintain on the lot or premises upon which such trampoline
is located a fence completely surrounding such. Such fence or other structure
shall conform with the ordinances of the city relating to fence height
requirements with no gaps or apertures (other than doors or gates) more than
four inches (4") square. All gates or doors opening through such enclosure
shall be equipped with a self closing and self latching device designed to keep
and capable of keeping such door or gate securely closed and locked at all
times when not in actual use to prevent small children from opening said door
or gate; provided, that the door of any dwelling and forming any part of the
enclosure herein above required need not be so equipped. (Ord. O-07-2002, 2-4-
2002)
8-10-6: INSPECTIONS:
The director of public health and inspection services, periodically, shall
inspect all trampolines to determine whether the provisions of this code and
other ordinances of the city regarding health, sanitation and safety applicable
thereto are being complied with. For this purpose, the director is hereby
authorized to enter upon any premises in the city to investigate the existence
of a trampoline and to determine whether or not any such trampoline complies
with the requirements of this code. (Ord. O-07-2002, 2-4-2002)
8-10-7: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. O-07-2002, 2-4-2002)
CHAPTER 11
TENTS
SECTION:
8-11-1: General Requirements
8-11-2: Definitions
8-11-3: Time Limitations
8-11-4: Storage
8-11-5: Location
8-11-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Every tent hereafter erected shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. O-16-2002, 12-16-2002)
8-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter a "tent" is defined as a portable structure,
including sunscreens, with or without walls of canvas or other like material,
covered with similar materials, and supported by poles, stakes and ropes. (Ord.
O-16-2002, 12-16-2002)
8-11-3: TIME LIMITATIONS:
No tent shall be erected in a front yard of a lot of record with an R
(residential) zoning classification for more than fourteen (14) consecutive
days from May 1 – September 30. Tents located in other than the front yard of a
lot of record with an R (residential) zoning classification may be erected
between May 1 and September 30. Tents may be located on any lot of record with
a B (business) zoning classification between May 1 and October 31. (Ord. O-20-
2012, 7-9-2012)
8-11-4: STORAGE:
Any vehicle stored under a car cover must display current license plates and a
city vehicle sticker. (Ord. O-16-2002, 12-16-2002)
8-11-5: LOCATION:
All tents must be located at least fifteen feet (15') behind the front lot line
of the lot where the tent is erected. (Ord. O-16-2002, 12-16-2002)
CHAPTER 12
REAL ESTATE TRANSFER INSPECTION AND STAMP
SECTION:
8-12-1: Inspection And Transfer Stamp Requirement
8-12-2: Inspection Fees
8-12-3: Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy Requirement
8-12-4: Uninhabitable Unit Or Structure
8-12-5: Penalty
8-12-6: Disclaimer
8-12-1: INSPECTION AND TRANSFER STAMP REQUIREMENT:
   A.   Compliance: Except as otherwise provided herein, no owner, agent, or
person in charge of a single- or multi-family residential unit or structure or
a commercial or industrial unit or structure shall sell, convey, quitclaim,
trade or otherwise transfer same unless said unit or structure shall have been
inspected and determined to be in compliance with all of the provisions of this
code, as evidenced by an inspection and transfer stamp issued by the city
clerk.
   B.   Title Insurance Reports: Except as otherwise provided herein, the
requirement of inspection, obtaining the inspection and transfer stamp, and
payment of inspection fees shall be mandatory on all transfers of ownership of
or beneficial interest in all single- or multi-family residential dwelling
units or structures or commercial or industrial units or structures within the
city. This requirement shall be further reflected on all real estate title
insurance reports conducted precedent to the transfer of ownership to give
public notice of the mandatory inspection and issuance of the inspection and
transfer stamp. Copies of the ordinance codified herein shall be sent to all
title insurance companies with notice that a mandatory inspection and
inspection and transfer stamp is required on any transfer of ownership of real
estate in the city.
   C.   Application For Inspection And Transfer Stamp: Any owner of a single-
or multi-family residential dwelling unit or structure or a commercial or
industrial unit or structure located within the city shall file an application
for an inspection and transfer stamp with the city not less than twenty one
(21) days prior to any proposed sale, assignment or other transfer of any legal
or beneficial interest of said real estate. There shall be no application fee
for the transfer stamp. The fee for inspection is set forth in subsection
8-2-4D of this title.
   D.   Appointed Time Of Inspection: Upon request of the owner, agent or other
person authorized to sell a dwelling or a structure used as a single- or multi-
family residential dwelling unit or structure or a commercial or industrial
unit or structure (hereinafter referred to as "applicant"), an inspector in the
building department will be available at an appointed time within ten (10)
working days as mutually agreed upon with the applicant to inspect such
dwelling, or structure. The term "ten (10) working days" in this instance shall
mean any ten (10) business days from the date the application is received by
the city, during regular business hours.
   E.   Issuance: If such inspection establishes that the dwelling or the
structure used as a single- or multi-family residential dwelling unit or
structure or a commercial or industrial unit or structure complies with the
provisions of this code, then the city shall issue an inspection and transfer
stamp, provided all outstanding taxes, charges and/or fines owed to the city
are paid in full for said unit or structure. Outstanding amounts due to the
city shall include charges due for water and sewer services as a result of a
final meter reading taken prior to the transfer of the property. Final meter
readings must be scheduled by the owner of the property prior to the date of
closing. The inspection and transfer stamp shall indicate the date of
inspection; and that such dwelling complies with the requirements of this code.
It shall be mandatory, prior to the sale or transfer of any real estate within
the city limits of the city, that a transfer stamp be secured. A record of all
inspection and transfer stamps shall be kept on file in the office of the
building department and copies of the inspection reports shall be furnished,
upon request, to any person having an interest or tenancy interest in the unit
or structure affected by this chapter. There shall be no fee for the issuance
of the transfer stamp.
   F.   Inspection Report: Said inspection shall be governed by the then
current inspection procedure and the resulting reports prepared by the
inspectors in the building department shall be placed on file in the city
clerk's office.
   G.   Refusal To Consent; Warrant Procedures: If the owner or occupant does
not consent to the proposed inspection, the building department may appear
before any judge in the circuit court of Cook County and seek an administrative
search warrant to allow an inspection. Any such application shall be made
within fourteen (14) calendar days after the owner's nonconsent. The
application for the warrant shall specify the basis upon which the warrant is
being sought and shall include a statement that the inspection will be limited
to a determination whether there are violations of the building code, and
whether there have been any illegal conversions of the building to increase the
number of individual dwelling units in violation of the building code (this
title) or the zoning code (title 10 of this code). The court may consider any
of the following factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in
its decision as to whether a warrant shall be issued:
      1.   Eyewitness account of violation;
      2.   Citizen complaints;
      3.   Tenant complaints;
      4.   Plain view violations;
      5.   Violations apparent from city records;
      6.   Property deterioration;
      7.   Age of property;
      8.   Nature of alleged violation;
      9.   Condition of similar properties in the area;
      10.   Documented violations on similar properties in the area;
      11.   Passage of time since last inspection;
      12.   Previous violations on the property.
   H.   Uninspected Property; Transfer Stamps: In the event the owner or
occupant refuses to consent to an inspection, and the city does not seek a
warrant (or if court refuses an application for the warrant), the building
department shall notify the city clerk that "uninspected property" transfer
stamps may be issued. In connection with the issuance of transfer stamps, the
city clerk shall advise the purchaser of such property that is "uninspected
property".
   I.   Payment Of Current Water Bills; Predeprivation Hearing: The seller must
pay the current water bill and other fees owed by the seller to the city prior
to the issuance of transfer stamps. In the event the owner disputes any such
obligation (or any portion thereof), the office of city clerk shall promptly
provide the owner with a predeprivation due process hearing consistent with the
principles enunciated in Memphis Light, Gas & Water Division v. Craft, 436 U.S.
1 (1978). The city clerk's office shall provide the hearing within five (5)
business days of a request. If the owner disputes the city's determination as
to liability, the owner may pay said bill under protest, and may pursue any
remedies available to said seller to recover the claimed overcharge. (Ord. O-
25-2007, 7-16-2007)
8-12-2: INSPECTION FEES:
   A.   The application fees for inspections are set forth in subsection
8-2-4D of this title. No inspection and transfer stamp shall be issued without
the inspection payment first being received by the city, and only then upon
being granted a final certificate of occupancy, or except as provided for in
section
8-12-3 of this chapter. (Ord. O-25-2007, 7-16-2007)
8-12-3: TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENT:
   A.   If such inspection establishes that a single- or multi-family
residential dwelling unit or structure or a commercial or industrial unit or
structure does not comply with the provisions of this code, the city may issue
an inspection and transfer stamp and temporary certificate of occupancy for a
period not to exceed six (6) months. In no event shall the city issue an
inspection and transfer stamp and/or a temporary certificate of occupancy if it
determines that there exists unsafe or life threatening conditions or that the
unit or structure of occupancy, the buyer(s) must execute a checklist of
required repairs, indicating that he/they understand what is required of them,
prior to closing and make arrangements with the city for the required deposit.
The city will then issue the inspection and transfer stamp and a temporary
occupancy permit.
   B.   The city may extend a temporary certificate of occupancy for an
additional period of up to six (6) months provided that this new owner, agent
or person in charge of such unit or structure has completed or corrected fifty
percent (50%) or more of all repairs required by the city.
   C.   In the event the required corrections are not made by the new owner,
agent or person in charge within the time specified by the city, such parties
shall be subject to a fine as provided in section
8-12-5 of this chapter. (Ord. O-25-2007, 7-16-2007)
8-12-4: UNINHABITABLE UNIT OR STRUCTURE:
If such inspection establishes that the single- or multi-family residential
dwelling unit or structure or commercial or industrial unit or structure is
uninhabitable, the city shall post such structure "No Occupancy". Said posting
shall remain until sufficient repairs are made to grant a temporary occupancy
permit. No inspection and transfer stamp will be issued until such time that
said posting is removed by the city, and a temporary occupancy permit is
granted. (Ord. O-25-2007, 7-16-2007)
8-12-5: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying or opposing the
enforcement of any other provisions of this chapter upon conviction thereof
shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each day the violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
   B.   In addition to the foregoing penalties, the city may also institute a
civil action against the violator to compel compliance with this chapter. In
the event civil action is necessary, then the city may recover reasonable
attorney fees and court costs from the violator. (Ord. O-25-2007, 7-16-2007)
8-12-6: DISCLAIMER:
   A.   The city does not warrant the condition of any property inspected and
shall not be responsible for any claims arising out of the property or the
condition thereof. The city does not warrant that all deficiencies are listed
in the inspection report and does not warrant anything as to the condition of
the property or the liability thereof.
   B.   The issuance of an inspection and transfer stamp and/or temporary
certificate of occupancy shall not operate as a waiver of any right of the city
to prosecute an owner or occupant of any real estate for any violation of any
city ordinance. (Ord. O-25-2007, 7-16-2007)
CHAPTER 13
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSING REQUIREMENTS 1
SECTION:
8-13-1: Seminar Attendance
8-13-2: Property Manager Required To Attend Seminar
8-13-3: Building Department To Obtain List Of Attendees
8-13-4: Crime Free Lease Addendum
8-13-5: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 9 of this title.
8-13-1: SEMINAR ATTENDANCE:
   A.   The owner of any property, which is being rented out for residential
purposes shall attend and complete a city of Northlake crime free multi-housing
program seminar. The owner, agent or designee shall attend the seminar prior to
obtaining or being issued a city of Northlake residential operator license. Any
current license holders shall have until August 31, 2006, to attend the city of
Northlake crime free multi-housing program seminar.
   B.   In the event a city of Northlake crime free multi-housing program
seminar is not available prior to obtaining the operating license, a
conditional license may be issued subject to the owner, agent or designee
attending the city of Northlake crime free multi-housing program seminar within
three (3) months of issuance of the license. In the event that a seminar is not
attended within three (3) months, the license shall be void without any need of
further action. After the seminar is attended the license shall be issued for
the balance of the year.
   C.   Any owner, agent or designee may be required to reattend the city of
Northlake crime free multi-housing program seminar after two (2) years if the
crime free multi-housing coordinator recommends reattendance to the mayor, and
the mayor or his designee concur in said recommendation. The mayor, in
determining whether or not to have the person reattend the crime free multi-
housing program seminar shall consider the following:
      1.   If the property rented by the owner is close to becoming a nuisance
residential rental property as defined in subsection
4-2-2G of this code; or
      2.   Criminal activity is occurring on the premises and the landlord has
failed to initiate eviction proceedings. (Ord. O-06-2006, 3-6-2006)
8-13-2: PROPERTY MANAGER REQUIRED TO ATTEND SEMINAR:
A property manager shall be considered an agent of the owner. If a new manager
is hired, the new manager shall have three (3) months after hiring to attend
the city of Northlake crime free multi-housing program seminar. (Ord. O-06-
2006, 3-6-2006)
8-13-3: BUILDING DEPARTMENT TO OBTAIN LIST OF ATTENDEES:
The crime free multi-housing coordinator, as designated by the chief of police
of the city of Northlake, shall provide the building department with a list of
owners, agents and/or designees who have attended the city of Northlake crime
free multi-housing program seminar, with the date of attendance and
verification that the owner, agent or designee has complied with this chapter
and is eligible to obtain, maintain or renew the operating license. (Ord. O-06-
2006, 3-6-2006)
8-13-4: CRIME FREE LEASE ADDENDUM:
Any owner, agent or designee of residential rental property is required to
utilize a crime free lease addendum or have a clause in the lease similar to a
crime free lease addendum for any leases executed after August 31, 2006. The
crime free multi- housing coordinator shall provide at no cost samples of the
crime free lease addendum and shall review any clauses within actual leases
with the city legal department to determine if the clause is similar to the
crime free lease addendum. The clause is to make criminal activity (not limited
to violent criminal activity or drug related criminal activity engaged by,
facilitated by or permitted by the renter, member of the household, guest or
other party under the control of the renter) a lease violation. The landlord
shall have authority under that clause to initiate an eviction proceeding as
specified in the Illinois Compiled Statutes forcible entry and detainer
statutes. Proof of criminal violation shall be by a preponderance of the
evidence. (Ord. O-06-2006, 3-6-2006)
8-13-5: PENALTY:
Any person firm, corporation, trust or other entity violating any provisions of
this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
offense. Each day a violation persists shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. O-06-2006, 3-6-2006)
CHAPTER 14
PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS
SECTION:
8-14-1: Definitions
8-14-2: Regulations
8-14-3: Penalties
8-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter a "portable storage unit" is defined as an
enclosed container that is delivered to a private property and is normally used
for the short term storage of items and materials associated with a move into
or from the principal use of the property. (Ord. O-17-2009, 6-1-2009)
8-14-2: REGULATIONS:
The following regulations shall apply to the use of portable storage units in
all residentially zoned property:
   A.   No more than one portable storage unit shall be permitted on a lot of
record (hereinafter "property") except that an additional portable storage unit
may be located on a property when it is used to store building supplies for a
construction or remodeling project on the property for which a permit has been
issued by the city.
   B.   Stacking of portable storage units is prohibited.
   C.   Any property where a portable storage unit is located must be occupied
by a principal use or dwelling.
   D.   No portable storage unit may remain on a property for more than thirty
(30) consecutive days. An additional fifteen (15) day period may be approved by
the building department for cause. Special circumstances allowing for longer
periods of time may be determined by the building department on a case by case
basis. It shall be illegal for the owner of a property or the owner of the
portable storage unit to allow a portable storage unit to remain on a property
for a period of time in excess of what is allowed by this subsection.
   E.   A portable storage unit shall not exceed sixteen feet (16') in length.
   F.   Portable storage units shall be placed on the driveway or other paved
surface on the property and shall not be placed on public property or in a
manner that obstructs traffic visibility.
   G.   No electrical cords or electrical service of any kind shall be extended
to any portable storage unit.
   H.   The portable storage unit shall not be used to store hazardous
materials or flammable liquids.
   I.   A permit and fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid prior to
the placement of a portable storage unit. The permit shall expire thirty (30)
days following the date of its issuance unless extended pursuant to subsection
D of this section.
   J.   Portable storage units shall be maintained in good repair, free from
rust, peeling paint, graffiti and other forms of deterioration.
   K.   Signage on portable storage units is limited to the name and address of
the portable storage unit rental company.
   L.   Portable storage units shall be locked when not being loaded or
unloaded. (Ord. O-17-2009, 6-1-2009)
8-14-3: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. O-17-2009, 6-1-2009)
CHAPTER 15
VACANT BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8-15-1: Definitions
8-15-2: Obligation To Register
8-15-3: Owner Registration Fee
8-15-4: Obligation To Permit Access For Purposes Of Inspection
8-15-5: Owner Obligation To Appoint Agent
8-15-6: Owner Obligation To Post A Sign
8-15-7: Owner Obligation To Secure Building
8-15-8: Interior Maintenance Standards
8-15-9: Minimum Requirements For Lot On Which The Vacant Building Stands
8-15-10: Duty Of Owner Where Vacant Building Becomes Violated
8-15-11: Liability Insurance
8-15-12: Fines And Penalties
8-15-13: Enforcement
8-15-14: Proceedings Before The Department Of Administrative Hearings
8-15-15: Proceedings Before The Circuit Court
8-15-16: Vacant Buildings; Mortgagee Required To Act; Enforcement Authority
8-15-17: Mortgagee To Inspect Real Estate
8-15-18: Termination
8-15-19: Improperly Maintained Buildings And Structures Subject To Nuisance
Abatement Proceedings
8-15-20: Demolition Of Open, Hazardous Residential And Commercial Buildings
8-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms have the meanings set forth in this chapter,
except where otherwise specifically indicated:
DEFAULT: Means, with respect to a residential building containing four (4) or
fewer dwelling units, when the mortgagor is sixty (60) days past due on the
mortgagor's obligation to make a scheduled payment under a mortgage or a
mortgage note. With respect to all other residential buildings, "default" shall
mean when the mortgagor is ninety (90) days past due on the mortgagor's
obligation to make a scheduled payment under a mortgage or a mortgage note.
MORTGAGE: Any consensual lien created by a written instrument which grants or
retains an interest in real estate to secure a debt or other obligation. The
term includes, without limitation:
   A.   Mortgages securing reverse mortgage loans;
   B.   Mortgages securing revolving credit loans;
   C.   Every deed conveying real estate, although an absolute conveyance in
its terms, which shall have been intended only as a security in the nature of a
mortgage; and
   D.   Equitable mortgages.
MORTGAGEE:
   A.   The holder of an indebtedness or oblige of a nonmonetary obligation
secured by a mortgage or any person designated or authorized to act on behalf
of such holder;
   B.   Any person claiming through a mortgagee as successor; and
   C.   Any person identified as such in a recorded document which has not been
released, assigned or superseded of record.
MORTGAGOR: The person whose interest in the real estate is the subject of the
mortgage and any person claiming through a mortgagor as successor. Where a
mortgage is executed by a trustee of a land trust, the mortgagor is the trustee
and not the beneficiary or beneficiaries.
OWNER: Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others:
   A.   Has legal title to the property, with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof; or
   B.   Has charge, care or control of the property as owner or agent of the
owner or an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the
owner; or
   C.   Is the agent of the owner for the purpose of managing, controlling the
property or collecting rents, or is any other person managing or controlling
the property or is any person entitled to the control or direction of the
management or disposition of the property.
PROPERTY: Any real, residential, commercial or industrial property, or portion
thereof, located within the city, including buildings or structures situated on
the property.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Buildings of three (3) stories or less in height where
the whole building or parts thereof are designed or used as residential units
or auxiliary uses to a residential unit.
WINTERIZE: Cleaning all toilets and completely draining all plumbing and
heating systems. (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-2: OBLIGATION TO REGISTER:
   A.   The owner of any building that has become vacant shall within thirty
(30) days, after the building becomes vacant, or within thirty (30) days after
assuming ownership of the building, whichever is later, file a registration
statement, including proof of liability insurance in the amount prescribed in
section
8-15-11 of this chapter, for each such building with the city on forms provided
by the city and pay a registration fee in the amount prescribed in section
8-15-3 of this chapter for each registered building; provided, however, that
all eleemosynary, religious, educational, benevolent or charitable associations
organized on a not for profit basis and all governmental agencies shall be
exempt from the payment of the registration fee. The registration shall remain
valid for six (6) months from the date of registration. The owner shall be
required to renew the registration every six (6) months as long as the building
remains vacant. There shall be no fee for such renewal. The owner shall notify
the city within twenty (20) days of any change in the registration information
by filing an amended registration statement on a form provided by the city. The
registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements
contained therein in any administrative enforcement proceeding or court
proceeding instituted by the city against the owner or owners of the building.
   B.   For the purposes of this section, "vacant" means a building which is
lacking habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the
premises, or at which substantially all lawful business or construction
operations or residential occupancy has ceased, or which is substantially
devoid of content. In determining whether a building is vacant, it is relevant
to consider, among other factors, the percentage of overall square footage of
the building or floor to the occupied space, the condition and value of any
items in the building and the presence of rental or for sale signs on the
property; provided that a residential property shall not be deemed vacant if it
has been used as a residence by a person entitled to possession for a period of
at least three (3) months within the previous nine (9) months and a person
entitled to possession intends to resume residing at the property; and further
provided that multi-family residential property containing ten (10) or more
dwelling units shall be considered vacant when ninety percent (90%) or more of
the dwelling units are unoccupied. (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-3: OWNER REGISTRATION FEE:
The registration for each registered building shall be five hundred dollars
($500.00) (the "base registration fee"). All fees and fines laid out in this
section are in addition to any fees and fines in other sections of this code.
The base registration fee set forth in this section shall be doubled if the
applicable initial registration takes place not through voluntary and timely
compliance, but as the result of the city's identification of a violation of
this chapter. Such doubled fee shall not be subject to reduction. (Ord. O-25-
2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-4: OBLIGATION TO PERMIT ACCESS FOR PURPOSES OF INSPECTION:
After filing a registration statement, the building owner shall provide access
to the city to conduct an exterior and interior inspection of the building to
determine compliance with this chapter, following reasonable notice, during the
period covered by the initial registration or any subsequent renewal. (Ord. O-
25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-5: OWNER OBLIGATION TO APPOINT AGENT:
In addition to other information required by the city the registration
statement shall include the name, street address and telephone number of a
natural person twenty one (21) years of age or older, designated by the owner
or owners as the authorized agent for receiving notices of code violations and
for receiving process, in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement
proceeding, on behalf of such owner or owners in connection with the
enforcement of this chapter or any other provision of this code. This person
must maintain an office in Cook County, Illinois, or must actually reside
within Cook County, Illinois. An owner who is a natural person and who meets
the requirements of this section as to location of residence or office may
designate himself as agent. By designating an authorized agent under the
provisions of this section the owner is consenting to receive any and all
notices of code violations concerning the registered building and all process
in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service of the
notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has designated an
authorized agent under the provisions of this section shall be deemed to
consent to the continuation of the agent's designation for the purposes of this
section until the owner notifies the city of a change of authorized agent or
until the owner files a new registration statement. Any owner who fails to
register a vacant building shall further be deemed to consent to receive, by
posting at the building, any and all notices of code violations and all process
in an administrative proceeding brought to enforce code provisions concerning
the building. (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-6: OWNER OBLIGATION TO POST A SIGN:
   A.   The owner of any building that has become vacant shall, within thirty
(30) days:
      1.   Post a sign affixed to the building indicating: the vacant building
registration number and the name, address and telephone number of the owner or
the owner's authorized agent for the purpose of service of process. The name,
address and telephone number of a person responsible for day to day supervision
and management of the building, if such person is different from the owner or
authorized agent shall be indicated on the sign as well. The sign shall be no
smaller than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (8.5" x 11") and placed
in such a location so as to be legible from the nearest public street or
sidewalk, whichever is nearer; and
      2.   Maintain the building in a secure and closed condition and maintain
the sign, until the building is again occupied or demolished. (Ord. O-25-2011,
12-19-2011)
8-15-7: OWNER OBLIGATION TO SECURE BUILDING:
   A.   The owner of any building that has become vacant, and any person
maintaining, operating or collecting rent for any building that has become
vacant shall, within thirty (30) days, do the following to enclose and secure
the building:
      1.   Secure building so that all building openings shall be closed and
secured, using secure doors, windows without broken or cracked panes,
commercial quality steel security panels, filled with like kind material as the
surrounding wall, or boarded with plywood installed and secured in accordance
with the rules and regulations issued by the city, as applicable to prevent
entry by unauthorized persons.
      2.   Secure the building so that at least one building entrance shall be
accessible from the exterior and secured with a door that is locked to allow
access only to authorized persons. If two (2) or more exit doors exist, a
minimum of two (2) exit doors shall be available to exit from the interior of
the building, with at least one exit door available per one hundred fifty (150)
linear feet of horizontal travel at ground floor level.
      3.   Maintain the building in a secure and closed condition and maintain
the sign until the building is reoccupied or demolished, repaired or completed
with all permits required by the city. If during the registration period and
following the initial boarding and securing of the property in compliance with
this section, the city notifies the mortgagee in writing that the property was
found open or it has been judicially or administratively found to be open, in
each case on two (2) separate occasions at least thirty (30) days apart, then
the building shall thereafter be secured with only commercial quality metal
security panels or a method deemed equivalent by the city.
      4.   Foundations, basements, cellars and crawl spaces shall be maintained
in sound and watertight condition adequate to support the building and
protected against the entry of rodents or other animals.
      5.   Exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting
boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness
to the interior portions of the walls or the interior spaces and shall be
protected against the entry of rodents and other animals.
      6.   Exterior windows and doors shall be maintained in sound condition,
and good repair. Windows and doors shall fit tightly within their frames and
the frames shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent
wall construction as to prevent rain from entering the building.
      7.   Exterior windows and doors shall be equipped with hardware for
locking and the locking mechanism shall be maintained in properly functioning
condition.
      8.   All points of possible ingress and egress including, but not limited
to, exterior windows and doors shall be secured to prevent unauthorized entry.
      9.   Any window which is broken, cracked or missing glass or glazing
shall be replaced and maintained in good repair or the building opening shall
otherwise be adequately secured pursuant to this section.
      10.   The roof shall be adequately supported and shall be maintained in a
weathertight condition; the gutters, downspouts, scuppers and appropriate
flashing shall be in good repair and adequate to remove the water from the
building or structure.
      11.   Chimneys and flues shall be kept in sound, functional, weathertight
condition and in good repair.
      12.   Every outside stair or step shall be maintained in sound condition
and in good repair; every porch, stoop, deck, veranda, balcony and walk shall
be maintained in sound condition for its purpose.
      13.   All exit areas shall have continuous exterior lighting from dusk to
dawn, normal intensity of lighting shall be not less than two (2) foot-candles
per square foot on the floor surfaces within an eight foot (8') radius around
said exit. This requirement may be met by the use of battery powered or solar
powered lighting if such lighting meets the performance standards set by this
subsection. (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-8: INTERIOR MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   The interior of any building shall be maintained by the owner as
follows:
      1.   It is prohibited to accumulate or permit the accumulation of junk,
trash and debris, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, junk, vehicles or any other
materials in such a manner that may produce any health, fire or safety hazard
or provide harborage for rodents or other animals on the premises; materials
stored by the owner or permitted to be stored by the owner shall be stacked
safely, and away from stairs or hallways, and any other places of ingress and
egress.
      2.   Every foundation, roof, floor, wall, stair, ceiling and any other
structural support shall be kept safe and capable of supporting the loads that
normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition
and in good repair; floors and stairs shall be free of holes, grooves and
cracks that could be potentially hazardous.
      3.   Any plumbing fixtures shall be winterized as defined in section
8-15-1 of this chapter or heated to resist being frozen.
      4.   Every exit door shall be secured with an internal deadbolt lock, or
with a locking mechanism deemed equivalent or better by the city and every such
exit door shall be capable of being opened from the inside easily and without
the use of a key or special knowledge.
      5.   Interior stairs shall have treads and risers that have uniform
dimensions, are sound, securely fastened and have no rotting, loose or
deteriorating supports.
      6.   Every owner shall be responsible for the extermination of insects,
rodents and other vermin in or about the premises. (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-9: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR LOT ON WHICH THE VACANT BUILDING STANDS:
   A.   In addition to any other applicable code requirements for each vacant
property, the owner must keep the lot on which the vacant building stands in
compliance with the following requirements for as long as the property remains
vacant: (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
      1.   The lot the building stands on and the surrounding public way shall
be maintained as follows: All grass and weeds on the premises including
abutting sidewalks, gutters and alleys shall be kept below eight inches (8") in
height and all dead or broken trees, tree limbs or shrubbery shall be cut and
removed from the premises. (Ord. O-17-2012, 5-21-2012)
      2.   The interior walkway leading to the main entry door and any public
sidewalk adjoining the lot shall be shoveled clear of snow.
      3.   Junk, rubbish, waste and any material that creates a health, safety
or fire hazard including, but not limited to, any mail or fliers that have been
delivered to the building shall not be permitted to accumulate on any portion
of the exterior lot of the building.
      4.   No portion of the lot nor any structure, vehicle, receptacle or
object thereon shall be maintained or operated in any manner that causes or
produces any health or safety hazard or permits the premises to become a rodent
harborage or is conducive to rodent harborage.
      5.   The lot shall be maintained so that water does not accumulate or
stand on the ground.
      6.   All fences and gates shall be maintained in sound condition and in
good repair. (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-10: DUTY OF OWNER WHERE VACANT BUILDING BECOMES VIOLATED:
It shall be a violation of this chapter for a vacant building to become
violated, after the owner has provided proof to the city that such building is
unviolated. With respect to a vacant building represented by the owner as
unviolated, if the city determines, based on an inspection report prepared by
the city that such building is violated, the city shall send by certified mail
a written notice of violation to the person responsible for day to day
supervision and management of the building or to the authorized agent for
service of process as identified on the sign required by section
8-15-6 of this chapter, or if there is no such sign, then sent by certified
mail to the owner of record. The fine for violation of this section shall be
not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-11: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The owner of any building that has become vacant shall, within thirty (30)
days, acquire or otherwise maintain liability insurance, in an amount of not
less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for buildings designed
primarily for use as residential units and not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for any other building, including, but not limited to,
buildings designed for manufacturing, industrial, storage or commercial uses,
covering any damage to any person or any property caused by any physical
condition of or in the building and maintain coverage until the building is no
longer vacant. Any insurance policy acquired after the building has become
vacant shall provide for written notice to the city within thirty (30) days of
any lapse, cancellation or change in coverage. The owner and the owner's
authorized agent for service of process shall provide evidence of insurance,
upon initial registration and all subsequent registration renewals, to the
city. (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-12: FINES AND PENALTIES:
Any owner who violates any provision of this chapter or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-13: ENFORCEMENT:
When a property is deemed in noncompliance with this chapter the city may
initiate an abatement proceeding under this chapter in the circuit court or the
department of administrative hearings. (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-14: PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
   A.   Proceedings for administrative adjudication of alleged violations of
this chapter shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures set out in title 1,
chapter 15 of this code, except in the event of a conflict between the
procedures set out in title 1, chapter 15 of this code and the procedures set
out in this section, the procedures set out in this section shall prevail.
   B.   If an administrative hearing officer finds, by a preponderance of
evidence, that the property is in noncompliance with this chapter the
administrative hearing officer shall assess fines and costs. After expiration
of the period within which judicial review of the hearing officer's decision
may be sought under the Illinois administrative review law, the order assessing
fines and costs decision, unless reversed or modified on judicial review, may
be enforced in the same manner as a judgment, including, but not limited to,
attorney fees, court costs and collection fees, and shall be a debt due and
owing the city and may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
   C.   If an administrative hearing officer finds, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the property is in noncompliance with this chapter the
administrative law officer may enter an order of abatement which requires the
owner to take all reasonable measures necessary to abate the noncompliance. If
an order of abatement is entered, it shall be entered at the time of the entry
of the order assessing fines and costs for violations which occurred prior to
the entry of the order of abatement. The order assessing fines and costs shall
not be final, until a final order is entered as to the abatement of the
violations. Any owner who fails to comply with an administrative hearing
officer's abatement order shall be subject to a fine not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
offense. Each day that the violation occurs shall be considered a separate and
distinct offense. (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-15: PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE CIRCUIT COURT:
The city's attorney is authorized to bring an action in the circuit court of
Cook County to abate noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter. If
the court finds that the city has established by a preponderance of the
evidence that the property identified in the notice is noncompliant, the court
shall enter an order of abatement which requires the owner to take all
reasonable measures necessary to abate the noncompliance. The court's order of
abatement may include, but is not limited to, correcting all code violations;
altering, repairing or improving the building or structure; rendering the
building or structure fit for human use or habitation; vacating or enclosing
the building or structure; removing or demolishing the building or structure;
or, if requested by the city and reasonable in light of the magnitude of the
harm caused or which can reasonably be expected to be caused by noncompliance,
the market value of the property in its current condition, and the extent to
which the defendant has failed to take effective measures to abate the
noncompliance, the forfeiture to the city of all the defendant's rights, title
and interest in the property. (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-16: VACANT BUILDINGS; MORTGAGEE REQUIRED TO ACT; ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
   A.   The mortgagee of any residential building that has become vacant and
which is not registered pursuant to this chapter shall, within the later of
thirty (30) days after building becomes vacant and unregistered or sixty (60)
days after a default, file a registration statement with the city on forms
provided by the city for such purposes and pay a registration fee of five
hundred dollars ($500.00). The registration shall remain valid for six (6)
months from the date of registration. The mortgagee shall be required to renew
the registration every six (6) months as long as the building remains vacant.
There shall be no fee for such renewal. The mortgagee shall notify the city
within twenty (20) days of any change in the registration information by filing
an amended registration statement on a form provided by the city for such
purposes. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements contained therein in any administrative enforcement proceeding or
court proceeding instituted under this chapter against the mortgagee with
respect to the registered building. After filing a registration statement under
this chapter and for the duration of each registration period, if the mortgagee
has a right of entry under the mortgage, the mortgagee shall exercise that
right of entry to allow the city to conduct an interior and exterior inspection
of the building to determine compliance with this chapter, upon ten (10) days'
written notice from the city. The base registration fee set forth above in this
chapter shall be doubled if the applicable initial registration takes place not
through voluntary and timely compliance, but as the result of the city's
identification of a violation of this chapter. Such doubled fee shall not be
subject to reduction.
   B.   In addition to other information required by the city, the registration
statement shall include the name, street address and telephone number of a
natural person, twenty one (21) years of age or older, or business entity
registered with the Illinois secretary of state designated by the mortgagee as
an authorized agent for receiving notices of code violations and for receiving
process in any court proceeding or administration enforcement proceeding on
behalf of such mortgagee in connection with enforcement of this chapter. This
person must maintain an office in Cook County, Illinois or must actually reside
within Cook County, Illinois. A mortgagee meeting these criteria may designate
itself as agent. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of
this section a mortgagee consents to receive any and all notices of violations
of this chapter concerning the registered building and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to enforce this
chapter with respect to the registered building by service of the notice or
process on the authorized agent. Any mortgagee who has designated an authorized
agent under the provisions of this section shall be deemed to consent to the
continuation of the agent's designation for the purposes of this section until
the mortgagee notifies the city of a change of authorized agent or until the
mortgagee files a new registration statement. Any mortgagee who fails to
register a vacant building under the provisions of this chapter shall further
be deemed to consent to receive, by posting at the building, any and all
notices of code violations and all process in the administrative proceeding
brought to enforce code provisions concerning the building. The city shall
notify the designated agent of all violations and enforcement proceedings
brought under this chapter.
   C.   The mortgagee of any residential building that has become vacant and
which is not registered pursuant to section
8-15-2 of this chapter, within the later of thirty (30) days after the building
becomes vacant and unregistered or sixty (60) days after a default, shall:
      1.   Secure the building's doors and windows so that all such building
openings are closed and secured, using secure doors, windows without broken or
cracked panes, commercial quality metal security panels, filled with like kind
materials as the surrounding wall, or boarded with plywood installed and
secured in accordance with the rules and regulations issued by the city.
      2.   Secure the building so that at least one building entrance shall be
accessible from the exterior and secured with a door that is locked to allow
access only to authorized persons. If two (2) or more exit doors exist, a
minimum of two (2) exit doors shall be available to exit from the interior of
the building, with at least one exit door available per one hundred fifty (150)
linear feet of horizontal travel at ground floor level.
      3.   Maintain all grass and weeds on the residential real estate
premises, below ten inches (10") in height and cut and remove all dead or
broken trees, tree limbs or shrubbery.
      4.   Clear or remove snow from the walkway leading to the main entry door
and any public sidewalk adjoining the lot.
      5.   Abate the accumulation of debris, trash and litter that does not
constitute personal property on any portion of the exterior lot of the
building.
      6.   Reasonably maintain fences and gates.
      7.   Reasonably maintain the structural integrity of stairs and steps
that lead to the main entrance of the building.
      8.   Winterize the building, which shall mean cleaning all toilets and
completely draining all plumbing and heating systems.
      9.   Maintain and secure the exterior of the building.
      10.   Post a sign affixed to the building indicating: the vacant building
registration number and the name, address and telephone number of the mortgagee
and the mortgagee's authorized agent for the purpose of service of process. The
name, address and telephone number of a person responsible for day to day
supervision and management of the building, if such person is different from
the mortgagee or authorized agent, shall be indicated on the sign as well. The
sign shall be no smaller than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (8.5"
x 11") and placed in such a location so as to be legible from the nearest
public street or sidewalk, whichever is nearer.
      11.   Maintain the building in a secure and closed condition and maintain
the sign until the building is reoccupied or demolished with all permits
required by the city. If during the registration period and following the
initial boarding and securing of the property in compliance with this chapter
the city notifies the mortgagee in writing that the property was found open or
it has been judicially or administratively found to be open, in each case on
two (2) separate occasions at least thirty (30) days apart then the building
shall thereafter be secured with only commercial quality metal security panels
or a method deemed equivalent by the city.
      12.   Keep the exterior of the property free of vermin and rodents.
   D.   Any mortgagee who violates any provision of this chapter or of the
rules and regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each offense. Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. The following shall be affirmative defenses
under this section and section
8-15-17 of this chapter:
      1.   That the owner or another mortgagee has registered the building
pursuant to section
8-15-2 of this chapter or this section as applicable and such registration is
current.
      2.   That the mortgagee is barred from doing any action required by this
chapter by an automatic stay pursuant to a bankruptcy proceeding, provided that
the mortgagee tenders evidence including the bankruptcy case number.
      3.   That the mortgagee has cured all violations within thirty (30) days
of receiving written notice of such violations. Notice sent by U.S. mail shall
be deemed received seven (7) days after mailing. An affidavit shall be
conclusive proof of mailing.
      4.   That at the time of the violation, the mortgage was not in default.
      5.   That at the time of the violation, the mortgagee was not the senior
lienholder of record on the real estate.
      6.   That a receiver has been appointed for the property by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
      7.   That in a foreclosure of the property, the owner or mortgagor has
taken any of the following acts within the past sixty (60) days:
         a.   Filed any pleading which asserts claims against the mortgagee or
defenses;
         b.   Filed any motion which asserts defenses or claims against the
mortgagee;
         c.   Filed any discovery for response by the mortgagee; or
         d.   Filed a request for mediation.
   E.   The city may issue rules and regulations for the administration of this
chapter.
   F.   Nothing in this chapter shall bar the concurrent enforcement of any
provision of this code against the owner or owners of the property.
   G.   To the extent permitted by law, a mortgagee's acts or omissions
required by ordinance shall not subject the mortgagee to civil or criminal
liability unless the act or omission constitutes gross negligence or wilful,
wanton or intentional misconduct, pursuant to this chapter. This provision
shall not waive the requirement to obtain permits or licenses.
   H.   For the purposes of this chapter and section
8-15-17 of this chapter, "vacant" shall mean any real estate improved with a
complete structure containing one or more dwelling units or an incomplete
structure if the real estate is zoned for residential development, where the
structure is empty or otherwise uninhabited by persons and the structure or lot
is in need of maintenance, repair or securing, and with respect to which one or
more of the following conditions exist:
      1.   All lawful business or construction operations have ceased for six
(6) months.
      2.   It has been declared unfit for occupancy and ordered to remain
vacant and unoccupied under an order issued by the city or by an order issued
by the circuit court of Cook County.
      3.   No construction or legal repairs have commenced for six (6) months.
      4.   The doors or windows are smashed through, broken, unhinged, removed
or continuously unlocked.
      5.   Law enforcement officials have received at least one report of
trespassers or vandalism or other illegal acts being committed at the property
in the last six (6) months.
      6.   Gas, electrical or water services to the entire premises have been
terminated.
A property shall not be considered vacant if: 1) there is an unoccupied
building which is undergoing construction, renovation or rehabilitation that is
proceeding diligently to completion and the building is in compliance with all
applicable ordinances, codes, regulations and legislation; 2) there is a
building occupied on a seasonable basis, but otherwise secure; 3) there is a
secure building on which there are bona fide rental or sale signs; or 4) there
is a building that is secure, but is the subject of a probate action, action to
quiet title or other ownership dispute; or 5) there is otherwise a building
that is secure and in substantial compliance with all applicable ordinances.
   I.   If a building is registered under subsection A of this section, only
the registered mortgagee shall be liable under this section during the
registration period. Nothing in this section shall bar the concurrent
enforcement of any provision of this section against the owner or owners of a
property.
   J.   To the extent permitted by law, a mortgagee's acts or omissions
required by this chapter shall not subject the mortgagee to civil or criminal
liability unless the act or omission constitutes gross negligence or wilful,
wanton or intentional misconduct pursuant to this section. This provision shall
not waive the requirement to obtain permits or licenses for performing certain
work required under this section, or otherwise required by this code or the
penalties provided for failure to do so. (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-17: MORTGAGEE TO INSPECT REAL ESTATE:
   A.   For purposes of this section the terms "default", "mortgage",
"mortgagee", "mortgagor", shall be defined as provided in section
8-15-1 of this chapter.
   B.   For the purposes of this section the term "vacant" shall be defined as
provided in subsection
8-15-16H of this chapter.
   C.   Beginning forty five (45) days after a default, a mortgagee shall
determine, on a monthly basis, if the building on the real estate subject to
its mortgage is vacant. Such determination may be made by communication with
mortgagor, a visual inspection of the real estate or other means reasonably
calculated to determine if the building is vacant.
   D.   This section shall not require a mortgagee to perform any action which
it is barred from doing by an automatic stay pursuant to a bankruptcy
proceeding.
   E.   To the extent permitted by law, mortgagee's acts or omissions required
by this section shall not subject the mortgagee to civil or criminal liability
unless the act or omission constitutes gross negligence or wilful, wanton or
intentional misconduct.
   F.   Any person who violates any provision of this section or of the rules
and regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
offense. Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. The affirmative defenses provided in subsection
8-15-16D of this chapter shall also apply to this section. (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-
19-2011)
8-15-18: TERMINATION:
   A.   For purposes of this section the terms "mortgage" and "mortgagee" shall
be defined as provided in section
8-15-1 of this chapter.
   B.   For the purposes of this section the term "vacant" shall be defined as
provided in subsection
8-15-16H of this chapter.
   C.   Upon the occurrence of any of the following, the requirements of
sections
8-15-16 and
8-15-17 of this chapter shall terminate with respect to a mortgagee:
      1.   The filing with the recorder of deeds of a satisfaction or release
of the mortgagee's mortgage.
   D.   Upon the occurrence of any of the following, the requirements of
sections
8-15-16 and
8-15-17 of this chapter shall terminate with respect to a building:
      1.   The filing with the recorder of deeds of a conveyance of title to
the underlying real estate, pursuant to foreclosure proceedings or otherwise;
      2.   The building ceases to be vacant; or
      3.   The building is demolished with all permits required by the city.
   E.   Within twenty (20) days of termination pursuant to this section, a
mortgagee shall notify the city on a form provided by the city for such
purpose. (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-19: IMPROPERLY MAINTAINED BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES SUBJECT TO NUISANCE
ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   The following buildings and structures are hereby declared to be public
nuisances subject to abatement proceedings under this section:
      1.   A building or structure found to be vacant and open after the
effective date of an order to secure and enclose issued by the circuit court of
Cook County or the administrative hearing officer within the previous twelve
(12) months, unless stayed by the circuit court of Cook County;
      2.   A building or structure that contains any violation of a health,
fire, electrical, plumbing, building or zoning provision of this code which is
imminently dangerous and hazardous;
      3.   A building or structure for which the costs of the repairs necessary
to bring the building or structure into compliance with applicable laws would
exceed the market value of the building or structure after the repairs have
been made, or when the owner cannot show that it has readily available and
sufficient assets to make such repairs or where such repairs otherwise are
economically infeasible; or
      4.   A building or structure where an owner or mortgagee has failed to
correct the code violation(s) that form the basis of an adverse order or
judgment involving that building or structure, issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction or the administrative hearing officer, within sixty (60) days of
entry, unless such adverse order or judgment has been stayed by the circuit
court of Cook County. For the purposes of this section "vacant" shall be
defined as provided in subsection
8-15-16H of this chapter for a mortgagee, for the purposes of this chapter
"vacant" shall be defined as provided in section
8-15-2 of this chapter for owners; and "open" refers to a building that has any
door, window or wall missing or unsecured, or has any other opening so as to
allow entry by a human being.
   B.   The city attorney is authorized to bring an action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to abate a public nuisance described in this section. If
the court finds that the county or the city has established by a preponderance
of the evidence that the building or structure identified in the notice is a
public nuisance as described in this section, the court shall enter an order of
abatement which requires the owner or owners of record, including beneficial
owners of any Illinois land trust, within the time frame specified in the
order, to take all reasonable measures necessary to abate the public nuisance.
The court's order of abatement may include, but is not limited to: correcting
all code violations; altering, repairing or improving the building or
structure, rendering the building or structure unfit for human use or
habitation; vacating or enclosing the building or structure; removing or
demolishing the building or structure. If requested by the city and reasonable
in light of the magnitude of the harm caused or which can reasonably be
expected to be caused by the nuisance, the market value of the property in its
current condition and the extent to which the defendant has failed to take
effective measures to abate the nuisance, the court may enter an order which
provides for:
      1.   Forfeiture to the city of all of the defendant's rights, title and
interest in the real estate; or
      2.   Authorization to the first or senior mortgagee, as a receiver, to
take possession of the property and bring the property into compliance with
this code.
   C.   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the issuance of an order
of forfeiture of all of the defendant's rights, title and interest in the real
estate or the issuance of an order authorizing the first or senior mortgagee to
take possession of the property and to bring the property into compliance with
this code shall be appropriate for any property that is determined to be a
nuisance under this section. Whenever such an order of forfeiture authorization
is issued under this section with respect to a vacant building or a building
containing four (4) or fewer residential units, the holder of the first or
senior mortgage or lien on the property, disregarding any more senior mortgages
or liens held by a unit of government, shall, beginning sixty (60) days after
the date the order is issued, be liable for any code violations on the property
on and after that date, unless the holder has waived its rights under the
mortgage or lien; provided that the sixty (60) day period after which liability
attaches may be extended by an administrative hearing officer or court upon a
showing that the mortgage or lienholder has exercised reasonable diligence in
abating the nuisance and that additional time is needed to complete the
abatement. The holder of such a mortgage or lien shall have the right to take
possession of the property in order to effect necessary repairs beginning on
the date that an order of forfeiture issues. In any case in which an order of
forfeiture is sought for property involving a vacant building or a building
containing four (4) or fewer residential units, the holder of any first or
senior mortgage or lien, disregarding any more senior mortgage or lien held by
a unit of government, shall be given notice and an opportunity to intervene as
a party.
   D.   For any building or structure that is a public nuisance subject to
abatement proceedings under this section, the owner, the owner's agent for
purpose of managing or controlling rents on the building or structure, the
holder of a mortgage or lien with a right to possession of the building or
structure and any other person or mortgagee managing or controlling the
building or structure shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day the
nuisance has existed until the nuisance is abated. The amount of any fine
imposed in any proceeding involving a building or structure that is a public
nuisance under this section, the cost of the repairs, alterations, improvements
or vacating and enclosing, or removal and demolition by the city, and the costs
of bringing the abatement proceeding under this section into compliance,
including inspector's and attorney fees, shall be recoverable from the owner or
owners and shall be a lien on the property upon which the building or structure
is or was located and shall also be enforceable against any person or mortgagee
against whom the order issues as provided by law. Any lien created under this
chapter may, upon showing of good cause, be waived by the city. The lien for
the costs of repairs, alterations, improvements, demolition, receivership,
vacating or enclosing shall be a first lien upon the real estate and the rents
and issues thereof, and shall be superior to all prior assignments of rents and
all prior existing liens and encumbrances, except taxes, and shall be enforced
pursuant to applicable law. No license shall be issued relating to the property
subject to such lien until the lien is satisfied or, upon a showing of good
cause, the lien is waived by the city. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent
the city from seeking other remedies for code violations through the use of any
other administrative procedure or court proceeding.
   E.   Any property forfeited to the city under this section may be disposed
of as authorized by the city.
   F.   All fees and fines laid out in this section are in addition to any fees
and fines in this code. (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
8-15-20: DEMOLITION OF OPEN, HAZARDOUS RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS:
   A.   If a residential building has been determined by the city pursuant to
subsection
8-15-19A of this chapter to be open and vacant and an immediate and continuing
hazard to the city, then the city shall be authorized to post a notice of not
less than two feet by two feet (2' x 2') in size on the front of the building.
The notice shall be dated as of the date of the posting and shall state that
unless the building is demolished, repaired or enclosed and unless any garbage,
debris and other hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances or materials are
removed so that an immediate and continuing hazard to the city no longer
exists, then the building may be demolished, repaired or enclosed or any
garbage, debris and other hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances or
materials may be removed by the city. Not later than thirty (30) days following
the posting of the notice, the city shall do the following:
      1.   Cause to be sent, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a
notice to all owners of record of the property, the beneficial owners of any
Illinois land trust having title to the property and all lienholders of record
in the property, stating the intent of city to demolish, repair or enclose the
building or remove any garbage, debris and other hazardous, noxious or
unhealthy substances or materials if that action is not taken by the owner or
owners or lienholders of record.
      2.   Cause to be published, in a newspaper published in the city, a
notice setting forth:
         a.   The address of the building or description of the real estate
sufficient for its identification;
         b.   A statement that the property is open and vacant and constitutes
an immediate and continuing hazard to the city; and
         c.   A statement that the city intends to demolish, repair or enclose
the building or remove any garbage, debris or other hazardous, noxious or
unhealthy substances or materials if the owner or owners or lienholders of
record fail to do so. This notice shall be published for three (3) consecutive
days.
      3.   Cause to be filed in the office of the recorder of deeds, a notice
setting forth: a) the address of the building or a description of the real
estate sufficient for its identification; and b) a statement that the city has
initiated an action under this section to cause the demolition, repair or
enclosure of the building or the removal of garbage, debris or other hazardous,
noxious or unhealthy substances or materials located on the property if the
owner or owners or lienholders of record fail to do so. If the building is not
demolished, repaired or enclosed or the garbage, debris or other hazardous,
noxious or unhealthy substances or materials are not removed, within thirty
(30) days of mailing the notice described in subsection A1 of this section or
within thirty (30) days of the last day of publication of the notice, whichever
is later, the city shall cause to be sent, by mail, a final determination to
the owners of record, the beneficial owners of any Illinois land trust having
title to the property, and all lienholders of record in the property, which
provides notice that the city has determined that the necessary demolition,
repair, enclosure or removal action has not been taken and that the building
remains open and vacant and an immediate and continuing hazard to the city. The
final determination shall include a statement that, unless a hearing is sought
under this section before the circuit court of Cook County to object to the
proposed actions of the city and a copy of the complaint served on the city
clerk within ten (10) days of the mailing of the final determination, the city
intends to exercise its power to demolish, repair or enclose the buildings or
to remove any garbage, debris or other hazardous, noxious or unhealthy
substances or materials.
The city may proceed to demolish, repair or enclose a building or remove any
garbage, debris or other hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances or
materials under this subsection within a one hundred twenty (120) day period
following the date of the mailing of the notice described in subsection A1 of
this section if the city determines that the demolition, repair, enclosure or
removal of any garbage, debris or other hazardous, noxious or unhealthy
substances or materials is necessary to remedy the immediate and continuing
hazard. If, however, before the city proceeds with any of the actions
authorized by this section, any person or mortgagee who has sought a hearing
under this section before a court and has served a copy of the complaint on the
city clerk, then the city shall not proceed with demolition, repair, enclosure
or removal of garbage, debris or other substances until the court determines
that action is necessary to remedy the hazard and issues an order authorizing
the city to do so.
Following the demolition, repair or enclosure of a building or removal of
garbage, debris or other hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances or
materials under this section the city may file a notice of lien against the
real estate for the cost of the demolition, repair, enclosure or removal within
one hundred eighty (180) days after the repair, demolition, enclosure or
removal occurred, for the cost and expense incurred, in the office of the
recorder of deeds. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement
setting forth: a) a description of the real estate, such as address or other
description of the property, sufficient for its identification; b) the expenses
incurred by the city in undertaking the remedial actions authorized by this
section; c) the date or dates that the expenses were incurred by the city or
its designee; d) a statement by the city that the building was open and vacant
and constituted an immediate and continuing hazard to the community; e) a
statement by the city that the required sign was posted on the building, that
notice was sent by certified mail to the owners of record, and that notice was
published in accordance with this subsection; and f) a statement as to when and
where the notice was published. The lien authorized by this chapter may
thereafter be released or enforced by the city as provided in 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-1(c). (Ord. O-25-2011, 12-19-2011)
CHAPTER 16
BASKETBALL POLES
SECTION:
8-16-1: Definitions
8-16-2: Setbacks From Front Lot Lines
8-16-3: Location
8-16-4: Removal Of Basketball Poles
8-16-5: Penalty
8-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall have the meanings set forth in this chapter
except where otherwise indicated:
BASKETBALL POLES: Any form of a basketball system used to play the game of
basketball consisting of a: a) hoop, b) hoop and net or c) hoop and net affixed
to a backboard, which is then mounted on a pole that is either permanently
affixed to the ground or a portable pole.
PERSON: Any natural person, individual, corporation, charitable, philanthropic
or religious institution or nonprofit corporation, homeowner association,
unincorporated association, partnership and joint venture. (Ord. O-13-2015, 4-
20-2015)
8-16-2: SETBACKS FROM FRONT LOT LINES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place a basketball pole less than
fifteen feet (15') from the front lot line of the lot of record where the
basketball pole is located. (Ord. O-13-2015, 4-20-2015)
8-16-3: LOCATION:
All basketball poles shall be located so that it is placed on the opposite side
of the driveway closest to the nearest side yard lot line. (Ord. O-13-2015, 4-
20-2015)
8-16-4: REMOVAL OF BASKETBALL POLES:
Within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this chapter, every person
on whose real estate a basketball pole is located in violation of this chapter
shall take all necessary actions to cause the removal of the basketball pole
located in violation of this chapter. (Ord. O-13-2015, 4-20-2015)
8-16-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a
violation occurs shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. O-13-
2015, 4-20-2015)
CHAPTER 17
WIND AND SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
8-17-1: Definitions
8-17-2: Wind And Solar Energy Systems Specifications
8-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
NET METERING: An arrangement by which excess energy generated by a Solar Energy
System is distributed back to the electrical utility grid.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A system that uses the power of the sun to capture,
distribute and/or store energy for on-site consumption of utility power.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING INTEGRATED: A Solar Energy System that is an
integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate
mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural
component of a building.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING MOUNTED: A Solar Energy System affixed to either
the principal or accessory structure.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND MOUNTED: A Solar Energy System that is not attached
to another structure and is affixed to the ground or that is attached to an
antenna, light pole or other utility facility.
SOLAR FARM ENERGY SYSTEM: A Commercial Solar Energy System that is used to
convert sunlight to electricity for on-site or off- site use with the primary
purpose being to provide or sell wholesale or retail electricity.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind
turbine, a tower or mounting and associated control or conversion electronics,
which is intended primarily to reduce on- site consumption of utility power.
(Ord. O-07-2019, 4-15-2019)
8-17-2: WIND AND SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   General Requirements: The requirements set forth in this section shall
govern the construction and/or installation of all Solar Energy Systems
governed by this chapter.
      1.   Applicability: The provisions in this chapter are intended to
establish parameters by which Solar Energy Systems may be installed in the
City. Wind Energy Systems and Solar Farm Energy Systems are not permitted.
Additional solar energy installations not explicitly addressed herein may be
authorized, subject to compliance with the applicable Building Codes and
standards of the City.
      2.   Use: Except as authorized by the City Council or its designee for
public utility purposes, a Solar Energy System shall be accessory to the
principal permitted use of a site.
      3.   Permitting And Installation:
         a.   A City building permit is required prior to the installation of
any Solar Energy System. Before a building permit is issued, the following
shall be submitted to the City for review:
            (1)   A site plan showing:
               (A)   Name, address and phone number of the property owner;
               (B)   Property lines;
               (C)   All structures;
               (D)   Setback lines;
               (E)   Location of all solar panels and associated equipment; and
               (F)   Location of the electrical disconnect for the Solar Energy
System.
            (2)   Evidence that the local electric utility has been informed of
the property owner's intent to install a customer-owned Solar Energy System.
            (3)   Evidence that the site plan has been submitted to the local
fire protection district.
            (4)   Evidence that proper warning signage has been located to
inform utilities that a Solar Energy System is present on site.
         b.   The owner of a Solar Energy System shall ensure that it is
installed and maintained in compliance with applicable Building and Safety
Codes adopted by the City and any other State or Federal agency having
jurisdiction over Solar Energy Systems.
         c.   All wiring associated with a Solar Energy System shall be
underground or contained within a raceway that complements the building
materials of the principal structure.
      4.   Interconnection With Public Utilities - Electric:
         a.   Energy produced by a Solar Energy System shall be utilized on
site, except for net metering as authorized by applicable regulatory agencies.
         b.   The interconnection of any Solar Energy System to the electric
distribution grid shall be in accordance with applicable regulatory agencies
required by law.
      5.   Illumination: Illumination of a Solar Energy System is prohibited.
      6.   Signage: No signage or attention-getting device is permitted on any
Solar Energy System.
      7.   Screening On Roofs: Physical screening for Solar Energy Systems
installed on roofs is not required.
      8.   Screening On Grades: Screening is required for Solar Energy Systems
installed on grade. Screening shall comply with chapter 5 of this title.
   B.   Solar Energy Systems:
      1.   Authorization Of Use:
         a.   Building-Integrated, Building-Mounted and Ground-Mounted Solar
Energy Systems are permitted in all zoning districts in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
      2.   Height:
         a.   Building-Mounted Solar Energy System: A Building-Mounted Solar
Energy System may not extend above the peak roof height of the building to
which the Solar Energy System is affixed.
         b.   Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System: The maximum height of a
Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System shall be six feet (6') as measured from the
average grade at the base of the pole to the highest edge of the system.
      3.   Location:
         a.   Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems shall not be located within
the required front yard or corner side yard of any lot of record or in any
utility, water, sewer, or other type of public easement.
         b.   All parts of any Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System shall be set
back at least ten feet (10') from the interior side and rear property lines.
         c.   Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems shall not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the required rear or backyard.
   C.   Maintenance And Removal Of Solar Energy Systems:
      1.   Solar Energy Systems must be maintained in good repair and operable
condition at all times, including compliance with all applicable Building and
Technical Codes to ensure structural and technical integrity of such
facilities. If a system becomes inoperable or damaged, operations must cease
and be promptly repaired.
      2.   If the City determines that a Solar Energy System fails to comply
with the applicable provisions of this Code, the City shall provide written
notification to the property owner. The property owner shall have a period of
thirty (30) days from the date of notification to either restore the Solar
Energy System to operation or remove the system.
      3.   In the event such Solar Energy System is not brought into compliance
with this Code within the specified time period, the City may cause the removal
of Solar Energy System at the property owner's expense. (Ord. O-07-2019, 4-15-
2019)
CHAPTER 18
RESIDENTIAL TENANT AND LANDLORD ORDINANCE
SECTION:
8-18-1: Title, Purpose And Scope
8-18-2: Exclusions
8-18-3: Definitions
8-18-4: Rental Agreements
8-18-5: Tenant Rights And Obligations
8-18-6: Landlord Rights And Obligations
8-18-7: Rights And Remedies Under Other Laws
8-18-8: Penalty
8-18-1: TITLE, PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Generally.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Residential Tenant and
Landlord Ordinance and shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its
purposes and policies.
   It is the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the City, in order to
protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens, to
establish the rights and obligations of the tenant and the landlord in the
rental of dwelling units and to encourage the tenant and the landlord to
maintain and improve the quality of housing.
   This chapter applies to, regulates and determines rights, obligations and
remedies under a rental agreement, wherever made, for a dwelling unit located
within the City. The chapter applies specifically to rental agreements for
dwelling units operated under subsidy programs of agencies of the United States
and/or the State of Illinois, including specifically programs operated or
subsidized by the Housing Authority of Cook County and/or Illinois Housing
Development Authority to the extent that this chapter is not in direct conflict
with statutory or regulatory provisions governing such programs. (Ord. O-20-
2020, 12-7-2020)
8-18-2: EXCLUSIONS:
   A.   Unless created to avoid the application of this chapter, the following
arrangements are not governed by this chapter:
      1.   Transient occupancy in a hotel or motel;
      2.   Residence at a public or private medical, extended care facility,
geriatric facility, convent, monastery, religious institution, temporary
overnight shelter, transitional shelter, educational dormitory, or in a
structure operated for the benefit of a social or fraternal organization;
      3.   Occupancy under a contract sale of a dwelling unit if the occupant
is the purchaser;
      4.   Occupancy in a cooperative apartment by a shareholder of the
cooperative;
      5.   Occupancy by an employee of a landlord whose occupancy is
conditional upon employment in or about the premises.
      6.   Residential buildings in which occupancy is limited to six units or
less and which are owner-occupied.
      7.   Buildings owned or managed by the City of Northlake or any other
unit of government. (Ord. O-20-2020, 12-7-2020)
8-18-3: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
DWELLING UNIT: A structure or part of a structure that is used as a home,
residence or sleeping place by one or more persons who maintain a household
together with the common areas and all housing services, privileges,
furnishings and facilities supplied in connection with the use or occupancy
thereof, including garage and parking facilities.
LANDLORD: The owner, agent, lessor, sublessor or the successor in interest of
any of them of a dwelling unit or the building of which it is part.
OWNER: One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all or part
of the legal title to property or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a
right to present use and enjoyment of the premises including a mortgagee in
possession.
PERSON: means an individual, corporation, government, governmental subdivision
or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association or any
other legal or commercial entity.
PREMISES: means the dwelling unit and the structure of which it is a part,
facilities and appurtenances therein and grounds, areas and facilities held out
for the use of tenants.
RENT: All payments to be made to the landlord under the rental agreement. When
it is used as a determination of damages and the tenant has a subsidized rent,
such as a Housing Choice Voucher, "rent" shall mean the full market rent, not
the tenant rent based on income.
RENTAL AGREEMENT: A written or oral agreement and valid rules and regulations
adopted under Section IV embodying the terms and conditions concerning the use
and occupancy of a dwelling unit and premises.
TENANT: A person entitled by written or oral agreement, subtenancy approved by
the landlord or by sufferance, to occupy a dwelling unit to the exclusion of
others.
WRITTEN NOTICE: Communications in writing shared as hand delivered typed or
printed documents, mailed documents, or electronically mailed or messaged
documents.
OWNER-OCCUPIED: That the residential building or at least a portion or one unit
thereof, condominium, or cooperative, is occupied by the owner of the
residential building as his or her principal residence. (Ord. O-20-2020, 12-7-
2020)
8-18-4: RENTAL AGREEMENTS:
   A.   
      1.   A rental agreement complying with the requirements of this chapter
shall be executed for the rental of all dwelling units within the City
regardless of the duration of the tenancy herein. The tenant and landlord may
include in a rental agreement terms and conditions not prohibited by this
chapter and other rules of law including rent, term of the agreement and other
provisions governing the rights and obligations of the parties.
      2.   All rental agreements for leases of dwelling units subject to this
chapter shall contain the full names of all occupants of the dwelling unit
leased or to be leased under the rental agreement. The individual occupancy of
the dwelling unit shall in no case exceed the maximum occupancy permitted
elsewhere in applicable building codes for that size unit.
      3.   Rent is to be payable at the time and place agreed upon by the
parties. Unless otherwise agreed, rent is payable at the dwelling unit at the
beginning of any term of one month or less and otherwise in equal monthly
installments at the beginning of each month. Unless otherwise agreed, rent
shall be uniformly apportionable from day to day.
      4.   Unless otherwise agreed, the tenancy shall be week to week in the
case of a tenant who pays weekly rent and, in all other cases, month to month.
   B.   
      1.   If the landlord does not sign and deliver a written rental
agreement, acceptance of rent without reservation by the landlord gives the
rental agreement the same effect as if it has been signed and delivered by the
landlord.
      2.   If the tenant does not sign and deliver a written rental agreement,
acceptance of possession and payment of rent without reservation gives the
rental agreement the same effect as if it had been signed and delivered by the
tenant.
      3.   If a rental agreement given effect by the operation of this section
provides for a term longer than one year, it is effective for only one year.
   C.   Prohibited Provisions. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no
rental agreement may provide that the tenant or the landlord:
      1.   Agrees to waive or to forego rights or remedies under this chapter,
Illinois state law, or federal law;
      2.   Authorizes a confession of judgment, or any entry of a judgment by a
court without notice or a trial for any claim including but not limited to
debts, liabilities, damages, and obligations, on a claim arising out of the
rental agreement;
      3.   Agrees to a waiver of: service, summons, copy of complaint,
petition, right to notice, motion or entry of appearance;
      4.   Agrees to non-disparagement clause that limits any written or oral
statements, remarks, or other communications, public or private, directly or
indirectly, made by tenants regarding the landlord, property, management,
staff, officers, directors, representatives, investors, shareholders,
administrators, affiliates, employees, affiliated corporations, divisions, or
subsidiaries;
      5.   Agrees to the limitation of any liability of the tenant or landlord
arising under law or to indemnify the tenant or landlord for that liability or
the costs connected therewith;
      6.   Agrees to waive any written termination of tenancy notice or manner
of service thereof provided under state law or this chapter;
      7.   Agrees to waive the right of any party to a trial by jury;
      8.   Agrees that in the event of a lawsuit arising out of the tenancy the
tenant will pay the landlord's attorney's fees except as provided for by court
rules, statute or ordinance;
      9.   Agrees that either party may cancel or terminate a rental agreement
at a different time or within a shorter time period than the other party,
unless such provision is disclosed in a separate written notice;
      10.   Agrees that a tenant shall pay a charge, fee or penalty in excess
of $10.00 per month for the first $1,500.00 in monthly rent plus five percent
(5%) per month for any amount in excess of $1500.00 in monthly rent for the
late payment of rent;
      11.   Agrees that, if a tenant pays rent before a specified date or
within a specified time period in the month, the tenant shall not receive a
discount or reduction in the rental amount in excess of $10.00 per month for
the first $1500.00 in monthly rent plus five percent (5%) per month for any
amount in excess of $1500.00 in monthly rent.
      A provision prohibited by this section included in a rental agreement is
unenforceable. If a landlord deliberately uses a rental agreement containing
any provision known by them to be prohibited, the tenant may recover actual
damages sustained by them or two (2) months' rent, whichever is greater.
   D.   Disclosure of Costs. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no
rental agreement may provide that the landlord:
      1.   Impose fees in excess of reasonable expenses incurred by the
landlord in connection with the dwelling unit;
      2.   Pay the cost of a utility for a dwelling unit in which the utility
service is individually metered to the dwelling unity and the tenant is
directly responsible to the utility company without disclosing to the tenant in
the rental agreement:
         a.   That the cost of the utility shall be the responsibility of the
tenant;
         b.   The annual cost of service from the utility providing the primary
service during the previous twelve (12) months.
      5.   Pay the cost of a utility for a dwelling unit to the landlord
without disclosing to the tenant in the rental agreement:
         a.   That the cost of the utility shall be the responsibility of the
tenant;
         b.   The annual cost of service from the utility providing the primary
service during the previous twelve (12) months;
      A provision prohibited by this section included in a rental agreement is
unenforceable. If a landlord deliberately uses a rental agreement containing
any provision known by them to be prohibited, the tenant may recover actual
damages sustained by them or two (2) months' rent, whichever is greater. (Ord.
O-20-2020, 12-7-2020)
8-18-5: TENANT RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS:
   A.   Tenant Rights & Remedies. In addition to any remedies provided under
municipal, state and federal law, a tenant shall have the remedies specified in
this section under the circumstances herein set forth.
      1.   Material Noncompliance. Material noncompliance by a landlord shall
include, but is not limited to, any of the following circumstances:
         a.   Failure to maintain floors in compliance with the safe load-
bearing requirements of the City Code;
         b.   Failure to maintain the structural integrity of the building or
structure or parts thereof;
         c.   Failure to comply with applicable requirements of the City Code
for the number, width, construction, location or accessibility of exits;
         d.   Failure to maintain exit, stairway, fire escape or directional
signs as required by the City Code;
         e.   Failure to provide smoke alarms, smoke detectors, sprinkler
systems, standpipe systems, fire alarm systems, automatic fire detectors or
fire extinguishers where required by the City Code;
         f.   Failure to maintain elevators in compliance with applicable
provisions of the City Code;
         g.   Failure to provide or maintain in good working order a flush
toilet, bathroom sink, bathtub or shower, and kitchen sink if applicable;
         h.   Failure to maintain heating facilities or gas-fired appliances in
compliance with the City Code;
         i.   Failure to provide heat or hot water in such amounts and at such
levels and times as required by the City Code;
         j.   Failure to provide hot and cold running water as required by the
City Code;
         k.   Failure to provide adequate hall or stairway lighting;
         l.   Failure to maintain the foundation, exterior walls or exterior
roof in sound condition and repair, substantially watertight and protected
against rodents;
         m.   Failure to maintain floors, interior walls or ceilings in sound
condition and good repair;
         n.   Failure to maintain windows, exterior doors or basement hatchways
in sound condition and repair and substantially tight and to provide locks or
security devises as required by the City Code, including deadlatch locks,
deadbolt locks, sash or ventilation locks and front door windows or peepholes;
         o.   Failure to supply screens as required by the City Code;
         p.   Failure to maintain stairways or porches in safe condition and
sound repair;
         q.   Failure to maintain the basement or cellar in a safe and sanitary
condition;
         r.   Failure to maintain facilities, equipment or chimneys in safe and
sound working condition;
         s.   Failure to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water;
         t.   Failure to exterminate insects, rodents or other pests;
         u.   Failure to supply or maintain facilities for refuse disposal;
         v.   Failure to prevent the accumulation of garbage, trash, refuse or
debris;
         w.   Failure to provide adequate light or ventilation as required by
the City Code;
         x.   Failure to maintain plumbing facilities, pipping, fixtures,
appurtenances and appliances in good operating condition and repair;
         y.   Failure to provide or maintain electrical systems, circuits,
receptacles and devices as required by the City Code;
         z.   Failure to maintain and repair any equipment which the landlord
supplies or is required to supply by the City Code;
         aa.   Failure to maintain the dwelling unit and common areas in a fit
and habitable condition in compliance with the City Code and all applicable,
state statutes, federal laws and state and federal regulations.    
      If there is material noncompliance by the landlord with the rental
agreement or with this section which renders the premises not reasonably fit
and habitable, the tenant may deliver, at any time of month, a written notice
to the landlord specifying the breach and that the rental agreement will
terminate on a date not less than fourteen (14) days after receipt of notice
unless the breach is remedied by the landlord prior to the expiration of the
notice. During that fourteen (14) day period, the tenant may withhold some or
all of the rent until the breach is remedied. If the breach is not remedied
prior to the expiration of the notice, the rental agreement shall terminate as
provided in the notice. The tenant may not terminate for a condition caused by
the deliberate or negligent act or omission of the tenant, a member of the
tenant's family, or other person on the premises with the tenant's consent. If
possession shall not be so delivered, then the tenant's notice shall be deemed
withdrawn and the lease shall remain in full force and effect. If the rental
agreement is terminated, the landlord shall return security.
      Except as provided in this chapter, the tenant may recover damages and
obtain injunctive relief for any material noncompliance by the landlord with
the rental agreement or with this section.
   B.   Failure to Provide Essential Services.
      1.   If, contrary to the rental agreement, the landlord fails to supply
heat, running water, hot water, electricity, gas or plumbing, the tenant shall
deliver a written notice to the landlord specifying the service to be restored.
If the landlord fails to correct the condition within 24 hours after being
notified by the tenant, the tenant may:
         a.   Withhold from the monthly rent an amount that reasonably reflects
the reduced value of the premises due to the material noncompliance or failure;
         b.   Procure reasonable amounts of heat, running water, hot water,
electricity, gas or plumbing service and, upon presentation to the landlord of
paid receipts, deduct the cost from their rent;    
         c.   Recover damages based upon the diminution in the fair rental
value of the dwelling unit and reasonable attorney fees;
         d.   Procure substitute housing, in which case the tenant is excused
from paying rent for the period of noncompliance. The tenant may recover the
cost of reasonable value of the substitute housing up to an amount equal to the
monthly rent and reasonable fees.
         e.   In addition, the tenant may:
         i.   Terminate the rental agreement by written notice to the landlord
if the material noncompliance or failure persists for more than 72 hours after
the tenant has notified the landlord; provided, however, that no termination
shall be allowed if the failure is due to the inability of the utility provider
to provide service. If the rental agreement is terminated, the landlord shall
return all security deposits thereon and tenant shall deliver possession of the
dwelling unit to the landlord within 30 days after the expiration of the 72
hour time period specified in the notice. If possession shall not be so
delivered, the tenant's notice shall be deemed withdrawn and the lease shall
remain in full force and effect.
      2.   Tenants may not exercise their rights under this section if the
condition was caused by the inability of a utility supplier to provider service
or by the deliberate or negligent act or omission of the tenant, a member of
the tenant's family, or other person on the premises with the tenant's consent.
   C.   Fire or Casualty.
      1.   If the dwelling unit or premises are damaged or destroyed by fire or
casualty to an extent that enjoyment of the dwelling unit is substantially
impaired, the tenant may:
      2.   Immediately vacate the premises and notify the landlord in writing
within fourteen (14) days thereafter of the tenant's intention to terminate the
rental agreement, in which case the rental agreement terminates as of the date
of fire or casualty;
      3.   If continued occupancy is lawful, vacate any part of the dwelling
unit rendered unusable by the fire or casualty, in which case the tenant's
liability for rent is reduced in proportion to the diminution in the fair
rental value of the dwelling unit;
      4.   If the tenant desires to continue the tenancy and if the landlord
has promised or begun work to repair the damage or destruction but fails to
carry out the work to restore the dwelling unit or common area diligently and
within a reasonable time, the tenant may notify the landlord in writing within
14 days after the tenant becomes aware that work is not being carried out
diligently or within a reasonable time of the tenant's intention to terminate
the rental agreement, in which case the rental agreement terminates as of the
date of the fire or casualty.
      5.   If the rental agreement is terminated, the landlord shall return all
security deposit. Accounting for rent in the event of a termination,
apportionment shall be made of the date of the fire or casualty.
      6.   A tenant may not exercise remedies in this section if the fire or
casualty damage was caused by the deliberate or negligent act or omission of
the tenant, a member of the tenant's family or a person on the premises with
the tenant's consent.
   D.   Minor and Other Repairs.
      1.   If the landlord fails to comply with the rental agreement or with
the requirements of this section and the reasonable cost of compliance does not
exceed $500.00 or one-half month's rent, whichever amount is greater, the
tenant may recover damages for the breach or may notify the landlord in writing
of their intention to correct the condition at the landlord's expense. If the
landlord fails to comply within fourteen (14) days after being notified by the
tenant in writing or as promptly as conditions require in case of emergency,
the tenant may have work done in a workmanlike manner and, after submitting to
the landlord a paid bill from an appropriate tradesman or supplier, deduct from
their rent the amount therefore, not exceeding the limits specified in this
section.
      2.   A tenant shall not repair at the landlord's expense if the condition
was caused by the deliberate or negligent act or omission of the tenant, a
member of the tenant's family, or other person on the premises with the
tenant's consent.
      3.   Before correcting a condition affecting facilities shared by more
than one dwelling unit, the tenant shall notify all other affected tenants of
their plans and so arrange the work as to create the least practicable
inconvenience to the other tenants.
      4.   For the purposes of mechanics' lien laws, repairs performed or
materials furnished pursuant to this subsection shall be construed as having
been performed or furnished pursuant to authority of or written permission of
the landlord.
      5.   If the landlord fails to comply with the rental agreement or with
the requirements of this section, the tenant may, where the condition has been
cited as a code violation by the City, notify the landlord in writing of the
tenant's intention to withhold from the monthly rent an amount which reasonably
reflects the reduced value of the premises. If the landlord fails to correct
the condition within fourteen (14) days after being notified by the tenant in
writing, the tenant may, during the time such failure continues, deduct from
the rent the stated amount. A tenant shall not withhold rent under this
subsection if the condition was caused by the deliberate or negligent act or
omission of the tenant, a member of the tenant's family, or other person on the
premises with the tenant's consent.
   E.   Rights of Possession and Entry.
      1.   If the landlord fails to deliver possession of the dwelling unit to
the tenant in compliance with the rental agreement, rent abates until
possession is delivered and the tenant may:
      2.   Upon written notice to the landlord, terminate rental agreement and,
upon termination, the landlord shall immediately return all security deposits;
      3.   Demand performance of the rental agreement and, if the tenant
elects, maintain an action for possession of the dwelling unit against the
landlord or any person wrongfully in possession and recover the damages
sustained by them.
      4.   An aggrieved person may recover from the person withholding
possession an amount not more than two (2) months' rent or twice the actual
damages sustained by them, whichever is greater, and reasonable attorney fees.
      5.   If the landlord makes an unlawful entry or a lawful entry in an
unreasonable manner or makes repeated demands for entry otherwise lawful, but
which have the effect of harassing the tenant, the tenant may obtain injunctive
relief to prevent the recurrence of the conduct or terminate the rental
agreement. In each case, the tenant may recover an amount equal to not more
than two (2) months' rent or twice the damages sustained by them, whichever is
greater, and reasonable attorney fees.
   F.   Tenant Obligations. The tenant shall:
      1.   Comply with all obligations imposed upon tenants by provisions of
the codes applicable to the dwelling unit;
      2.   Keep that part of the premises that they occupy and use as safe as
the condition of the premises permits;
      3.   Dispose from their dwelling unit all ashes, rubbish, garbage and
other waste in a clean and safe manner;
      4.   Keep all plumbing fixtures in the dwelling unit or used by the
tenant as clean as their condition permits;
      5.   Use, in a reasonable manner, all electrical, plumbing, sanitary,
heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other facilities and appliances,
including elevators, in the premises;
      6.   Not deliberately destroy, deface, damage, impair or remove any part
of the premises or knowingly permit any person to do so;
      7.   Conduct themselves and require other persons on the premises with
their consent to conduct themselves in a manner that will not disturb their
neighbors' peaceful enjoyment of premises;    
      8.   Unless otherwise agreed, only occupy their dwelling unit as a
dwelling unit. (Ord. O-20-2020, 12-7-2020)
8-18-6: LANDLORD RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS:
In addition to any remedies provided under state and federal law, a landlord
shall have the remedies specified in this section under the circumstances
herein set forth.
   A.   Landlord Rights and Remedies.
      1.   Rights of Entry. A tenant shall not unreasonably withhold consent to
the landlord to enter the dwelling unit:
         a.   To inspect the premises or conduct inspections authorized or
required by any government agency;
         b.   To make necessary or agreed repairs, decorations, alterations or
improvements, including where such work elsewhere in the building requires such
access;
         c.   To supply necessary or agreed services;   
         d.   To exhibit the dwelling unit to prospective or actual purchasers,
mortgagees, workmen or contractors;
         e.   To exhibit the dwelling unit to prospective tenants 60 days or
less prior to the expiration of the existing rental agreement;
         f.   To determine a tenants' compliance with provisions in the rental
agreement.
         The landlord may only enter at reasonable times, except in case of
emergency. An entry between 8:00am and 8:00pm or at any other time expressly
requested by the tenant shall be presumed reasonable.
         A landlord may enter the dwelling unit without consent of the tenant
in case of emergency.
         The landlord shall not abuse the right of access or use it to harass
the tenant. Except in cases of emergency the landlord shall give the tenant at
least two (2) days' notice of their intent to enter. Such notice shall be
provided directly to each dwelling unit by mail, telephone, written notice to
the dwelling unit or by other reasonable means designed in good faith to
provide notice to the tenant. If access is required because of repair work for
common facilities or multiple apartments, a general notice may be given by the
landlord to all potentially affected tenants that entry may be required. In
cases where access is authorized due to emergency the landlord shall give the
tenant notice of entry within two (2) days after such entry.
         If the tenant refuses to allow lawful access, the landlord may obtain
injunctive relief to compel access or terminate the rental agreement. In either
case, the landlord may recover damages and reasonable attorney fees.
         If the landlord makes an unlawful entry or entry in an unreasonable
manner or repeated unreasonable demands for entry, which have the effect of
harassing the tenant, the tenant may obtain injunctive relief to prevent the
recurrence of the conduct or terminate the rental agreement. In each case, the
tenant may recover an amount equal to one month's rent or twice the damage
sustained, whichever is greater, and reasonable attorney fees.
      2.   Rules and Regulations. The landlord may adopt general rules or
regulations concerning the tenant's use and occupancy of the premises. They
enforceable only if in writing and:
         a.   Their purpose is to promote the convenience, safety and welfare
of the tenants in the premises, preserve the landlord's property from abusive
use or make a fair distribution of services and facilities among tenants;
         b.   They are reasonably related to the purpose for which they are
adopted;
         c.   They apply to all tenants in the premises in a fair manner;
         d.   They are sufficiently explicit to fairly inform the tenant of
what they must or must not do to comply;
         e.   They are not for the purpose of evading the obligations of the
landlord;
         f.   They are not for the purpose of preventing tenants to assemble or
otherwise communicate amongst each other about the premises;
         g.   The tenant has written notice of them at the time they enter into
the rental agreement.
         A rule or regulation adopted after the tenant enters into the rental
agreement that substantially modifies their bargain is not enforceable unless
the tenant consents in writing.
   B.   Landlord Remedies: Every landlord shall have the remedies specified in
this section for the following circumstances:
      1.   Failure to Pay Rent: If all or any portion of rent is unpaid when
due and the tenant fails to pay the unpaid rent within five days after written
notice by the landlord of the landlord's intention to terminate the rental
agreement if rent is not so paid, the landlord may terminate the rental
agreement. Provided. however, that at any time prior to the issuance of any
order of possession or an eviction order made pursuant to Article IX of the
Illinois Code of Civil Procedure. 735 ILCS 5/9-101 et seq. the tenant has a
one-time right to cure the non-payment of rent by paying the landlord unpaid
rent, duly owed from the date of the notice of termination to the date of
payment, together with all filing fees and costs paid by the landlord and all
fees and costs expended by the landlord for service of process, but not
including attorney fees. If the tenant so cures, then the order of possession
or eviction order shall be vacated, and the case dismissed upon motion by
either the landlord or the tenant. If a landlord does not provide a total
amount due, the tenant shall be obligated to provide only the amount of rent
due from the notice to the date of judgment. Nothing in this subsection shall
affect a landlord's obligation to provide notice of termination of tenancy in
subsidized housing as required under federal law or regulations. A landlord may
also maintain an action for rent and/or damages without terminating the rental
agreement.
      2.   Material Noncompliance: If there is material noncompliance by a
tenant with a rental agreement, the landlord may deliver written notice to the
tenant specifying the acts and omissions constituting the breach and that the
rental agreement will terminate upon a date no less than thirty (30) days after
receipt of the notice, unless the breach is remedied by the tenant prior to the
expiration of the notice. If the breach is not remedied prior to the expiration
of the notice, the rental agreement shall terminate as provided in the notice.
The landlord may recover damages and obtain injunctive relief for any material
noncompliance by the tenant with the rental agreement.
      3.   Abandonment: Abandonment of the dwelling unit shall have occurred
when:
         a.   Actual notice has been provided to the landlord by the tenant
indicating the tenant's intention not to return to the dwelling unit;
         b.   All persons entitled under a rental agreement have been absent
from the unit for a period of 32 days or for one rental period when the rental
agreement is for less than a month and such persons have removed their personal
property from the premises and rent for that period is unpaid.
         Abandonment of the dwelling unit shall not be deemed to have occurred
if any person entitled to occupancy has provided the landlord with written
notice indicating that they still intend to occupy the unit and make full
payments of all amounts due to the landlord.
         If the tenant abandons the dwelling unit, the landlord shall make a
good faith effort to rent it at a fair rental value. This shall include the
acceptance of reasonable subleases. If the landlord succeeds in renting the
dwelling unit at a fair rental, the tenant shall only be liable for the amount
by which the rent due from the date of abandonment to the termination of the
initial rental agreement exceeds the fair rental subsequently received by the
landlord from the date of abandonment to the termination of the initial rental
agreement. If the landlord makes a good faith effort to rent the dwelling unit
at a fair rental and is unsuccessful, the tenant shall be liable for the rent
due for the period of the rental agreement. The tenant shall also be liable for
reasonable advertising and redecoration costs incurred by the landlord in re-
renting the dwelling unit.
         Unless otherwise agreed, if, upon termination of a tenancy including,
but not limited to, a termination after expiration of a lease or by surrender
or abandonment of the premises, a tenant has left personal property on the
premises, and the landlord reasonably believes that the tenant has abandoned
such personal property, the landlord may notify the tenant in writing of their
demand that such property be removed within dates set forth in the notice, but
no less than 14 days after delivery of the notice;
         If such property is not removed within the time specified, the
property may be sold at a public sale or at a commercially reasonable private
sale. The proceeds, less reasonable costs incurred by such sale or storage,
shall be held by the landlord for the tenant for one year. If the tenant does
not claim the proceeds within one year, the proceeds shall be the property of
the landlord. Any public sale, authorized under the provisions of this section,
shall be conducted pursuant to law in such instances made and provided;
         If the tenant has left personal property which is reasonably
determined by the landlord to be valueless or of such little value that the
cost of storing and conducting a sale would probably exceed the amount that
would be realized from such a sale, the landlord must include in such notice
that the landlord intends to destroy or otherwise dispose of the property. If
such notice is given and property is not removed within the time specified, the
landlord may destroy or otherwise dispose of the property.
         After sending written notice, the landlord shall store all personal
property of the tenant in a place of safekeeping and shall exercise reasonable
care of the property but shall not be responsible to the tenant for any loss
not caused by the landlord's deliberate or negligent act or omission. The
landlord may elect to store the property in or about the previously vacated
premises. The landlord shall be entitled to the cost of storage for the period
of time that the property has remained in their safekeeping. In such case the
storage shall not exceed commercially reasonable storage rates. If the tenant's
property is removed to a commercial storage company, the storage cost shall
include the actual charge for such storage and removal from the premises to the
place of storage.
         After the landlord's notice, if the tenant makes timely response in
writing of their intention to remove the personal property from the premises
and does not do so within the landlord's notice or a mutually agreeable date
(whichever is later), it shall be conclusively presumed that the tenant has
abandoned such property.
      4.   Rent and Renewals.
         a.   If the landlord accepts rent, including holding payment, knowing
that it alleges a lease violation, including a default in the payment of rent
by the tenant, the landlord waives the right to terminate the rental agreement
for that breach.
         b.   If the rental agreement is terminated, the landlord may maintain
a claim for possession or for rent and a separate claim for damages for breach
of the rental agreement.
         c.   No tenant shall be required to renew a rental agreement more than
90 days prior to the termination date of the rental agreement. If the landlord
violates this subsection, the tenant shall recover one month's rent or actual
damages, whichever is greater.
         d.   The landlord shall notify the tenant in writing at least 90 days
prior to the stated termination date of the rental agreement of the landlord's
intent to terminate the tenancy or not renew an existing rental agreement. If
the landlord fails to give required written notice, the tenant may remain in
the dwelling unit for up to 120 days after the date on which such required
written notice is given to the tenant, regardless of the date specified in the
existing rental agreement. During such occupancy, the terms and conditions of
the tenancy shall be the same as the terms and conditions during the last month
of tenancy.
   C.   Landlord Obligations.
   The landlord shall maintain the premises in compliance with all applicable
provisions of the City Code and shall promptly make any and all repairs to
fulfill this obligation.
   The landlord and tenant of any dwelling unit may agree that the tenant is to
perform specified repairs, maintenance tasks, alterations or remodeling only
if:
   The agreement of the parties is entered into in good faith and not for the
purpose of evading obligations of the landlord and is set forth in a separate
writing signed by the parties and supported by adequate consideration;
   The agreement does not diminish or affect the obligation of the landlord to
other tenants on the premises.
      1.   Notice of Habitability.
         a.   Before a tenant initially enters into or renews a rental
agreement for a dwelling unit, the landlord or any person authorized to enter
into a rental agreement on his behalf shall disclose to the tenant in writing:
         b.   Any code violations which have been cited by the City or other
oversight body during the previous twelve (12) months for the dwelling unit and
common areas and provide notice of the pendency of any code enforcement
litigation or administrative hearing. The notice shall provide the case number
of the litigation and/or the identification number of the administrative
hearing proceeding and a listing of any code violations cited;
         c.   Any notice of intent by the City or any utility provider to
terminate water, gas, electrical or other utility service to the dwelling unit
or common areas. The disclosure shall state the type of service being
terminated, the intended date of termination and whether the termination will
affect the dwelling unit, common areas or both.
      2.   Bed Bugs.
         a.   Landlords subject to this section must provide to all prospective
and current lessees with a copy of the current, approved U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency federal pamphlet on bed bug prevention, detection and
control.
         b.   In any rental unit in which an infestation of bed bugs is found
or reasonably suspected, it is the responsibility of the landlord to:
            (1)   Provide pest control services by a pest management
professional until such time that no evidence of bed bugs can be found and
verified;
            (2)   Maintain a written record of the pest control measures
performed by the pest management professional on the rental unit. The record
shall include reports and receipts prepared by the pest management
professional. The record shall be maintained for three years and shall be open
to inspection by authorized City personnel.
         c.   In any multiple rental unit building in which an infestation of
bed bugs is found or reasonably suspected, it is the responsibility of the
landlord to:
            (1)   Provide pest control services by a pest management
professional until such time that no evidence of bed bugs can be found and
verified within the building or portion thereof, including the individual
rental units;
            (2)   Maintain a written record of the pest control measures
performed by pest management professional on the building. The record shall
include reports and receipts prepared by the pest management professional. The
record shall be maintained for three years and shall be open to inspection by
authorized city personnel, including but not limited to employees of the
departments of health and buildings.   
         d.   A landlord shall provide the pest control services within ten
(10) days after:
            (1)   A bed bug is found or reasonably suspected anywhere on the
premises;
            (2)   Being notified in writing by a tenant of a known or
reasonably suspected bed bug infestation on the premises or in the tenant's
rental unit.
         e.   The extermination of bed bugs shall be by inspection, and if
necessary, the treatment of the dwelling unit on either side of the affected
dwelling unit and the unit directly above and below the affected dwelling unit.
This pattern of inspection and treatment shall be continued until no further
infestation is detected.
      3.   Lead Paint. Landlords subject to this section must follow all
applicable City, state and federal laws and regulations regarding lead
poisoning and must specifically provide all prospective and current lessees
with a copy of the current, approved U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
federal pamphlet on lead-based paint disclosure and disclose any known lead
hazards
      4.   Disclosure. The landlord or any person authorized to enter into a
rental agreement on their behalf shall disclose to the tenant in writing on or
before the commencement of tenancy the name, address and telephone number of:
         a.   The owner or person authorized to manage the premises;
         b.   A person authorized to act for or on the behalf of the owner for
the purpose of service of process and for the purpose of receiving of notices
and demands;
         c.   A person who fails to comply with this section becomes an agent
of each person who is a landlord for:
            (1)   Service of process and receiving of notices and demands;
            (2)   Performing the obligations of the landlord under this chapter
and under the rental agreement and expending or making available for that
purpose all rent collected from the premises.
         d.   The information required to be furnished by this section shall be
kept current. This section extends to any successor landlord, owner or manager.
         e.   If the landlord fails to comply with this section, the tenant may
terminate the rental agreement. If the landlord fails to comply with this
section after receipt of written notice, the tenant shall recover one month's
rent or actual damages, whichever is greater, and reasonable attorneys' fees.
      5.   Notification of Foreclosure.
         a.   Within seven (7) days of being serviced a foreclosure complaint,
an owner or landlord of a premises that is subject to the foreclosure complaint
shall disclose, in writing, to all tenants of the premises that a foreclosure
action has been filed against the owner or landlord. An owner or landlord shall
also disclose, in writing, the notice of a foreclosure to any other third party
who has a consistent pattern and practice of paying rent to the owner or
landlord on behalf of a tenant.
         b.   Before a tenant initially enters into a rental agreement for a
dwelling unit, the owner or landlord shall also disclose, in writing, that they
are named in a foreclosure complaint.
         c.   The written disclosure shall include the court in which the
foreclosure action is pending, the case name, case number and shall include the
following language:
         d.   "This is not a notice to vacate the premise. This notice does not
mean ownership of the building has changed. All tenants are still responsible
for payment of rent and other obligations under the rental agreement. The owner
or landlord is still responsible for their obligations under the rental
agreement. You shall receive additional notice if there is change in owner."
         e.   If the owner or landlord fails to comply with this section, the
tenant may terminate the rental agreement by written notice. The written notice
shall specify the date of termination no later than 30 days from the date of
written notice. In addition, if a tenant in a civil legal proceeding against an
owner or landlord establishes that a violation of this section has occurred
they shall be entitled to recover $200.00 in damages in addition to any other
damages or remedies that the tenant may also be entitled. 
      6.   Limitation of Liability.
         a.   Unless otherwise agreed, a landlord who sells the premises is
relieved of liability under the agreement and this chapter for events occurring
subsequent to written notice to the tenant of the sale.
         b.   Unless otherwise agreed, the manager of the premises is relieved
of liability under the rental agreement and this chapter for events occurring
after written notice to the tenant of the termination of their management.
      7.   Security Deposits.
         a.   A landlord may not demand or receive security in an amount in
excess of one and one-half months' rent. A landlord may not avoid the coverage
of this subsection by labeling the fee as something other than a security
deposit, including "move-in" fee.
         b.   A tenant shall pay the landlord, at the time the tenant moves
into the premises or at any other time mutually agreed upon by the parties, the
amount of the security required by the landlord. Any portion in excess of one
month's rent, at the election of the tenant, shall be paid either at the time
the tenant pays the initial security deposit, or shall be paid in no more than
six (6) equal installments no later than six (6) months after the effective
date of the lease.
         c.   A landlord shall hold all security deposits in a federally
insured interest-bearing account in a bank, savings and loan association or
other financial institution located in the State of Illinois. A security
deposit shall continue to be the property of the tenant making such deposit,
shall not be commingled with the assets of the landlord and shall not be
subject to the claims of a creditor of the landlord or of the landlord's
successors in interest, including a foreclosing mortgagee or trustee in
bankruptcy.
         d.   Notwithstanding this section, a landlord may accept the payment
of the first month's rent and security deposit in one check or one electronic
funds transfer and deposit the check or electronic funds transfer into one
account if, within seven (7) business days of acceptance of the check or
electronic funds transfer, the landlord transfers the amount of the security
deposit into a separate account that complies with this section.
         e.   The name and address of the financial institution where the
security deposit will be deposited shall be clearly and conspicuously disclosed
in the written rental agreement signed by the tenant.
         f.   If, during the pendency of the rental agreement, a security
deposit is transferred from one financial institution to another, the landlord
shall, within fourteen (14) days of such transfer, notify the tenant in writing
of the name and address of the new financial institution.
         g.   Any landlord who receives a security deposit from a tenant shall
give a receipt indicating the amount of such security deposit, the name of the
person receiving it and, in the case of the agent, the name of the landlord for
whom such a security deposit is received, the date on which it is received, and
a description of the dwelling unit. The receipt shall be signed by the person
receiving the security deposit. Failure to comply with this subsection shall
entitle the tenant to immediate return of security deposit.
         h.   Upon payment of the security deposit by means of an electronic
funds transfer, the landlord shall give the tenant a receipt that complies with
this section or an electronic receipt that complies with this section, or an
electronic receipt that acknowledges the receipt of the security deposit, a
description of the dwelling unit and an electronic or digital signature of the
person receiving the deposit.
         i.   Upon termination of the tenancy, property or money held by the
landlord as a security deposit must be returned to the tenant within twenty-one
(21) days after the tenant has vacated the dwelling unit provided that the
landlord or successor landlord may deduct from the security deposit for the
following:
            (1)   Any unpaid rent which has not been validly withheld or
deducted pursuant to state or federal law;
            (2)   Any reasonable amount necessary to repair any damage caused
to the premises by the tenant or any person under the tenant's control or on
the premises with the tenant's consent, reasonable wear and tear excluded. In
the case of such damage, the landlord shall deliver or mail to the last known
address of the tenant within thirty (30) days an itemized statement of the
damages allegedly caused to the premises and the estimated or actual cost for
repairing or replacing each item on that statement, attaching copies of the
paid receipts for the repair or replacement. If estimated cost is given, the
landlord shall furnish the tenant with copies of paid receipts or a
certification of actual costs of repairs of damage if the work was performed by
the landlord's employees within 30 days from the date the statement showing
estimated costs was furnished to the tenant.
         j.   In the event of a sale, lease, transfer of ownership or control
or other direct or indirect disposition of residential real property by a
landlord who has received a security deposit from a tenant, the successor
landlord of such property shall be liable to that tenant for any security
deposit which has been paid to the transferor.
         k.   The transferor shall remain jointly and severably liable with the
successor landlord to the tenant for such security deposit unless and until
such transferor transfers said security deposit to the successor landlord and
provides notice, in writing, to the tenant of such transfer, specifying the
name, business address and business telephone of the successor landlord or
their agent within ten (10) days of said transfer.
         l.   The successor landlord shall, within fourteen (14) days from the
date of such transfer, notify the tenant, in writing, that any security deposit
was transferred to the successor landlord and that the successor landlord is
holding said security deposit. Such notice shall also contain the name,
business address and business telephone number of the successor landlord or
their agent.
         m.   If the landlord fails to comply with any provision of this
section, the tenant shall be awarded damages in an amount equal to two (2)
times the security deposit and reasonable attorney fees. This section does not
preclude the landlord or tenant from recovering other damages which they may be
entitled under this chapter.
      5.   Retaliatory Conduct.
         a.   Except as provided for in this section, a landlord may not
retaliate by increasing rent or decreasing services or by bringing or
threatening to bring action for possession or by refusing to renew a rental
agreement because the tenant has in good faith:
            (1)   Complained of code violations to a governmental agency,
elected representative or public official charged with responsibility for
enforcement of a building, housing, health, or similar code;    
            (2)   Complained of a building, housing, health or similar code
violation or an illegal landlord practice to a community organization or the
news media;
            (3)   Sought the assistance of a community organization, including
a legal aid organization, or the news media to remedy a code violation or
illegal landlord practice;
            (4)   Requested the landlord make repairs to the premises as
required by a building code, health ordinance, other regulation or the
residential rental agreement;
            (5)   Organized or becomes a member of a tenant union or similar
organization;
            (6)   Testified in any court or administrative proceeding
concerning the condition of the premises;
            (7)   Exercised any right or remedy provided by law.
         b.   If the landlord acts in violation of this section, the tenant has
cause of action against the landlord and/or a defense in any retaliatory action
against them and is entitled to the following remedies:
         c.   The tenant shall recover possession or terminate the rental
agreement and, in either case, recover an amount equal to not more than two (2)
months' rent or twice the damage sustained by the tenant, whichever shall be
greater, and reasonable attorney fees.
         d.   If the rental agreement is terminated, the landlord shall return
all security deposits recoverable under this chapter.
         e.   In an action by or against the tenant, if there is evidence of a
complaint within one year prior to the alleged act of retaliation, it may be
presumed that the landlord's conduct is retaliatory. The presumption shall not
arise if the tenant made the complaint after notice of a proposed rent
increase.
         f.   A landlord's behavior shall not be considered retaliatory if any
code violation was caused primarily by the lack of care of the tenant, a member
of the tenant's family or other person on the premises with the tenant's
consent.
      9.   Anti-Lockout Provision.
         a.   It is unlawful for any landlord or any person acting at his
direction knowingly to oust or dispossess or threaten or attempt to oust or
dispossess any tenant from a dwelling unit without authority of law, by
plugging, changing, adding or removing any lock or latching device; or by
blocking any entrance into said unit; or by removing any door or window from
said unit; or by interfering with the services to said unit; including but not
limited to electricity, gas, hot or cold water, plumbing, heat or telephone
service; or by removing a tenant's personal property from said unit; or by the
removal or incapacitating of appliances or fixtures, except for the purpose of
making necessary repairs; or by the use or threat of force, violence or injury
to a tenant's person or property; or by any act rendering a dwelling unit or
any part thereof or any personal property located therein inaccessible or
uninhabitable. The foregoing shall not apply where:
            (1)   A landlord acts in compliance with the laws of Illinois
pertaining to forcible entry and detainer and engages the sheriff of Cook
County to forcibly evict a tenant or his personal property; or
            (2)   A landlord interferes temporarily with possession only as
necessary to make needed repairs or inspection and only as provided by law; or
            (3)   The tenant has abandoned the dwelling unit.
         b.   Removal of personal property when a landlord is acting in
compliance with the laws of Illinois pertaining to distress for rent (735 ILCS
5/9-301 et seq.) will not be considered a violation of this section. (Ord. O-
20-2020, 12-7-2020)
8-18-7: RIGHTS AND REMEDIES UNDER OTHER LAWS:
To the extent that this chapter provides no rights or remedies in a
circumstance, the rights and remedies available to landlords and tenants under
the laws of the State of Illinois shall remain applicable. (Ord. O-20-2020, 12-
7-2020)
8-18-8: PENALTY:
In addition to the other penalties provided in this chapter, any violation of
this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more
than $1,000.00. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense. (Ord. O-20-2020, 12-7-2020)
CHAPTER 19
SWING SETS
SECTION:
8-19-1: Definitions
8-19-2: Setbacks From Front Lot Lines
8-19-3: Location
8-19-4: Removal Of Swing Sets
 
8-19-5: Penalty
8-19-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall have the meanings set forth in this chapter
except where otherwise indicated.
PERSON: Any natural person, individual, corporation, charitable, philanthropic
or religious institution or non-profit corporation, homeowner association,
unincorporated association, partnership and joint venture.
SWING SETS: A wooden or metal structure that has swings hanging from it and
that may have a slide or other things attached to it for children to play on.
(Ord. O-10-2025, 6-16-2025)
8-19-2: SETBACKS FROM FRONT LOT LINES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place a swing set less than fifteen feet
(15') from the front lot line of the lot of the lot of record where the swing
set is located. (Ord. O-10-2025, 6-16-2025)
8-19-3: LOCATION:
All swing sets shall be located so that it is placed on the opposite side of
the driveway closest to the nearest side yard lot line. (Ord. O-10-2025, 6-16-
2025)
8-19-4: REMOVAL OF SWING SETS:
Within one hundred eighty (180) days following the effective date of this
chapter, every person on whose real estate a swing set is located in violation
of this chapter shall take all necessary actions to cause the removal of the
swing set located in violation of this chapter. (Ord. O-10-2025, 6-16-2025)
8-19-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a
violation occurs shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. O-10-
2025, 6-16-2025)
TITLE 9
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
SECTION:
9-1-1: Comprehensive Plan For The City
9-1-2: Scope Of Plan
9-1-3: Copies Available; Fee
9-1-1: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOR THE CITY:
The city of Northlake comprehensive plan ("the plan") shall be, and the same is
hereby adopted by reference, the same as if its terms and provisions were set
forth verbatim herein, as the primary land use, economic development, housing,
natural resources, transportation, community facilities, image and identity,
and implementation strategy of the city of Northlake and that all actions that
the city takes or sanctions to promote should be in conformity with the plan.
Three (3) certified copies of the Northlake comprehensive plan shall be on file
in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. O-11-2013, 5-20-2013)
9-1-2: SCOPE OF PLAN:
See section
9-1-1 of this chapter. (Ord. O-11-2013, 5-20-2013)
9-1-3: COPIES AVAILABLE; FEE:
Copies of the plan and ordinance implementing the same, including the official
map, when it is adopted, shall be available to all interested parties upon the
payment of fifty dollars ($50.00) in order to reimburse the general fund of the
municipality for the cost of printing and distributing same. (Ord. O-23-79, 11-
20-1979)
TITLE 11
LAND SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title
11-1-2: Purpose
11-1-3: Application; Interpretation; Scope
11-1-4: Rules and Definitions
11-1-5: Dedication of Land for Public Use
11-1-6: Subdivision of Small Tracts
11-1-7: Blasting
11-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the SUBDIVISION
ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF NORTHLAKE, ILLINOIS. (1976 Code §25-1-1)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
While it is obvious that regulations are needed to assure orderly extension of
City streets, the other purposes of these regulations are:
   A.   To insure sound, harmonious subdivision development and community
growth, and to safeguard the interests of the home owner, the subdivider, the
investor and the City;
   B.   To provide permanent assets to the locality and to the City;
   C.   To prevent scattered development beyond existing public utilities and
prevent excessive development costs;
   D.   To assure the development of land for optimum use with necessary
protection against deterioration and obsolescence; and
   E.   To provide common grounds of understanding and a sound working
relationship between the City and the subdivider. (1976 Code §25-1-2)
11-1-3: APPLICATION; INTERPRETATION; SCOPE:
   A.   No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located within the
City or in any unincorporated area which is located entirely or in part within
one and one-half (11/2) miles of the nearest limits of the City, except in
conformity with the provisions of this Title. The subdivision plans and plats,
proposed improvements to be installed and all procedures relating thereto shall
in all respects be in full compliance with the regulations herein. (1976 Code
§25-1-3)
   B.   Any owner of land which is within the corporate limits of the City or
within one and one-half (11/2) miles of such corporate limits on unincorporated
land wishing to divide the same into lots or to resubdivide for the purpose of
sale or assessment, or both, or wishing to dedicate streets, alleys or other
lands for public use shall follow the procedures and requirements of this
Title. (1976 Code §25-1-8)
   C.   In interpretation and application, the provisions of this Title shall
be held to be the minimum requirements.
   D.   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Title upon the
use of land are either more restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by
any other provisions of this Title or of any other law, ordinance, resolution,
rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or
which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
   E.   This Title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any
other private agreement; provided, that where the regulations of this Title are
more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such
easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this
Title shall govern. (1976 Code §25-1-5)
   F.   No building permit shall be issued by any governing official for the
construction of any building, structure or improvement to the land or any lot
within a subdivision, as defined herein, which has been approved for platting
or replatting, until all requirements of this Title have been complied with.
(1976 Code §25-4-3)
   G.   No occupancy permit shall be granted by any governing official for the
use of any structure within a subdivision approved for platting or replatting
until required utility facilities have been installed and made ready to service
the property and until roadways providing access to the subject lot or lots
have been constructed or are in the course of construction. (1976 Code §25-4-4)
   H.   All transferees, grantees, successors or assigns of owners or
subdividers subject to the provisions of this title shall be bound by any
representations and undertakings made in the preliminary and final plats and
are charged with knowledge of and are subject to the provisions of the
applicable City ordinance. (1976 Code §25-4-9)
11-1-4: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Rules of Word Construction:
      1.   The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "piece" and "parcel".
      2.   The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for",
"designed for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for". (1976 Code
§25-1-6)
   B.   Definitions: As used in this Title, the following words and terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
ALLEY: A public right of way primarily for vehicular traffic along the side or
in the rear of properties which affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting properties.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or shore lines
of waterways or corporate boundary lines of the City.
   BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to
the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space
or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings and
which is designed or intended for shelter, enclosure or protection of persons,
animals or chattels.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the street line at a distance from
it, regulated by the front yard requirements of the Northlake Zoning Ordinance.
1
CITY ENGINEER: The person or firm charged with the responsibility of Municipal
engineering matters.
CROSSWALK: A public right of way located across a block to provide pedestrian
access to adjacent streets or alleys.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one open end and being permanently terminated
by a vehicular turnaround.
DATUM PLANE: A reference point from which elevations are measured. The datum
plane is mean sea level as established by the (U.S.G.S.) United States Geodetic
Survey.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the
general public, a corporation or a certain person for a specific purpose.
GRASS LAND AREA: The entire area of a development, including lots, streets and
alleys, measured to the center line of any bounding streets.
LAND USE PLAN: The approved land use plan of the City.
LOT: A parcel of land legally described as a distinct portion or piece of land
of record.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately
parallel streets and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street
lines shall be deemed front lines.
OFFICIAL MAP: The map showing the streets, highways and parks theretofore laid
out, adopted and established by law and any amendments or additions thereto
resulting from the City Council action or the approval of subdivision plats.
PARKWAY: A route intended to be used primarily by passenger vehicles and whose
right of way is or is intended to be developed in a park-like character. (1976
Code §25-1-7)
PLAN COMMISSION: The Board of Appeals - Plan Commission of the City. 1  (1976
Code §25-1-7; 1991 Code)
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A parcel or tract of land, initially under single
ownership or control, which contains two (2) or more principal buildings and
one or more principal use, planned and constructed as a unified development
where specific regulations of a given zoning district are modified through the
issuance of a special use permit.
PLAT: A plan, map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan for the
subdivision of land is presented and which he submits for approval and intends
to record in final form.
PLAT, FINAL: The drawings and documents presented for final approval and as
described in Section
11-2-4 of this Title.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: The drawings and documents presented for tentative approval
as described in Section
11-2-3 of this Title.
RESIDUE AREA: That portion of a planned development not platted as residential
lots or designated for dedication as streets or alleys.
ROADWAY: The paved area within a street right of way intended for vehicular
traffic, including all curb and gutter facilities.
STREET, APPROVED: Any street, whether public or private, meeting standards and
specifications of the City.
STREET, MAJOR: A street of considerable continuity which serves or is intended
to serve as a major traffic artery connecting various sections of the City.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS: A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to
highways and major streets and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection to local traffic from fast, through traffic on the highways and
major streets.
STREET, MINOR: A street primarily as access to abutting properties.
STREET, PUBLIC: Any major or secondary street or minor street which is shown on
the subdivision plat and is or is to be dedicated to public use.
STREET, SECONDARY OR COLLECTOR: A street which carries traffic from minor
streets to the major street system, including the principal entrance streets or
residential development and streets for circulation within such development.
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between the lines of lots delineating the
public street.
SUBDIVIDER: The person responsible for preparing the plats of the subdivision
and for carrying out all appropriate requirements relating thereto as outlined
in this Title.
SUBDIVISION: The division of land into two (2) or more parts, any of which is
less than five (5) acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or building development, including all public streets,
alleys, ways for public service facilities, parks, playgrounds, school grounds
or other public grounds, and all the tracts, parcels, lots or blocks and
numbering of all such lots, blocks or parcels by progressive numbers, giving
their precise dimensions; provided, that the following shall not be considered
a subdivision and shall be exempt from the requirements of this Title:
      1.   The conveyance of parcels of land or interest therein for use as
right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities which does not
involve any new streets or easements of access;
      2.   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements or access;
      3.   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or
grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use; and
      4.   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances. (1976
Code §25-1-7)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
1 1. See Title 2, Chapter 3 of this Code.
11-1-5: DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC USE:
All offerings or dedications of land to the City for use as streets, highways,
alleys, schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses shall be referred to
the Plan Commission for review and recommendation before being accepted by the
City Council or by any other governing authority of the City. (1976 Code §25-1-
4)
11-1-6: SUBDIVISION OF SMALL TRACTS:
Where a tract of land proposed for subdivision is part of a larger, logical
subdivision unit in relation to the City as a whole, the Plan Commission may,
before approval, cause to be prepared a plan for the entire area or
neighborhood, such plan to be used by the Plan Commission as an aid in judging
the proposed plat.
The City Engineer shall cooperate with the Plan Commission in the preparation
of this plan and shall furnish such surveys and data as may be necessary. (1976
Code §25-1-4)
11-1-7: BLASTING:
No blasting shall take place in connection with any work in a subdivision until
appropriate City authorities have been notified and the applicable City
ordinances complied with. 1  (1976 Code §25-4-5)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 8, Chapter 1, Article D of this Code.
CHAPTER 2
SUBDIVISION PLATS AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11-2-1: Plat Approval Required
11-2-2: Pre-Application Procedure
11-2-3: Preliminary Plan
11-2-4: Final Plat
11-2-5: Improvements Required; Guarantees
11-2-6: Recording Plats
11-2-1: PLAT APPROVAL REQUIRED:
Wherever any subdivision of land shall be laid out within the incorporated
limits of the City or within the contiguous unincorporated territory not more
than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the incorporated boundaries of the
City, the subdivider thereof or his agent shall submit both a preliminary and a
final subdivision plat to the City for its approval. The subdivision plats and
all procedures relating thereto shall in all respects be in full compliance
with these regulations.
Until preliminary plats and plans for the subdivision are approved:
   A.   No land shall be subdivided nor any street laid out nor any
improvements made to the natural land.
   B.   No lot, tract or parcel of land within any subdivision shall be offered
for sale nor shall any sale or contract for sale be made or given.
   C.   No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water drainage,
sanitary sewerage facilities, gas service, electric service, lighting, grading,
paving or surfacing of streets, shall be made by any owner or owners or his or
their agent or by any public service corporation at the request of such owner
or owners or his or their agent. (1976 Code §25-1-4)
   D.   No plat will be approved for a subdivision which is subject to periodic
flooding or which contains poor drainage facilities and which would make
adequate drainage of the lots and streets impossible. However, if the
subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the City
Engineer, make the area safe for occupancy and provide adequate lot and street
drainage, the subdivision may then be approved. (For flood limits refer to
current edition Floodway, Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, City of Northlake,
Illinois, Cook County, Community-Panel Number 170134 0001, as published by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. 1 ) (1976 Code §25-1-4; 1992 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 12, Chapter 1 of this Code.
11-2-2: PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
Prior to filing of an application for approval of the preliminary plan, the
subdivider may submit to the Plan Commission plans and data as specified below.
This step does not require formal application, fee or filing of plans with the
City Clerk. The subdivider may request a meeting with the Plan Commission in
order to discuss his plans and particular problems.
Pre-application information suggested is as follows:
   A.   General subdivision information shall describe or outline the existing
conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary to supplement
the submitted plans. This information may include data on existing covenants,
land characteristics and available community facilities and utilities and
information describing the subdivision proposal, such as number of residential
lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas, school,
playground and park areas and other public areas, proposed protective
covenants, proposed utilities and street improvements.
   B.   Sketch plan on topographic survey shall show in simple sketch form the
proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to existing
conditions. The sketch plan may be a free- hand pencil sketch made directly on
a print of the topographic survey. The sketch plan shall include the existing
topographic data and contours of not less than two foot (2') intervals. (1976
Code §25-1-9)
11-2-3: PRELIMINARY PLAN:
   A.   Procedure for Approval:
      1.   The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plan, which
plan shall include all of the property owned or controlled by the applicant
that is adjacent to or considered to be contiguous to the proposed subdivision,
together with improvement plans and other supplementary material as specified
which shall be submitted to the City Clerk with written application for
approval.
      2.   The City Council shall, by motion, refer the preliminary plan to the
Plan Commission at least ten (10) days prior to a regular meeting of the Plan
Commission and shall, at the same time, instruct the City Engineer to
collaborate with the subdivider and the Plan Commission in assembling plans for
the design and construction of streets and such other public improvements as
are required by this Title or any other ordinances. The Plan Commission and the
City Engineer shall review the preliminary plan for compliance with the
regulations and other ordinances of the City, and the Plan Commission shall,
within two (2) months from the first regular meeting following referral:
         a.   Approve or disapprove the proposed preliminary subdivision plan
and submit its written recommendations, which may include the recommendations
of the City Engineer, to the City Council; or
         b.   If the Plan Commission finds that changes, additions or
corrections are required on the preliminary plan, the Plan Commission shall so
advise the subdivider in writing. The subdivider may resubmit the preliminary
plan to the Plan Commission without paying an additional fee for its
consideration at the next regular meeting of such Commission. The Plan
Commission shall at such meeting approve or disapprove the preliminary plan and
submit its recommendations, in writing, which shall include the recommendations
of the City Engineer, to the City Council and the subdivider.
      3.   If such plan is approved by the Plan Commission, the City Council
shall accept or reject the plan within one month after its next regular meeting
following the action of the Plan Commission. The applicant and the City Council
may mutually agree to extend the one month period.
      4.   The following qualifications shall govern approval of the
preliminary plan:
         a.   Approval of a preliminary plan by the Plan Commission and City
Council is tentative only, involving merely the general acceptability of the
layout as submitted.
         b.   The Plan Commission and the City Council may require such changes
or revisions as are deemed necessary in the interest of the needs of the
community.
         c.   Approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a maximum
period of one year unless, upon application of the developer, the City Council
grants an extension. The application for such extension shall not require an
additional filing fee or the submittal of additional copies of the plan
subdivision. (1976 Code §25-1-10)
   B.   Required Plats and Data for Approval of Preliminary Plan:
      1.   Topographic Data: Topographic data required as a basis for the
preliminary plan in subsection B2 herein shall include existing conditions as
follows, except when otherwise specified by the Plan Commission:
         a.   Boundary Lines: Bearing and distances.
         b.   Easements: Location, width and purpose.
         c.   Streets On and Adjacent to the Tract: Name and right-of-way width
and location, type, width and elevation of surfacing, any legally established
center line elevation, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.
         d.   Utilities On and Adjacent to the Tract: Location, size of
sanitary, storm and combined sewers; location and size of water mains. If water
mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction
and distance to and the size of the nearest usable facilities.
         e.   The preliminary plan of subdivision shall be accompanied by:
            (1)   A statement that the proposed subdivision (where contiguous)
is or is not to be annexed to the City.
            (2)   Either a preliminary plan for sewer, water and storm sewers
or a written statement setting forth general plans for such improvements and
indicating the method to be employed to overcome particular problems that may
be encountered with the development of the proposed subdivision.
            (3)   Where the sanitary sewage facilities are proposed to be
provided by individual septic systems, percolation tests shall be made on the
property and a report on these tests prepared by an Illinois registered
professional engineer. These tests shall be made at a frequency of one test
hole for each five (5) lots or each three (3) acres, whichever requires the
greater number of test borings.
         f.   Other Conditions On the Tract: Watercourses, marshes, rock
outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees of one foot (1') or more in
caliper at one foot (1') above ground level, houses, barns, shacks and other
significant features.
         g.   Other Conditions On Adjacent Land: Approximate direction and
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls,
character and location of buildings, railroads, adverse influences; owner of
adjacent unplatted land (for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by
name, recording date and number, and showing approximate percent buildup,
typical lot size and dwelling type).
         h.   Photographs, if Required by the Plan Commission: Camera
locations, directions of view and key numbers.
         i.   Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
         j.   Proposed Public Improvements: Highway or other major improvements
planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract.
         k.   Key plan showing location of the tract.
         l.   Title and Certificates: Present tract designation according to
official records in offices of the County Recorder; title under which proposed
subdivision is to be recorded with names and addresses of owners, notation
stating acreage, scale, north arrow.
         m.   Ground Elevations on the Tract, Based on the U.S.G.S. Datum
Plane: For land that slopes less than one-half percent (1/2%), show not less
than one foot (1') contours; for land that slopes one-half percent (1/2%) to
two percent (2%), show not less than two foot (2') contours; and for land that
slopes more than two percent (2%), should not be less than two foot (2')
contours.
      2.   Preliminary Plat: Preliminary plat shall be at a scale of one
hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100'). It shall show all existing conditions
required in subsection B1 above and shall show all proposals, including the
following:
         a.   Streets: Names, right-of-way and roadway widths, approximate
grades and gradients, similar data for alleys, if any.
         b.   Other Rights of Way or Easements: Location, width and purpose.
         c.   Location of utilities if shown on other exhibits.
         d.   Lot lines, lot dimensions, lot numbers and block numbers.
         e.   Sufficient information to show the intent of surface drainage.
         f.   Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for schools, parks,
playgrounds or other public uses.
         g.   Sites, if any, for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers,
churches, industry or other nonpublic uses, exclusive of single- family
dwellings.
         h.   Proposed building setback lines.
         i.   Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot
size, acres in parks, etc.
         j.   Proposed name of the subdivision.
         k.   Location by section, township and range.
         l.   Name and address of the developer.
         m.   Name and address of the planner or engineer.
         n.   Title, scale, northpoint and date.
      3.   Other Preliminary Plans: When required by the Plan Commission, the
preliminary plan shall be accompanied by profiles showing existing ground
surface and proposed street grades, including extensions for a reasonable
distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision, typical cross-sections
of the proposed grading, roadways and sidewalks and preliminary plan of
proposed sanitary and storm water sewers with grades and sizes indicated. All
elevations shall be based on the U.S.G.S. Datum Plane.
      4.   Protective Covenants: Draft of protective covenants, whereby the
subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise
protect the proposed development. (1976 Code §25-1-11)
11-2-4: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Procedure for Approval:
      1.   The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat
as approved and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and
develop at the time; provided, that such portion conforms to all requirements
of these regulations.
      2.   Application for approval of the final plat, including all
engineering drawings, shall be submitted, in writing, to the City Clerk and
shall be accompanied by the fee and engineering review as required in these
regulations. The application shall be submitted at least ten (10) days prior to
the regular meeting of the Plan Commission for its review and recommendations
and approval or disapproval.
      3.   Four (4) copies of the final plat, engineering plans and
specifications required for approval shall be prepared as specified and shall
be submitted to the City Clerk within one year after approval of the
preliminary plat; otherwise, such approval shall become null and void unless
application for an extension will not require an additional fee or filing of
additional copies of the plat.
      4.   Within two (2) months after its meeting at which the application for
approval of the final plat was submitted, the Plan Commission shall approve or
disapprove it. If the Plan Commission approves, it shall affix upon the plat
the certifying signature of its chairman. If it disapproves, it shall set forth
its reason in its own records and provide the applicant with a copy.
      5.   Filing shall be as follows:
         a.   After approval of the final plat by the Plan Commission and the
fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations, one tracing of the final
plat of the subdivision, drawn in ink on tracing cloth not exceeding thirty six
inches by forty eight inches (36" x 48") in size, shall be submitted to the
City Council for approval.
         b.   Action must be taken by the City Council within two (2) months
after the meeting at which the final plat and all drawings, maps and other
documents required have been submitted for its approval. The applicant and the
City Council may mutually agree to extend the two (2) month period. (1976 Code
§25-1-12)
   B.   Required Plats and Data for Final Plat Approval:
      1.   Final Plat: Final plat shall be drawn in ink on suitable
reproducible material not to exceed thirty six inches by forty eight inches
(36" x 48") and shall be at a scale of one hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100')
or as otherwise recommended by the Plan Commission. Where necessary, the plat
may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire
subdivision. for large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for
approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to the Plan
Commission. The final plat shall show the following:
         a.   Primary control points, approved by the City Engineer, or
descriptions and "ties" to such control points to which all dimension, angles,
bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred.
         b.   Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements
and other rights of way and property lines of residential lots and other sites,
with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and
central angles of all curves.
         c.   Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right of way.
         d.   Location, dimensions and purpose of any easement.
         e.   Number to identify each lot or site and block conforming to
present and accepted lot identification.
         f.   Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are
dedicated or reserved.
         g.   Proposed building setback lines on all lots and other sites.
         h.   Location and description of monuments.
         i.   Certification by a registered Illinois land surveyor certifying
to accuracy of the survey and plat.
         j.   Certifications showing that all taxes and special assessments due
on the property to be subdivided have been paid in full shall be produced
within thirty (30) days after final approval of plat; otherwise approval
becomes null and void.
         k.   Certification of title showing how title to land is held; also,
that the applicant has the right to build, subdivide and develop.
         l.   Approval by signature of the City Council. Such approval shall be
as follows:
Approved by the City Council of the City of Northlake, Cook County, Illinois,
this       day of      , 19   .
   Signed          
Mayor
   Attest          
City Clerk
         m.   Approval by signatures of the Plan Commission. Such approval
shall be as follows:
Approved by the Plan Commission of the City of Northlake, Illinois, this      
day of      , 19   .
   Signed          
Chairman
   Attested          
Secretary
         n.   This approval of the final plat shall not be deemed to constitute
or effect an acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street or other
proposed public way or space shown on the plat.
         o.   Statement by owner dedicating streets, rights of way and any
sites for public use.
         p.   Name of subdivision.
         q.   Location by section, township and range.
         r.   Title, scale, north arrow and date.
      2.   Protective Covenants: Protective covenants for recording.
      3.   Other Data: Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or
dedications as may be required by the Plan Commission in the enforcement of
these regulations. (1976 Code §25-1-13)
11-2-5: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED; GUARANTEES:
   A.   Construction and Guarantee of Improvements: No building permit shall be
issued until the final plat has been recorded. The final plat shall be approved
by the Plan Commission and the City Council before recording, and such approval
shall not be given until the subdivider has complied with the requirements of
this Section.
      1.   Construction of Improvements: After approval of the preliminary
plat, the subdivider shall present plans and specifications for all
improvements to the City Engineer for approval. Upon approval by the City
Engineer and by all other pertinent authorities and upon escrowing the
necessary funds for City inspection during construction, the subdivider may
construct and install all such improvements. On approval and certification of
completion by the City Engineer of such improvements, within two (2) years
after approval of the preliminary plat, the final plat shall be submitted as
herein provided for approval, and upon approval, shall be recorded. If
engineering plans require substantial changes from the preliminary plan, as
approved, the subdivider shall revise and resubmit the preliminary plat prior
to constructing the improvements for reapproval, and such resubmission shall
not require the payment of additional fees.
      2.   Guarantee of Improvements: In lieu of actual construction of the
improvements, as provided in subsection A1 above, the subdivider may post with
the City Clerk cash, negotiable securities or a surety bond, with sureties
acceptable to the Plan Commission and the City Council, running to the City, in
amount sufficient to cover the full cost of the improvements, including the
cost of furnishing inspection during construction, as estimated by the City
Engineer and conditioned on the completion and acceptance by the City Engineer
of all improvements within two (2) years from the approval of the final plat.
Upon acceptance of such bond, approval of plans and specifications for all
improvements by the City Engineer and approved by the Plan Commission and City
Council of the final plat, such plat may then be recorded.
      3.   Agreement for Installation of Improvements: In lieu of the
provisions of subsections A1 and A2 of this Section, the subdivider may submit
with his plans and specifications for all improvements and his final plat,
evidence of a binding agreement with a responsible contractor for the
installation of all such improvements within two (2) years after the approval
of the final plat, together with a performance bond, with sureties acceptable
to the Plan Commission and the City Council, the plat may then be recorded.
      4.   Installation of Improvements by Special Assessment: In lieu of
subsections A1, A2 and A3 of this Section, the subdivider may petition, in
appropriate cases, for the installation for all improvements by special
assessment and shall provide a purchaser for all bonds issued thereunder. On a
sale of such bonds for par or more and on approval of the final plat by the
Commission and the City Council, such plat may be recorded.
   B.   Maintenance of Improvements: The subdivider shall, in all cases, be
responsible for the maintenance of all improvements for one year following
their acceptance by the City and shall guarantee such maintenance by posting
cash or negotiable securities in the amount of five percent (5%) of the cost of
such improvements or a surety bond with sureties approved by the Plan
Commission and the City Council in the amount of twenty percent (20%) of the
cost of such improvements. The fulfillment of this requirement is a condition
to the approval of the final plat and is in addition to the requirements of
subsection A of this Section. (1976 Code §25-1-14)
11-2-6: RECORDING PLATS:
   A.   No proposed plat of subdivision affecting land regulated by the
provisions of this Title shall be presented to the Recorder of Deeds of Cook
County, Illinois, for recordation unless the requirements of this Title and all
other applicable City requirements are fulfilled. A certified copy of a
resolution approving the plat or a certified copy of an order of the circuit
court directing the recording as provided in the present §11-12-8 of the
Illinois Municipal Code S.H.A. chapter 24 shall be sufficient evidence of
compliance with this Section.
   B.   Upon receipt of the approval of the final plat of subdivision from the
Plan Commission and City Council, the subdivider, builder or land developer
shall file with the City Clerk the original tracing until all other provisions
of this Title have been complied with, at which time, the Clerk will arrange
for the affixing of signatures of the Mayor and chairman of the Plan Commission
to the original tracing. The City Clerk will then record the plat with the
Recorder of Deeds of Cook County and retain the tracing for the records of the
City.
   C.   All of such subdivision plats then shall be copies upon a book of plats
of the City and be filed and kept by the City. (1976 Code §25-4-7)
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Design Standards Required
11-3-2: Streets
11-3-3: Alleys
11-3-4: Easements
11-3-5: Blocks
11-3-6: Lots
11-3-7: Building Setback Lines
11-3-8: Parks, Schools and Public Areas
11-3-1: DESIGN STANDARDS REQUIRED:
The subdivision of land, including the arrangement, character, extent, width,
grade and location of all highways, streets, alleys, crosswalks, easements,
sites for parks, playgrounds and schools or other land to be dedicated for
public uses, shall conform to the land use plan of the city council, approved
by the plan commission and adopted by the city council and other responsible
governmental bodies of the city council as part of the official plan of the
city 1 . (1976 Code § 25-2-1)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 9, chapter 1 of this code.
11-3-2:STREETS:
   A.   All streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety
and in their relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such
streets.
   B.   Where such is not shown on the land use plan, the arrangement of
streets in a subdivision shall either:
      1.   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
major or collector streets in surrounding area; or
      2.   Conform to a plan for the area or neighborhood approved or adopted
by the plan commission to meet a particular situation where topographic or
other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets
impracticable.
   C.   Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged.
   D.   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed highway
or major thoroughfare, as shown on the land use plan, the plan commission may
require marginal access streets, double frontage with screen planting contained
in a nonaccess reservation at least ten feet (10') wide along the rear property
line, deep lots with rear service alleys or such other treatment as may be
necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford
separation of through and local traffic.
   E.   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad or highway, the
Plan Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side
of such a railroad or highway, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use
of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts or for
commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances
shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach
grades and future grade separations.
   F.   Reserve strips controlling access to public utilities, streets or
alleys shall be prohibited.
   G.   All street intersections and confluences should encourage safe traffic
flow.
   H.   Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one hundred twenty
five feet (125') shall be avoided.
   I.   Tangents shall be introduced between reverse curves on all major and
secondary streets (see Table of Minimum Standards at end of this Section).
   J.   When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than ten degrees (10o), they shall be connected by a curve with a
radius adequate to insure clear sight distances (see Table of Minimum Standards
at end of this Section).
   K.   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at less than sixty
degrees (60o).
   L.   Street right-of-way width shall be as specified in the Table of Minimum
Standards found at the end of this Section.
   M.   Half streets shall be prohibited with the following exception: Wherever
an existing half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half
of the street shall be platted within such tract.
   N.   Dead-end streets (cul-de-sac), designed to be so permanently, shall not
be longer than six hundred feet (600') from the intersection of the origin
through the center of the circle to the end of the right of way and shall be
provided at the closed end with a paved turnaround having an outside pavement
diameter of at least eighty eight feet (88') and a street property line
diameter of at least one hundred twenty feet (120').
   O.   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
names of existing streets. Existing street names shall be projected wherever
possible. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Plan Commission.
   P.   Street gradients and vertical curves shall be as specified in the Table
of Minimum Standards found at the end of this Section.
   Q.   Street grades shall provide proper relation between the street and the
first floor elevation of the houses or buildings and permit convenient and
economical access to and drainage of lots. (1976 Code §25-2-2)
   TABLE FOR
   MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
 
           Right-                     Length   Tangent
           of-    Pavement Radius     of       Between    Maximum  Minimum  Clear
Street     Way    Width**  Horizontal Vertical Horizontal Gradient Gradient Sight
           Width           Curves     Curves   Reverse                      Distance
                                               Curves
Major      100    48       500 ft.    *        200 ft.    *        *        500 ft.
           ft.    ft.***
Collector  80 ft. 40 ft.   400 ft.    *        200 ft.    *        *        400 ft.
Minor      60 ft. 28 ft.   150 ft.    *        -          *        *        200 ft.
Cul-de-sac 60 ft. 28 ft.   150 ft.    *        -          *        *        200 ft.
Marginal   40 ft. 24 ft.   400 ft.    *        100 ft.    *        *        200 ft.
Access
In
Business   80-100
and        ft.    54 ft.   500 ft.    *        200 ft.    *        *        500 ft.
Industrial
Districts
 
* See Section
11-4A-1 for specifications.
** Pavement widths are measured back to back of curb.
*** Or two 24 foot roadways, divided by a median strip.
(1976 Code §25-2-9)
11-3-3: ALLEYS:
   A.   In commercial, business and industrial districts, definite and assured
provisions shall be made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading and parking, consistent and adequate for the uses proposed. If, in
the opinion of the Plan Commission, such facilities are not adequate, the Plan
Commission may permit or require the dedication and improvement of a public
alley.
   B.   Alleys in residential areas shall not be permitted except where deemed
necessary and on the recommendation of the Plan Commission.
   C.   The width of an alley, where permitted or required, shall be twenty
feet (20') in residential areas and thirty feet (30') in commercial, business
and industrial districts.
   D.   Alleys intersections and sharp changes in alley alignment shall be
avoided.
   E.   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable,
they shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as
determined by the Plan Commission. (1976 Code §25-2-3)
11-3-4: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least ten feet (10')
wide.
   B.   Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from block to block.
   C.   Where subdivision and/or parcels abut a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, storm water easements or drainage right of way conforming
substantially with the line of such watercourse shall be provided. The easement
width shall be determined by the City Engineer. (1976 Code §25-2-4)
11-3-5: BLOCKS:
   A.   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
      1.   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated.
      2.   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions within the
corporate limits of the City. 1
      3.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic.
   B.   Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand five hundred feet (1,500')
and shall not be less than six hundred feet (600').
   C.   Pedestrian crosswalks not less than ten feet (10') wide shall be
required where deemed necessary by the Plan Commission to provide for
pedestrian circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
transportation and other community facilities.
   D.   Blocks, or portions thereof, intended for commercial or industrial use,
shall be designated as such and the plan shall show adequate off street areas
to provide for parking, loading docks and other such facilities. (1976 Code §
25-2-5)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
11-3-6: LOTS:
   A.   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate
for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
   B.   Lot dimensions and areas shall conform to the requirements of the
zoning ordinance 1 . However, residential lots not served by public sanitary
sewers and water supply shall be not less than one hundred feet (100') wide at
the building line and not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in
area. Where either community sanitary sewers and sewage treatment or water
supply is provided, a lot shall be not less than eighty feet (80') wide and not
less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area.
   C.   Lots abutting a watercourse drainageway, channel or stream shall have a
minimum width or depth as required to provide an adequate building site and to
afford the minimum usable area required in this title or the zoning ordinance 2
for front, side and rear yards.
   D.   All corner lots shall have a minimum width of seventy five feet (75')
and contain not less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet in area. A minimum
building setback line shall be maintained on both streets.
   E.   All lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street.
   F.   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
essential to provide separation of residential development from highways or
primary thoroughfares or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet (10'), across
which there shall be no right of vehicular access, shall be provided along the
rear lot lines of lots abutting such highways and major thoroughfares.
   G.   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines. (1976 Code § 25-2-6)
   H.   Corner lots of record shall not be resubdivided unless the owner or
applicant for the resubdivision provides for the demolition of all existing
buildings on the lot and provides proof that the new structures to be located
on the lot shall face the same direction and have adjoining front and rear
yards. (Ord. O-30-2006, 8-7-2006)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 10 of this code.
2 1. See title 10 of this code.
11-3-7: BUILDING SETBACK LINES:
Building setback lines in residential areas of new subdivisions shall conform
to the front yard requirements of the zoning ordinance 1 . (1976 Code § 25-2-7)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 10 of this code.
11-3-8: PARKS, SCHOOLS AND PUBLIC AREAS:
   A.   Whenever the reasonable requirement provided by the comprehensive plan
1  indicates the necessity for providing for a school site or other public
lands within any proposed subdivision for which approval has been requested,
and no such provision has been made therefor, the plan commission may require
that land be designated for such public purpose before approving such plat.
Whenever a final plat of a subdivision or part thereof has been approved by the
plan commission as complying with the comprehensive plan, and there is
designated therein a school site, park site or other public land, the governing
authorities have jurisdiction of such use, be it a school board, park board or
other authority, and shall acquire the land so designated by purchase or
commence proceedings to acquire such land by condemnation within one year from
the date of approval of such plat, and if it does not do so within such period
of one year, the land so designated may then be used by the owners thereof in
any other manner consistent with this title, including the comprehensive plan 2
and zoning ordinance of the city. 3
   B.   In the subdividing of any land within the city or within one and one-
half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits, due regard shall be shown for all
natural features such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots or similar
conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the
proposed development. (1976 Code § 25-2-8)
 
Notes
1 3. See title 9, chapter 1 of this code.
2 1. See title 9, chapter 1 of this code.
3 2. See title 10 of this code.
CHAPTER 4
REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Land Improvements Required
11-4-2: Street Improvements
11-4-3: Sidewalks
11-4-4: Water and Sewer Systems
11-4-5: Public Utilities
11-4-6: Monuments and Markers
11-4-7: Landscaping and Screening
11-4-8: Soil Investigations
11-4-9: Street Lighting
11-4-1: LAND IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
No subdivision of land shall be approved by the Plan Commission without the
subdivider submitting a statement signed by the City Engineer certifying that
the improvements described in the subdivider's plans and specifications,
together with agreements, meet the minimum requirements of all ordinances of
the City and that they comply with Section
11-4A-1 of this Title. (1976 Code §25-3-1)
11-4-2: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Street design shall be in accordance with the Table of Minimum
Standards for Street Design found at the end of Section
11-3-2 of this Title.
   B.   All curb returns at street intersections shall have a radius of not
less than twenty feet (20') and at intersections with major and collector
streets, not less than twenty five feet (25'). In industrial and commercial
areas, the radius of curb returns shall not be less than twenty five feet (25')
and shall be increased to thirty feet (30') at intersections with major and
collector streets.
   C.   Street signs, as per City specifications, shall be installed at each
intersection and shall indicate the street names as shown on the final plat.
Street signs shall be set in the ground according to standard details
obtainable from the City Engineer. (1976 Code §25-3-3)
11-4-3: SIDEWALKS: 1
   A.   Concrete sidewalks shall be provided throughout the subdivision to
serve the anticipated needs of its residents. Such walks shall be located in
accordance with proper land planning procedures and with due regard for public
safety and anticipated concentration of pedestrian traffic.
   B.   Sidewalks shall be located so that a parkway separates the curb from
the sidewalk. Such sidewalks shall not be less than five feet (5') wide.
   C.   The specifications in Section
11-4A-1 of this Title shall be adhered to. (1976 Code §25-3-6)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section 7-1A-3 of this Code.
11-4-4: WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS:
   A.   Sanitary Sewers:
      1.   Sanitary sewer systems shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements of the City, 1  the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater
Chicago and the State of Illinois Sanitary Water Board.
      2.   Sewers may be placed only in public rights of way or in easements
including easements in a private street.
      3.   The specifications in Section
11-4A-1 of this Title shall be adhered to.
      4.   In all cases where private central sanitary sewer systems are to be
used, the developer shall secure the necessary permits for installation and
operation of the system.
   B.   Storm Sewers:
      1.   The design of the drainage system within the development shall
anticipate and provide capacity for other drainage from naturally tributary
land. Such design shall provide adequate capacity for transmitting such
drainage from the other tributary areas on the basis of the ultimate
development of such other tributary areas, but such drainage system need not
make provision for the retention of drainage from other tributary areas.
      2.   The specifications in Section
11-4A-1 of this Title shall be adhered to.
   C.   Water Supply:
      1.   All residential, commercial, industrial and community facility
buildings or structures shall be served by an adequate water supply and
distribution system. The design of the system shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the State of Illinois Department of Public Health.
      2.   The specifications in Section
11-4A-1 of this Title shall be adhered to.
   D.   Lot Size Conditioned Upon Water and Sewer Systems:
      1.   A subdivision plat shall in no case be approved which will be
dependent upon individual septic tanks unless they are properly installed
according to official specifications of the Illinois Public Health Department
and where lots therein contain not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet each. Not more than one dwelling shall be connected to a septic system.
      2.   Where either community sewers and sewage treatment or community
water supply is provided, the lot area may be reduced to fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet.
      3.   Where both community sanitary sewerage and water facilities are
provided, lot sizes and dimensions shall conform to the Zoning Ordinance. 2
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 7, Chapter 7 of this Code.
2 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
11-4-5: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
All utility lines for telephone and electric service shall be placed
underground entirely throughout a subdivided area except where the subdivision
or subdivided area includes less than thirty percent (30%) of a block and no
underground utilities shall be required. Such conduits or cables shall be
placed within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not
conflict with other underground services. Further, all transformer boxes shall
be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public. The utility
lines shall be parallel to and not less than twelve inches (12") from the
property lines. Corner markers, as required in Section
11-4-6 of this Chapter, shall not be disturbed by the installation of utility
lines. (1976 Code §25-3-5)
11-4-6: MONUMENTS AND MARKERS:
Monuments shall be placed at all corners and angle points of the outside
boundary but no further than one-fourth (1/4) mile apart. The monuments shall
be of concrete, not less than six inches (6") in diameter and thirty six inches
(36") deep, with a center copper dowel three inches (3") long cast in place.
Iron pipe or steel bars not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and
twenty four inches (24") long shall be set at the intersection of street center
lines and at all corners of lots not marked by monuments. The monuments and
markers shall be set level with the finished grade.
The subdivider shall replace all or verify the existence of the iron pipes at
all lot corners and all bends in property lines after the completion of all
construction and before final acceptance of the subdivision by the City
Council. (1976 Code §25-3-4)
11-4-7: LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING:
   A.   Sodded Areas: All unpaved areas within the street rights of way shall
be seeded or sodded. Before the release of the twelve (12) month maintenance
bond can be recommended by the City Engineer, all unpaved areas between the
edge of the road pavement and the right-of-way line must support an adequate
mat of grass. Provisions shall be made to assure the growth of all landscaping.
   B.   Street Trees: 1
      1.   Street trees shall be planted on both sides of each proposed street,
except where there are existing trees present and preserved, as determined by
the City Engineer. Street trees newly planted shall be not further apart than
fifty feet (50') or one tree per inside lot and three (3) trees on corner lots
and the type of trees shall be limited to those varieties as approved by the
Plan Commission.
      2.   Newly planted street trees shall be at least two inches (2") in
caliper, measured one foot (1') from the ground.
      3.   The planting of the following varieties of trees shall be
prohibited:
Soft Maple     (Acer dasycarpum) In variety
Poplar         (populus)         All varieties
Willow         (Salix)           All varieties
Box Elder      (Acer negundo)    All varieties
Catalpa        (Catalpa)         All varieties
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus)       All varieties
Mountain Ash   (Sorbus)          All varieties
Mulberry       (Morus Alba)      In variety
 
   C.   Screening: Protective screen planting may be required to secure a
reasonably effective physical barrier between residential properties and
adjoining uses to minimize adverse conditions of sight and sound. The screen
planting shall be prepared by a landscape architect and shall meet the approval
of the Plan Commission. (1976 Code §25-3-7)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Title 7, Chapter 3 of this Code.
11-4-8: SOIL INVESTIGATIONS:
   A.   If the subdivision contains questionable soil and, in the opinion of
the City Engineer, soil investigations, borings or other soil tests are
necessary to determine the nature and extent of such questionable material, the
owner or developer shall retain or cause to be retained the services of
competent testing laboratory to perform the needed investigations.
   B.   Copies of the completed reports prepared by the testing laboratory
shall be filed with the City Engineer.
   C.   The City Engineer shall have no liability for costs connected with the
tests, borings or interpretations of results of such works. (1976 Code §25-3-8)
11-4-9: STREET LIGHTING:
Street lighting improvements shall be installed to serve all properties within
the subdivision consisting of standards, luminaries, cable conduit under
driveways and/or streets, controllers, handrails and all other miscellaneous
work and equipment necessary for an integrated system of street lights. (1976
Code §25-3-9)
ARTICLE A. CONSTRUCTION OF REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-4A-1: Construction Specifications
11-4A-2: Supervision of Construction
11-4A-3: Inspections
11-4A-4: Acceptance of Improvements
11-4A-1: CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
The owner or subdivider shall install storm and sanitary sewers, water supply
system, street grading and pavement, alleys, crosswalkways, public utilities,
street lighting in accordance with applicable ordinances and standards of
construction of the City.
No subdivision of land shall be approved without receiving a statement signed
by the City Engineer, certifying that the improvements described in the
subdivider's plans and specifications, together with agreements, 1  meet the
minimum requirements of all ordinances of the City and that they comply with
the following:
   A.   Street Improvements:
      1.   Generally:
         a.   The full width of the right of way shall be graded to the
required section.
         b.   All unsuitable subbase material shall be removed and shall be
replaced with stable, compacted material in conformance with generally accepted
engineering practices.
         c.   The center line grade shall be not less than thirty three one-
hundredths percent (0.33%) and shall not exceed six percent (6%) on primary and
secondary streets and eight percent (8%) on minor streets and cul-de-sac
streets.
         d.   Vertical curves shall be used whenever a change in center line
gradient occurs, except where the algebraic difference in gradient is one
percent (1%) or less. The length of vertical curve on minor streets shall be
forty feet (40') for each one percent (1%) of algebraic difference of grade,
but in no case shall such length be less than forty feet (40'). The length of
vertical curve on collector streets shall be fifty feet (50') for each one
percent (1%) of algebraic difference of grade, but in no case shall such length
be less than fifty feet (50').
         e.   All pavement thicknesses, including surface base courses and
subbase courses, shall be designed in accordance with either the "Manual of
Instructions for the Structural Design of Bituminous Pavements" or the "Manual
for the Structural Design of Portland Cement Concrete Pavements", as
applicable, and all subsequent revisions thereto as published by the State of
Illinois Department of Public Works and Buildings, Division of Highways. The
minimum thicknesses for residential streets shall be as specified therein.
Design data shall be submitted to the City Engineer, together with copies of
soil test reports, at the time of plan submittal.
         f.   Placements in or bordering industrial and/or commercial areas
shall have the following minimum thicknesses, although alternate materials may
be considered by the City Council if structurally equal:
            (1)   Standard reinforced Portland cement concrete pavement having
a uniform thickness of eight inches (8"). Concrete for such pavement shall have
a minimum fourteen (14) day compressive strength of three thousand five hundred
(3,500) pounds per square inch, shall contain not less than six (6) bags of
cement per cubic yard of concrete and shall contain not less than three percent
(3%) nor more than six percent (6%) entrained air. Slump shall be not less than
two inches (2") nor more than four inches (4").
            (2)   Eight inch (8") thick pozzolanic base course and a wearing
surface of bituminous concrete binder and surface course having a minimum
compacted thickness of three inches (3").
            (3)   Eight inch (8") thick bituminous aggregate mixture base
course and a wearing surface of bituminous concrete binder and surface course
having a minimum compacted thickness of three inches (3").
         g.   Curbs and gutters shall be constructed on all streets and shall
be combination (integral) concrete of the barrier not less than eighteen inches
(18") in overall width. Curbs may be constructed integrally with the Portland
cement concrete pavement. Concrete for curb and gutter shall conform to that
herein required for concrete sidewalks. 2  Half streets of a permanent nature
shall be constructed with a concrete retainer curb at the center line, except
for concrete base construction. Three (3) five-eighths inch (5/8") reinforcing
bars ten feet (10') long shall be installed in all curb and gutters, centered
over each sewer and water trench crossed by the curb and gutter.
The dimensions of curb and gutter shall be as follows: The curb shall be a
vertical face type six inches (6") in height above the gutter line; the width
of the combined curb and gutter shall be eighteen inches (18"); the width of
curb from gutter line to back of curb shall be six inches (6"); the gutter
shall be one-half inch (1/2") below the edge of the gutter flag; the thickness
of the gutter flag shall be equal to the thickness of the adjacent street
pavement. Other curb and gutter cross-sections may be used in special cases
upon the approval of the City Council.
      2.   Marginal Access Streets:
         a.   The complete design for marginal access streets, including
specifications and designation of trafficways, driving lanes, paving widths,
thickness, materials, etc., shall be submitted to the Plan Commission for
review and approval prior to the issuance of building permits or the sale or
lease of buildings or land in planned developments as defined in this Title.
The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the City. 3  Marginal access streets
and parking areas shall be designed in accordance with other provisions of this
Title, but in no case shall the minimum equivalent thickness be less than six
inches (6") for Portland cement concrete or six inches (6") of pozzolanic base
course with two and one-half inches (21/2") of bituminous concrete binder and
surface course (combined compacted thickness). When a marginal access street is
to be dedicated to public use, the specifications shall be in accordance with
the minimum width, thickness and standards of the City. Where more than one
owner or lessee is to use the same private marginal access street or parking
lot, a trust indenture shall be recorded before approval of the multi-family,
commercial or industrial subdivision as defined herein.
         b.   A minimum distance may be required by the Plan Commission, where
deemed necessary, between points of ingress and egress where all property to be
subdivided is under one ownership on August 19, 1969. Where property has
frontage on a State or Federal highway, the spacing and design of the points of
ingress and egress to the major highway shall be subject to approval of the
Illinois Division of Highways.
   B.   Alleys: Alley pavement shall conform with specifications in subsection
A1e of this Section.
   C.   Sidewalks: 4  Sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement to a
thickness of five inches (5"). Concrete for such sidewalks shall have a minimum
twenty eight (28) day compressive strength of four thousand (4,000) pounds and
shall contain not less than three percent (3%) nor more than six percent (6%)
entrained air. Slump shall be no less than two inches (2") nor more than four
inches (4").
   D.   Crosswalkways: Crosswalkways shall be constructed of Portland cement
concrete conforming to the requirements set forth under subsection C of this
Section.
   E.   Sewers:
      1.   Sanitary Sewers: Sanitary sewers and sanitary sewer services shall
be installed to serve all properties in the subdivision. Public sanitary sewers
shall have a minimum internal diameter of eight inches (8"). Sanitary sewer
services shall have a minimum internal diameter of six inches (6"). Sanitary
sewers with internal diameter between eight inches (8") and twenty one inches
(21") and sanitary sewer services shall be constructed of extra strength
vitrified clay pipe in conformance with the specifications of the American
Society for Testing Materials, Designation C-200. Sanitary sewers with internal
diameter of twenty four inches (24") and over shall be constructed of
reinforced concrete pipe conforming to the American Society for Testing
Materials, Designation C-76, with wall thickness B. Other materials for
sanitary sewer construction may be used in special cases upon the approval of
the City Council.
Joints for vitrified clay pipe sanitary sewers and sanitary sewer services
shall be the compression type in conformance with the specifications of the
American Society for Testing Materials, Designation C-425. Joints for
reinforced concrete sewers shall be rubber gaskets conforming to the American
Society for Testing Materials, Designation C-443. Rubber gaskets shall be of
uniform thickness throughout, smooth, free from pitting, blisters, air checks
and other imperfections.
      2.   Storm Sewers: Storm sewers shall be constructed throughout the
entire subdivision to carry off water from all inlets and catch basins and
shall be connected to an adequate outfall. Intercepting storm water structures
shall be provided at points specified by the City Engineer. The storm water
drainage system shall be separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system.
Storm sewers shall be constructed of reinforced concrete pipe conforming to the
American Society for Testing Materials, Designation C-76, wall thickness B.
Other materials for storm sewer construction may be used in special cases upon
the approval of the City Council. Existing drain tiles shall be connected to
storm sewers or shall be restored to operating condition. Joints for concrete
storm sewer shall be designated above for concrete sanitary sewers or they
shall be cement mortar and jute.
Storm sewer capacities shall be determined with the use of the rational
formula. The intensity (I factor) used shall be a return frequency of not less
than five (5) years. The runoff coefficient (C factor) shall be determined by
the character of the land to be drained and shall conform to accepted standard
engineering practices. Street grades and lot and block drainage shall be
established so as to permit positive drainage.
      3.   Manholes and Drainage Appurtenances:
         a.   Manholes: Manholes for sewers thirty six inches (36") and smaller
shall have an inside diameter of forty eight inches (48") and a six inch (6")
thick precast concrete base, in one piece, bedded in at least two inches (2")
of gravel or crushed stone. The sidewalls should be of precast concrete ring
construction which shall have a five inch (5") minimum thickness. Manhole bases
for sewers with an internal diameter forty two inches (42") and larger shall be
constructed of reinforced concrete.
         b.   Catch Basins and Inlets: Catch basin and base construction shall
conform to manhole requirements for sewers thirty six inches (36") and smaller;
except, that a sump two feet six inches (2'6") in depth shall be provided below
the discharge pipe. Inlets shall have an internal diameter of two feet (2') and
a minimum depth of two feet (2'). Sidewalls shall be precast concrete, having a
thickness of four inches (4"), bedded in a minimum of two inches (2") of gravel
or crushed stone.
         c.   Frames and Grates: Frames and grates for manholes, catch basins,
inlets and valve vaults shall be similar to Neenah manufacture No. R-1015, with
a combined weight of five hundred forty (540) pounds for Type B closed lid and
a combined weight of five hundred twenty five (525) pounds for Type D open lid.
Open curb casting may be used based on approval of the City Council. The frames
shall be set in a full mortar joint on each structure.
   F.   Water Supply and Services:
      1.   Water Mains: Water mains shall be of a minimum six inch (6")
internal diameter of cast iron mechanical joint or double sealing, single
gasket joint pipe, Class 150, conforming to the American Standards Association
Specifications A21.6 or 21.8 with A21.10 mechanical joint fittings. The minimum
depth of water main from the top of pipe to finished grade shall be five and
one-half feet (51/2').
      2.   Valves and Vaults: Valves shall be nonrising stem gate valves with
operating nut designed to take full pressure on either face, furnished in full
compliance with AWWA C500. All valves shall open by turning to the left. Valves
shall operate at a working pressure of one hundred fifty (150) pounds per
square inch and a test pressure of three hundred (300) pounds per square inch.
Valves eight inches (8") and larger shall be housed in valve vaults with an
internal diameter of sixty inches (60"). Valve vault, sidewall and base
construction shall conform to that required for catch basins.
      3.   Hydrants:
         a.   Hydrants shall be of compression- or gate-type conforming to AWWA
C502 and shall be of a make that has been adopted by the City as standard.
Hydrants shall be designed for a three hundred (300) pound test pressure and a
one hundred fifty (150) pound working pressure.
         b.   Hydrants shall be furnished with two (2) two and one-half inch
(21/2") hose nozzles and one four inch (4") steamer nozzle. Threads on nozzles
and caps and operating nuts shall be National Standard Threads. Hydrants shall
open by turning to the left and shall be so marked.
         c.   Hydrants shall have a six inch (6") pipe connection, a five inch
(5") valve opening and shall be equipped with auxiliary valves. Auxiliary valve
shall be attached to hydrant with one hundred twenty five (125) pound standard
flanges. Joint for joining the auxiliary valve shall be of the same type as
specified for the piping system.
      4.   Water Services: All water services shall be constructed of Type K
copper pipe having a minimum internal diameter of one inch (1"). Such services
shall be equipped with corporation cock, curb stops and other necessary
fittings in accordance with current City standards.
   G.   Trench Backfill:
      1.   All trenches caused by the construction of sewers, water mains,
water service pipes and in excavation around catch basins, manholes, inlets and
other appurtenances which occur within the limits of existing or proposed
pavements, sidewalks and curb and gutters shall be backfilled with trench
backfill.
      2.   Trenches and excavations near or adjacent to proposed or existing
pavements, sidewalks and curb and gutters shall be backfilled with trench
backfill to an elevation equal to the intersection of a one to one (1:1) slope
line from the top of the pavement, sidewalks or curb edge, with a vertical line
through the nearest edge of the trench or excavation.
      3.   Trench backfill shall consist of sand, pitrun gravel or crushed
stone and shall be compacted in place to ninety five percent (95%) of maximum
density at optimum moisture as determined by the Standard Proctor Test.
   H.   Street Lighting:
      1.   Generally:
         a.   The lighting plans shall be a part of the construction plans and
shall be on a separate sheet. All plans shall be prepared by a professional
engineer registered in Illinois. Upon completion of street lighting
installation, a set of "as built" drawings shall be submitted to the City
Engineer.
         b.   All work must meet the approval of the City Engineer. He may
designate larger lamps, higher poles or vary the spacing a he deems necessary
to meet with any special conditions. Installation shall be made in conformance
with the local codes 5  and in a good and workmanlike manner.
         c.   Each bidder shall furnish with his bid two (2) copies each of the
drawings and/or descriptive literature covering the lighting standards,
luminaries, lamps, cable and other control equipment.
      2.   Testing: After the installation is complete and at a time convenient
to the City, the contractor shall conduct operating tests of the lighting
system. He shall also hire and pay for an experienced cable testing company to
test the cable for shorts, grounds, open circuits and low insulation
resistance. The contractor shall rectify all such faults.
      3.   Lighting System: The street lighting system shall consist of two
hundred fifty (250) watt mercury vapor luminaries mounted at a nominal height
of twenty five feet (25'), with spacing to provide the illumination shown in
the following table. Street lights at major and secondary street entrances to
subdivisions shall be four hundred (400) watt mercury vapor luminaries mounted
approximately thirty feet (30') high above the roadway. There shall be at least
one luminary at each intersection and cul-de-sac. Maximum spacing shall not
exceed three hundred feet (300'). Light standards shall be set two feet (2')
back from the curb line.
TABLE
 
Roadway Classification Average Maintained Horizontal Foot Candles
Major                  0.9
Collector              0.6
Local or Minor         0.2
 
      4.   Materials: All material and equipment shall be the product of an
established and reputable manufacturer and shall be new and of finest
construction class.
         a.   Light Standards: Light standards shall be polished spun aluminum,
round shaft, anchor base type or approved equal with eight foot zero inch
(8'0") mast arm. Light standards shall have a handhole and shall be installed
on a five foot zero inch (5'0") deep concrete foundation. A ground rod shall be
provided in each foundation.
         b.   Luminaries: Luminaries shall have a built in, 120/240 volt, high
power factor constant wattage-type ballast with two inch (2") slip filter. The
distribution shall be IES Type, two-way or four-way. A house side shield shall
be provided for three-way distribution.
         c.   Cable: Cable shall be single or multi-conductor, stranded copper,
RHW type RR, six hundred (600) volt insulation with neoprene jacket and shall
be listed by Underwriters Laboratories as suitable for direct burial. The
minimum size of the cable shall be #8 AWG from pole to pole and #10 AWG within
the pole. Cable size shall be adequate so as not to exceed a ten percent (10%)
voltage drop throughout the system.
Underground cable shall be buried at least twenty four inches (24") below
finished grade and shall be surrounded in the trench by at least three inches
(3") of sand. It shall be located two feet (2') back of the curb or as directed
by the City Engineer. All underground cable shall be continuous. Necessary
splices shall be made above ground level and shall have location recorded on
plans.
         d.   Conduit: All driveways and street and sidewalk crossing shall
have two inch (2") galvanized rigid steel conduit used as a raceway for
underground cable with two inch (2") insulating plastic bushings.
         e.   Controls: Lighting system shall be controlled either with
individual photo-electric control units provided with each luminary or with a
photo-electric control unit or time-clock located at the control station. (1976
Code §25-4-6)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  11-2-5 of this Title.
2 1. See subsection D of this Section.
3 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
4 2. See also Section
  7-1A-3-1 of this Code.
5 1. See Title 8, Chapter 1, Article C of this Code.
11-4A-2: SUPERVISION OF CONSTRUCTION:
The design engineer engaged by the subdivider, builder or land developer shall
be responsible for, and establish, all lines and grade for the proposed
improvements. (1976 Code §25-4-6)
11-4A-3: INSPECTIONS:
All public inspections proposed to be made under the provisions of this Title
shall be inspected during the course of construction by the City Engineer or a
duly designated deputy. During the course of construction of the improvements,
the subdivider shall be required to notify the City Engineer forty eight (48)
hours before the inspection of all utilities.
The subdivider shall pay the cost of all inspection services. The fee shall be
established by the City, based on current rates and standard engineering
practices.
All service boxes and buffalo boxes shall be located in the parkway and with
due regard for the location of surface improvements such as sidewalks. (1976
Code §25-4-1)
11-4A-4: ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Upon completion of construction of all public improvements required by this
Title, in conformance with approved engineering plans and specifications, the
design engineer engaged by the subdivider, builder or land developer shall
prepare and submit to the City Department of Public Works three (3) sets of as-
built plans and certification by City Engineer that all public improvements
have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the approved engineering
plans and specifications. The City Council will enact a resolution accepting
the improvements. (1976 Code §25-4-6)
CHAPTER 5
SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11-5-1: Enforcement
11-5-2: Variations and Exceptions
11-5-3: Fees
11-5-4: Penalties
11-5-1: ENFORCEMENT:
The Director of Health and Inspectional Services is hereby appointed the
enforcing officer of this Title, and it shall be his duty to enforce the
provisions hereof. The enforcing officer may call upon any department or
official of the City to furnish him with such information and assistance as he
may deem necessary for the observance or enforcement of this Title, and it
shall be the duty of such department or officer to furnish such information and
assistance whenever required. (1976 Code §25-4-9; 1992 Code)
11-5-2: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
The Plan Commission may recommend variations from these requirements in
specific cases which, in its opinion, do not affect the general plan or the
spirit of this Title. Requests for such variations shall be made, in writing,
to the Plan Commission by the subdivider. Such recommendations of the Plan
Commission shall be communicated to the City Council or the governing County
authorities, in writing, with the reasons therefor. The City Council or the
County authorities may then approve variations from these regulations in
specific cases which, in its opinion, do not affect the general plan or the
spirit of this Title. (1976 Code §25-4-2)
11-5-3: FEES:
   A.   Preliminary and Final Plats: There is hereby established a fee for the
approval of preliminary and final plats which shall be as provided in Section
3-1A-1 of this Code.
   B.   Engineering Review Fee: Four (4) complete sets of engineering plans and
specifications of required land improvements as regulated by subsection 11-2-
4A2 of this Title, together with an estimate of the cost of improvements, such
plans and specifications to bear the seal of an Illinois registered
professional engineer along with his signed statement that such plans and
specifications have been prepared in compliance with this Title and with good
engineering practice. Such plans shall be drawn to a minimum horizontal scale
of fifty feet to the inch (50' = 1") and minimum vertical scale of five feet to
the inch (5' = 1"). Plans shall show profiles of all utility and street
improvements, with elevations referred to U.S. Geological Survey Datum.
The plan review fee is based on the following percentages of total land
improvement costs, as estimated by the design engineer and approved by the City
Engineer:
      1.   One and one-half percent (11/2%) of the construction cost of the
improvements when such cost is fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less.
      2.   One percent (1%) of the construction cost of the improvements when
such cost is over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) but less than two hundred
fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00).
      3.   Three-quarter percent (0.75%) of the construction cost of the
improvements when such cost is over two hundred fifty thousand dollars
($250,000.00).
   C.   Payment of Fees: All such fees shall be payable to the City by
certified check or money order. (1976 Code §25-4-8)
11-5-4: PENALTIES:
   A.   Generally: Any person who constructs any public improvement or portion
thereof in violation of the provisions of this Title shall be, upon conviction,
fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
   B.   Activity Prior to Final Plat Approval: Whoever shall sell or offer for
sale, lease or offer for lease, any lot or lots or block or blocks within the
incorporated limits of the City, or any resubdivision of any lot or block
therein, or within contiguous unincorporated territory and not more than one
and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the incorporated boundary of the City, before
a final plat of a subdivision has been approved by the Plan Commission and the
City Council as required by this Title, shall be fined not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each lot, block or part thereof so disposed of,
offered for sale or leased. (1976 Code §25-4-10; 1992 Code)
TITLE 12
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
DEVELOPMENT IN SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Authority
12-1-2: Purpose
12-1-3: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
12-1-4: Definitions
12-1-5: Duties Of The Enforcement Official(s)
12-1-6: Base Flood Elevation
12-1-7: Occupation And Use Regulations In Specific Areas
12-1-7-1: Flood Fringe Areas
12-1-7-2: Designated Floodways
12-1-7-3: SFHA Areas Where Floodways Are Not Identified
12-1-8: Permitting Requirements Applicable To All Floodplain Areas
12-1-9: Other Development Requirements
12-1-10: Variances
12-1-11: Disclaimer Of Liability
12-1-12: Penalties
12-1-1: AUTHORITY:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted by 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2 as
well as the city's home rule powers. (Ord. O-20-2008, 6-16-2008)
12-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to maintain this city's eligibility in the
national flood insurance program; to minimize potential losses due to periodic
flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare;
and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve economic
and natural values and provide for the wise utilization of water and related
land resources. This chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following
specific purposes:
   A.   To meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18g,
rivers, lakes and streams act;
   B.   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage
hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
   C.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   D.   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
   E.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and
relief operations;
   F.   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in
the city by fulfilling the requirements of the national flood insurance
program;
   G.   To comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood
insurance program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended;
   H.   To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and
water resources; and
   I.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitats,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. O-20-2008, 6-16-2008)
12-1-3: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
   B.   Where this chapter and other chapters, easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
   C.   This chapter is intended to repeal prior chapters or resolutions which
were adopted to meet the national flood insurance program regulations, but is
not intended to repeal the resolution which the city passed in order to
establish initial eligibility for the program. (Ord. O-20-2008, 6-16-2008)
12-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the
principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use
of the principal structure.
ACT: "An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of
the state of Illinois", 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and
will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are
as specified in subsection
12-1-7-2C of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location
is as defined in section
12-1-6 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls
and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured
home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more
than one hundred eighty (180) days, unless fully licensed and ready for highway
use.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form
of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross
section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g.,
straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction
approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map. This
preconstruction approval, pursuant to this chapter, gives assurances to the
property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to
permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon
review and acceptance of as built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that FEMA
will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries
or floodways as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map or flood
insurance rate map, once the as built plans are submitted and approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes
through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface
elevation.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any public or private facility which, if flooded, would
create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life
and health. Examples are public buildings, emergency operations and
communication centers, etc.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion
of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by IDNR/
OWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year frequency flood
discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to the loss of
flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in
velocities.
   A.   The floodways are designated for Addison Creek on the flood insurance
rate map prepared by FEMA on map number 17031C panels 0366, 0367, and 0369 and
dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps
as may be prepared from time to time. When two (2) floodway maps exist for a
waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall prevail.
   B.   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city that may be annexed into
the city are designated for Addison Creek on the flood insurance rate map
prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments or revisions to
such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
   C.   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated
floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and located
on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation
is needed to determine the exact location of the designated floodway boundary,
IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
   A.   Construction, reconstruction, repair or placement of a building or any
addition to a building.
   B.   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the travel trailer or
recreational vehicle is on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, it
must be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
   C.   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges
or similar projects.
   D.   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
   E.   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
   F.   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams or culverts;
channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials;
deposit of solid or liquid waste.
   G.   Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height or
velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
Development does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase
in elevation, or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices that do
not involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a building has been elevated.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave
action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per
Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) including state, federal or local units of
government.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1,
1990.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79,
revised as of October 1, 2001. This incorporation does not include any later
editions or amendments.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP: An official map of a community where the boundaries
of the flood having special hazard areas have been designated as zone A.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM): A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the
special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): An examination, evaluation and determination of
flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the
SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas,
ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard
area (SFHA).
   A.   The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the city
that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood.
The SFHAs of the city are generally identified as such on the flood insurance
rate map of Cook County prepared by the federal emergency management agency on
map number 17031C panels 0366, 0367, 0369 and dated August 19, 2008, and such
amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to
time.
   B.   The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the
city are generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map prepared
for Cook County by the federal emergency management agency and dated August 19,
2008, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency;
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analyses which determine
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources, office of water resources.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific
structure is not in a 100-year flood zone. It amends the effective flood hazard
boundary map (FHBM) or FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or
floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured homes" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects
which floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety
and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion
and sedimentation control, and channel restoration. Mitigation may also include
those activities taken to reduce a structure's susceptibility to flooding.
NGVD: National geodetic vertical datum of 1929. Reference surface set by the
national geodetic survey deduced from a continental adjustment of all existing
adjustments in 1929.
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the
existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A
natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural
conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April
1, 1990.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATERS: All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes,
and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were
capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or
discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the state of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of
water directly accessible thereto.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing
and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall
preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in
part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public
agencies.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois
under the Illinois land surveyors act 1 .
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the state of
Illinois under the Illinois professional engineering practice act 2 .
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result
in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the
dimensions of a structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores storm water runoff
without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of storm
water runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or
storm.
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent
stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified channel. This term
does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of
sheet flow or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): Any base flood area subject to flooding from
a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch or any other identified channel or
ponding and shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map as
zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V, M, E, or D.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
STRUCTURE: The results of a manmade change to the land constructed on or below
the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a
building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a
site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer
on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days unless they are fully
licensed and ready for highway use.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred, regardless of the actual repair work performed. Volunteer
labor and materials must be included in this determination. Damage of less than
fifty percent (50%) of the fair market value will be applied to the repetitive
loss calculations.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
   A.   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement.
   B.   For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
   C.   The term does not, however, include either: 1) any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe living conditions, or 2) any alteration of a "historic structure" listed
on the National Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of
Historic Places, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a
narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided. (Ord. O-20-2008, 6-16-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.
2 2. 225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.
12-1-5: DUTIES OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL(S):
   A.   Duties Designated: The city shall be responsible for the general
administration and enforcement of this chapter which shall include the
following:
      1.   Determining The Floodplain Designation:
         a.   Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in
a special flood hazard area (SFHA).
         b.   If they are in an SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway,
flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been
conducted and which drains more than one square mile.
         c.   Check whether the development is potentially within an extended
SFHA (with a drainage area less than 1 square mile), indicating that the
development would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance, or
inundation which would be the basis for the applicant being required to
delineate the floodplain and floodway and be subject to the remaining sections
of this chapter.
      2.   Professional Engineer Review:
         a.   If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain
for which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than
one square mile, the permit shall be referred to a registered professional
engineer under the employ or contract of the city for review to ensure that the
development meets section
12-1-7-2 or
12-1-7-3 of this chapter.
         b.   In the case of an appropriate use, the professional engineer
shall state in writing that the development meets the requirements of section
12-1-7-2 of this chapter.
      3.   Dam Safety Requirements:
         a.   Ensure that an IDNR/OWR permit has been issued or a letter
indicating no permit is required, if the proposed development activity includes
construction of a "dam" as defined in section
12-1-4 of this chapter.
         b.   Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or
impoundment structures.
      4.   Other Permit Requirements: Ensure that any and all required federal,
state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit.
      5.   Plan Review And Permit Issuance:
         a.   Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the
jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this chapter; and
         b.   Issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and other regulations of the city when the
development meets the conditions of this chapter.
      6.   Inspection Review: Inspect all development projects before, during
and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
      7.   Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain permit files
including:
         a.   An elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building subject
to section
12-1-8 of this chapter; and/or
         b.   The elevation to which a nonresidential building has been
floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to
section
12-1-8 of this chapter.
      8.   Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and
furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies
of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, conditional
letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and "as
built" elevation and floodproofing and/or elevation certificates for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter.
      9.   State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been
granted by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to sections
12-1-7-2 and
12-1-7-3 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated
to the city. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the
city and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
         a.   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the
Illinois Compiled Statutes;
         b.   IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in
section
12-1-4 of this chapter and all other state, federal or local unit of government
projects, including projects of the city and county, except for those projects
meeting the requirements of subsection
12-1-7-2H of this chapter;
         c.   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per subsection
12-1-7-2D5 of this chapter;
         d.   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection
12-1-7-2D4 of this chapter;
         e.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage as indicated in subsections
12-1-7-2D1, D2 and D8 of this chapter;
         f.   Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly
navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
         g.   Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations;
and
         h.   Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist.
      10.   Cooperation With Other Agencies:
         a.   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies
to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to
improve the administration of this chapter;
         b.   Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a
regulatory map within six (6) months whenever a modification of the floodplain
may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain
map;
         c.   Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance
program; and
         d.   Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
      11.   Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as
necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject
however to the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any chapter
changes.
      12.   Damage Determinations: Make damage determinations of all damaged
buildings in the SFHA after a flood to determine substantially damaged
structures which must comply with subsection
12-1-8E1 of this chapter.
   B.   Methods For Fulfilling Duties: The city shall be responsible for
fulfilling all of the duties listed in subsection A of this section.
      1.   To fulfill those duties, the city first should use the criteria
listed in section
12-1-6, "Base Flood Elevation", of this chapter to determine whether the
development site is located within a floodplain.
      2.   Once it has been determined that a site is located within a
floodplain, the city must determine whether the development site is within a
flood fringe, a designated floodway, or within an SFHA or floodplain for which
no floodway has been identified.
         a.   If the site is within a flood fringe, the city shall require that
the minimum requirements of section
12-1-7-1 of this chapter be met.
         b.   If the site is within a floodway, the city shall require that the
minimum requirements of section
12-1-7-2 of this chapter be met.
         c.   If the site is located within an SFHA or floodplain for which no
detailed study has been completed and approved, the city shall require that the
minimum requirements of section
12-1-7-3 of this chapter be met.
      3.   In addition, the general requirements of section
12-1-8 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the
requirements of section
12-1-7-1,
12-1-7-2, or
12-1-7-3 of this chapter.
      4.   The city shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the
requirements of section
12-1-9 of this chapter.
      5.   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the city shall review
the requirements of section
12-1-10 of this chapter to make sure they are met. In addition, the city shall
complete all notification requirements.
      6.   In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required
in this chapter, the city may take any and all actions as outlined in section
12-1-12 of this chapter. (Ord. O-20-2008, 6-16-2008)
12-1-6: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance study for
the city. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is
not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be
according to the best existing data available in the Illinois state water
survey's floodplain information repository that has been approved by IDNR/OWR
and FEMA. When a party disagrees with the best available data, he/she shall
finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with
better data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for approval prior to any
development of the site.
   A.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
Addison Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
flood insurance study of the city prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008,
and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to
time.
   B.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of Cook
County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments or
revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
   C.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA
delineated as an "AH zone" or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth)
delineated on the flood insurance rate map of the city. The base flood or 100-
year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an
"A zone" on the flood insurance rate map of the city shall be according to the
best existing data available in the Illinois state water survey floodplain
information repository.
      1.   When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be
determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-RAS, HEC-2, or WSP-2.
      2.   The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from
a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-1, or TR-20, or by techniques
presented in various publications prepared by the United States geological
survey for estimating peak flood discharges.
      3.   Along any watercourses draining more than one square mile, the above
analyses shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for approval. Once approved it must be
submitted to the Illinois state water survey floodplain information repository
for filing.
      4.   For a nonriverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the
historic flood of record plus three feet (3'), unless calculated by a detailed
engineering study and approved by IDNR/OWR for drainage areas greater than one
square mile.
      5.   For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than 1
square mile) which has been identified by the city pursuant to subsection
12-1-5A1c of this chapter, the base flood elevation shall be determined by the
applicant utilizing a method as approved in this subsection C, with concurrence
of the city. (Ord. O-20-2008, 6-16-2008)
12-1-7: OCCUPATION AND USE REGULATIONS IN SPECIFIC AREAS:
12-1-7-1: FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
   A.   General Requirements: Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe
will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood by proper elevation and compensatory storage, and other
applicable provisions of this chapter. No use will be permitted which adversely
affects the capacity of drainage facilities or systems. Developments located
within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section along with
the requirements of section
12-1-8 of this chapter.
   B.   Development Permit:
      1.   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by
law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a
development permit from the city.
      2.   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the city.
         a.   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the
property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor;
existing grade elevations in MSL, 1929 adjustment datum or NGVD and all changes
in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and dimensions of
all buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings, the
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade
shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development will be subject to
the requirements of section
12-1-8 of this chapter.
         b.   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas
shall be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to
be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
         c.   The city shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant
copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit not
required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The city shall
not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been
obtained.
      3.   Upon receipt of a development permit application, the city shall
compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation.
         a.   Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher
than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map and which
has not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
without a permit as required by this chapter is not in the SFHA and, therefore,
not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any development
located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically
connected, but shown on the current flood insurance rate map is subject to the
provisions of this chapter. The city shall maintain documentation of the
existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this
ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance
rate map identification.
   C.   Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood fringe shall
create a threat to public health and safety.
      1.   If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data
and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of
removing the site from the floodplain.
   D.   Compensatory Storage:
      1.   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
      2.   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
      3.   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
      4.   All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
      5.   All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly
to the watercourse.
   E.   Construction Of The Lowest Floor Below The Base Flood Elevation (BFE):
A person who has obtained a letter of map revision based on fill that removes a
site in the flood fringe from the floodplain due to the use of fill to elevate
the site above the BFE, may apply for a permit from the city to construct the
lowest floor of a residential building below the BFE in the flood fringe. The
city shall not issue such a permit unless the applicant has complied with all
the criteria set forth in the following subsection:
      1.   Compensatory storage shall be provided per subsection D of this
section.
         a.   The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e.,
window wells, accessways) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation
(FPE).
         b.   The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above
the FPE, for a minimum distance of ten feet (10') beyond the outside face of
the structure. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement
cannot be met, the city may waive the ten foot (10') minimum setback if an
Illinois registered professional engineer certifies that an alternative method
to protect the building from damage due to hydrostatic pressures has been met.
The certifications shall be in the form of a detailed soils and structural
design analysis, which shall be submitted to the city for review. The city may
require such additional documentation as necessary to prove that the proposed
shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe. In no case
shall the setback distance be less than four feet (4').
         c.   The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a
distance of twenty feet (20') from the structure, shall be above the BFE.
However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be obtained,
the city may waive the twenty foot (20') minimum setback distance if an
Illinois registered professional engineer certifies that an alternative method
to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures has been met.
A detailed soils analysis and structural design proving that a shorter setback
distance will keep the structure reasonably safe from flooding, shall be
submitted to the city for review. In no case shall the setback distance be less
than four feet (4').
         d.   The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets
all requirements of this subsection and is at least five feet (5') thick under
the basement floor slab. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to
require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as part of a LOMR-F,
if such fill consists of material, including soils of similar classification
and degree of permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL, SC or ML
according to ASTM standard D-2487, classification of soils for engineering
purposes.
         e.   The fill material must be homogeneous (i.e., all of 1 material)
and isotropic (i.e., having the same engineering properties) and in the same
direction.
         f.   All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and
inspected by an Illinois registered professional engineer, as warranted by the
site conditions.
         g.   The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than
five feet (5') below the BFE.
         h.   There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab,
and minimum of one-fourth (1/4) horsepower sump pump with a backup power supply
shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at four (4)
times the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and away
from the building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the
floor under the effect of the seepage pressure.
         i.   The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of
preventing backflow.
         j.   All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand
hydrostatic pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.
         k.   If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set
forth in subsections E1a through E1j of this section, the city may allow the
construction of a basement below the BFE only if the applicant demonstrates
that the proposed fill and structure meet the guidelines and requirements set
forth in FEMA technical bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably safe from flooding.
In order to demonstrate that the proposed structure is reasonably safe from
flooding, the applicant shall submit a detailed engineering analysis of the
proposed fill and foundation wall. The engineered basement study shall be
completed in accordance with the latest edition of FEMA technical bulletin 10-
01, with the analysis of the fill being prepared by an Illinois registered
professional engineer.
         l.   In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site, in
no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the lot
exceed eighteen inches (18"), as measured from the previously existing natural
grade. The rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of excavation,
if necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of mechanical means to
drain the compensatory storage area will not be permitted. (Ord. O-20-2008, 6-
16-2008)
12-1-7-2: DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS:
   A.   Scope: This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment,
site modification or building modification within a designated floodway. The
designated floodway for Addison Creek shall be as delineated on the designated
floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR according to and referenced in section
12-1-4 of this chapter. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which
meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the
minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development
shall also meet the requirements of section
12-1-8 of this chapter.
   B.   Development Permit:
      1.   Permit Required: No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body
not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a floodway without
first obtaining a development permit from the city and IDNR/OWR.
      2.   Application For Permit; Required Information:
         a.   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the city. The application shall include the following information:
            (1)   Name and address of applicant;
            (2)   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
            (3)   Name of stream or body of water affected;
            (4)   Description of proposed activity;
            (5)   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
            (6)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
            (7)   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property
if different from the applicant;
            (8)   Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent; if the
applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall
sign the application form; if the applicant is a partnership, each partner
shall sign the application form; and, if the applicant is a land trust, the
trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer.
A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with the application, identifying each
beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective
interests therein.
            (9)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which
include, as a minimum:
               (A)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of
the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site,
graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;
               (B)   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions, including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or NGVD
or North American vertical datum, adjacent property lines and ownership,
drainage and flood control easements, location of any channels and any existing
or future access roads, distance between proposed activity and navigation
channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body
of water), designated floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and
dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of
cross sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale;
               (C)   Cross section views of the project and engineering study
reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions
of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal
water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
               (D)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed
areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
               (E)   A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect
any proposed change in the designated floodway location.
            (10)   Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or
approval letters that may be required for this type of development.
            (11)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be
submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of
subsection C of this section.
            (12)   If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-
year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated
conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may
be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.
            (13)   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by
drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and
existing ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed
excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a
registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land
surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
12-1-8 of this chapter.
            (14)   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
               (A)   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed
work;
               (B)   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative
locations or methods (see subsection D9a of this section) to accomplish the
purpose of the proposed work;
               (C)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts
each feasible alternative identified in subsection D9a of this section would
have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected;
and
               (D)   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project,
considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the
body of water affected.
         b.   The city shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant
copies of all other federal, state, and local permits and approvals that may be
required for this type of activity. The city shall not issue the development
permit unless all required federal and state permits have been obtained.
      3.   Review Of Application: A registered professional engineer, under the
employ or contract of the city, shall review and approve applications reviewed
under this section.
   C.   Preventing Increased Damages: The only development in a floodway which
will be allowed are appropriate uses which will not cause a rise in the base
flood elevation, and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging
increase in flood heights or velocity, or be a threat to public health and
safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or
aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate
mitigation methods as called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses
listed in 17 Illinois administrative code part 3708 will be allowed.
Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new
structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or
channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the
floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a
fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an
appropriate use. The approved appropriate uses are as follows:
      1.   Public flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works
or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding of
existing structures, erosion, or water quality or habitat for fish and
wildlife.
      2.   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access
to, the water or shoreline, such as instream aeration and similar treatment
facilities, facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, and
commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses.
      3.   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls.
      4.   Underground and overhead utilities.
      5.   Public open space and recreational facilities such as playing fields
and trail systems including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when
viewed from any one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows,
and including open air pavilions.
      6.   Bridges, culverts and associated roadways, sidewalks and railways
necessary for crossing over the floodway or for providing access to other
appropriate uses in the floodway and any modification thereto.
      7.   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures, including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures, or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or
industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be
no more than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing
structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the
structure.
      8.   In the case of damaged or replacement buildings, reconstruction or
repairs made to a building that are valued at less than fifty percent (50%) of
the market value of the building before it was damaged or replaced, and which
do not increase the outside dimensions of the building.
   D.   Construction Of Appropriate Uses: Within the designated floodway as
identified on the floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR, the construction of an
appropriate use, will be considered permissible provided that the proposed
project meets the following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so
stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered
professional engineer and provided that any structure meets the protection
requirements of section
12-1-8 of this chapter:
      1.   Preservation Of Flood Conveyance So As Not To Increase Flood Stages
Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on
stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost
due to the project, will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
         a.   Designated floodway conveyance, "K" = (1.486/n)(AR2/3) where "n"
is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective flow area of the cross
section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See "Open
Channel Hydraulics", Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.)
         b.   The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and
proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal,
state or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a nonvegetative
land cover.
         c.   Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of
effective designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to
IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
            (1)   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
            (2)   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's
length.
            (3)   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction,
a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of
stream length shall be used.
            (4)   Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections
with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated floodway
delineations on adjacent properties.
            (5)   All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
      2.   Preservation Of Floodway Storage So As Not To Increase Downstream
Flooding: Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated floodway
storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures
placed and the impact of any related flood control projects. Compensatory
storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least 1.5 times the volume
of floodplain storage lost. Artificially created storage lost due to a
reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.
The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed between the
proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation. All
designated floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation
shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All designated
floodway storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall
be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. If the
compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed
construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through a
determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the
compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent. There shall be no reduction
in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such
modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure.
      3.   Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase Stream
Erosion Or Flood Heights: For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts
or on stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in
the average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage for all flood
events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. In the case of bridges
or culverts or on stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water
in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the
structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use
of riprap or other design measures.
      4.   Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway
Approaches: The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions for
all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event, or the
upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or
within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the
design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded
flood easements. If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood
stages greater than 0.1 foot, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a
permit for a dam or waiver.
         a.   The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be
calculated using the flood study flows and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in section
12-1-6 of this chapter. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT, FHWA
hydraulic chart for the selection of highway culverts. Bridges must be analyzed
using the U.S. DOT/federal highway administration hydraulics of bridge
waterways calculation procedures.
         b.   Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection D2
of this section.
         c.   Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection D3 of this
section.
         d.   If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for
recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be received.
         e.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge
showing the existing conditions and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by
subsection C of this section.
         f.   All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be
designed per this subsection D.
      5.   Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts And
Approach Roads:
         a.   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and
including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of
flood damage.
         b.   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
         c.   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a
source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in accordance
with 17 Illinois administrative code part 3708 (floodway construction in
northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence
before a permit is issued.
      6.   On Stream Structures Built For The Purpose Of Backing Up Water: Any
increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 feet, when compared to the
existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or within existing
vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection
grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within recorded flood easements. A
permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from
IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the
stream during normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures, as
defined in section
12-1-4 of this chapter, shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Illinois
administrative code part 3702 (construction and maintenance of dams). If the
proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to
accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
         a.   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by
providing flood control, public recreation or regional storm water detention;
         b.   The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish
species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle,
such as for spawning;
         c.   The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water
quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual bank
slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a presedimentation basin;
         d.   A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals and other pollutants.
If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with
upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control;
         e.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section.
      7.   Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial
Structures:
         a.   If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction
shall be placed no farther than ten feet (10') from the outside of the
building.
         b.   Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required
for floodproofing activities.
      8.   Excavation In The Floodway: When excavation is proposed in the
design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and
replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for
lost conveyance or other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be
provided for the excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios
shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through
engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be
used with the same efficiency:
         a.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section,
the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
         b.   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section,
the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length.
         c.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a
minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream
length shall be used.
         d.   Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and
downstream of the transition sections.
      9.   Channel Modification: If the proposed activity involves a channel
modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
         a.   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would
accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body
of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization,
floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the
floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a
stream side buffer strip or greenbelt. Channel modification is acceptable if
the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish
and wildlife habitat.
         b.   Water quality, habitat and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values.
         c.   The activity has been planned and designed and will be
constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following
criteria:
            (1)   The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall
match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross
section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously
modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be
incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.
            (2)   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both
the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will
prevent erosion.
            (3)   One sided construction of a channel shall be used when
feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one
side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization
effects of the vegetation.
            (4)   Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to that
which is essential for construction of the channel.
            (5)   Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no
steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable.
Native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or riprap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as concrete,
gabions or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives.
            (6)   All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative
cover.
            (7)   If the existing channel contains considerable bottom
diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such
features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and
flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established
where appropriate.
            (8)   A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of
the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
            (9)   New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all
items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel.
            (10)   There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the
channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless
necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is
justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
            (11)   Unless the modification is for a public flood control
project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage
outside the floodway as a result of the modification.
         d.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section.
      10.   Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a
floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
      11.   Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in the
floodway, including grading, filling and excavation, in which there is
potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
         a.   The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum
vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time soil
is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be
destroyed, removed or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior to the
initiation of improvements.
         b.   Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to
denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be
provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any portion
of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may not be at
final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days.
         c.   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any
significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement
of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control
devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion
ditches, and sediment traps and basins.
         d.   A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in
width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along existing
channels (see subsection D9 of this section). Construction vehicle use of
channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed,
where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along
channels shall be restabilized immediately.
         e.   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed
and implemented consistent with "Procedures And Standards For Urban Soil
Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Illinois" (1988) also known as the "Green
Book", and the "Illinois Urban Manual" (NRCS, 1995).
      12.   Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects,
the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the
applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR, through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations, that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right of way or easements
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
      13.   General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
         a.   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated
floodway study, referenced in section
12-1-6 of this chapter, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If
the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR
shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base
conditions data to use.
         b.   If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of the
proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to
meet the requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency flood
elevations of the designated floodway conditions and conditions with the
receiving stream at normal water elevations.
         c.   If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a
private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to
be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
(5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
      14.   Conditional Letter Of Map Revision:
         a.   If the appropriate use would result in a change in the designated
floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant
shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and documents
necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map revision and
receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway
change before a permit is issued.
         b.   The final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA
until as built plans or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging,
or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR.
         c.   In the case of nongovernment projects, the municipality in
incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the
proposed conditional designated floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval
can be given.
         d.   No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place
until a conditional approval is issued.
         e.   After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no
activities shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is
issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
      15.   Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses shall
be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer.
      16.   Construction Within Twenty Five Feet Of The Channel: For all
activities in the floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25')
of the channel, the following criteria shall be met:
         a.   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at
least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
         b.   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the
construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction.
After receipt of conditional approval of the designated floodway change and
issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of map revision, construction as
necessary to change the floodway designation may proceed, but no buildings or
structures or other construction that is not an appropriate use may be placed
in that area until the designated floodway map is changed and a final letter of
map revision is received. The designated floodway map will be revised upon
acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the "as built" plans.
   E.   Development Activities In Delegated Communities Requiring State Review:
For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the following
criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and concurrence and/or
permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or county delegated
state permitting authority in the floodway.
      1.   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection D5 of this section.
      2.   An engineer's determination that a proposed bridge affected by
backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller
opening.
      3.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage
pursuant to subsections D1, D2 and D8 of this section.
      4.   The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in
section
12-1-4 of this chapter) and all other state, federal, or local units of
government projects, including projects of the municipality or county.
      5.   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge
pursuant to subsection D4 of this section.
      6.   Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood
profiles.
      7.   Projects in public bodies of water.
   F.   Other Permits: In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a
development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless
the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is
not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/5 et seq. No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated
this responsibility to the city.
   G.   Permits For Dams:
      1.   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a
"dam", as defined in section
12-1-4 of this chapter, per 17 Illinois administrative code part 3702 (rules
for construction of dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of
construction of a dam.
      2.   If the city finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the
city shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office.
      3.   If the city finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition,
the city shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett
office, and the Illinois emergency management agency (IEMA).
   H.   Activities That Do Not Require A Registered Professional Engineer's
Review: The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
      1.   Underground and overhead utilities that:
         a.   Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations, or
         b.   Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the
floodway, or
         c.   In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe
or encasement is buried a minimum of five feet (5') below the existing
streambed, and
         d.   Overhead utility lines shall be constructed above the estimated
100-year frequency flood elevation or attached above the low chord of an
existing bridge (with the permission of the bridge owner). No supporting towers
shall be placed in the watercourse and shall be designed so as to not catch
debris.
         e.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks shall be resorted to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         f.   A utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution as defined by the environmental protection act 415 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5 (1992 state bar edition) shall be provided with shutoff valves on
each side of the body of water to be crossed.
         g.   All Illinois commerce commission, national electrical safety
codes, and federal requirements for clearance must be met.
      2.   Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls that:
         a.   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent
natural bank slope,
         b.   Do not result in an increase in ground elevation,
         c.   Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall
location.
      3.   Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences),
properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade.
      4.   Construction of shoreline and stream bank protection:
         a.   That does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length.
         b.   Where materials are not placed higher than the existing top of
bank.
         c.   Where materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross
sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.
         d.   Where stabilization utilizing native vegetation and gradual side
slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems.
Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use
of alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or riprap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete,
construction rubble and gabions should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives.
      5.   Temporary stream crossings in which:
         a.   The approach roads will be one-half foot (1/2') or less above
natural grade.
         b.   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up
the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall invert.
         c.   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two
feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be
nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
         d.   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within
one year after authorization.
         e.   All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized
as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction.
(Ord. O-20-2008, 6-16-2008)
12-1-7-3: SFHA AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED:
   A.   General Provisions: In SFHA or floodplains (including AE, AH, AO and
unnumbered A zones) where no floodways have been identified and no base flood
or 100-year frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and
draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the
cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the
flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood
or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
   B.   Development Permit:
      1.   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body, not exempted by
state law, shall commence any development in an SFHA or floodplain without
first obtaining a development permit from the city.
      2.   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the city.
         a.   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations
and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a
licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all
buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of
section
12-1-8 of this chapter.
         b.   The application for a development permit shall also include the
following information:
            (1)   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose
and intended use;
            (2)   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
            (3)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
            (4)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which
include as a minimum:
               (A)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of
the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site,
graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;
               (B)   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or
NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control
easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the
proposed construction is in or near a commercially navigable body of water),
floodplain limit, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and
a graphical or numerical scale;
               (C)   Cross section views of the project perpendicular to the
flow of floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed
conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view,
existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency
flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation and graphical or numerical
scales (horizontal and vertical); and
               (D)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for
disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to
be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
            (5)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be
submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection D
of this section.
            (6)   Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or
approvals that may be required for this type of development.
         c.   The city shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant
copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit-not-
required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The city shall
not issue the development permit unless all required federal, state, and local
permits have been obtained.
   C.   Determining Elevation: Based on the best available existing data,
according to the Illinois state water survey's floodplain information
repository, the city shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
      1.   Should no elevation information exist for the site, the developer's
engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection
12-1-6C of this chapter.
      2.   Any development located on land that can be shown to have been
higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map
identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
      3.   The city shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification.
   D.   Preventing Increased Damages:
      1.   No development in the SFHA where a floodway has not been determined
shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural
hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair
existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be
minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter.
   E.   Standards: Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been
determined, the following standards shall apply:
      1.   Engineering Requirements: The developer shall have a registered
professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans,
calculations, and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of
subsections
12-1-7-2D1 through D12 of this chapter, for the entire floodplain as calculated
under the provisions of subsection
12-1-6C of this chapter.
         a.   As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study
performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to IDNR/OWR
for acceptance as a designated floodway.
         b.   Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR, the developer shall
then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of section
12-1-7-2 of this chapter for the designated floodway. The floodway shall be
defined according to the definition in section
12-1-4 of this chapter.
      2.   IDNR/OWR Permit Required: A development permit shall not be issued
unless the applicant first obtains a permit from IDNR/OWR or written
documentation that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR.
      3.   When IDNR/OWR Permit Not Required: No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be
required if IDNR/OWR has delegated permit responsibility to the city per 17
Illinois administrative code part 3708 for designated floodways.
      4.   Permits For Dams:
         a.   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a
"dam" as defined in section
12-1-4 of this chapter per 17 Illinois administrative code part 3702 (rules for
construction of dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of
construction of a dam.
         b.   If the city finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit,
the city shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office.
         c.   If the city finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe
condition, the city shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR
Bartlett office, and the Illinois emergency management agency (IEMA).
      5.   Activities Potentially Permitted Without Engineer's Review: The
following activities may be permitted without a registered professional
engineer's review or calculation of a base flood elevation and designated
floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this
chapter:
         a.   Underground and overhead utilities that:
            (1)   Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations,
or
            (2)   Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the
floodway, or
            (3)   In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the
pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of five feet (5') below the existing
streambed, and
            (4)   Overhead utility lines shall be constructed above the
estimated 100-year frequency flood elevation or attached above the low chord of
an existing bridge (with the permission of the bridge owner). No supporting
towers shall be placed in the watercourse and shall be designed so as to not
catch debris.
            (5)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a
minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation.
            (6)   A utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution as defined by the environmental protection act 415 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5 (1992 state bar edition) shall be provided with shutoff valves on
each side of the body of water to be crossed.
            (7)   All Illinois commerce commission, national electrical safety
codes, and federal requirements for clearance must be met.
         b.   Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls that:
            (1)   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent
natural bank slope, and
            (2)   Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and
            (3)   Are designed so as not to cause stream bank erosion at the
outfall location.
         c.   Construction of shoreline and stream bank protection:
            (1)   That does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length.
            (2)   Where materials are not placed higher than the existing top
of bank.
            (3)   Where materials are placed so as not to reduce cross
sectional area of the stream channel by more than ten percent (10%).
            (4)   Where stabilization utilizing native vegetation and gradual
side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems.
Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use
of alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or riprap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete,
construction rubble and gabions should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives.
         d.   Temporary stream crossings in which:
            (1)   The approach roads will be one-half foot (1/2') or less above
natural grade.
            (2)   The crossings will allow stream flow to pass without backing
up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile
or outfall invert.
            (3)   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least
two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall
be nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
            (4)   All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise
stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction.
            (5)   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed
within one year after authorization.
         e.   The construction of light poles, signposts and similar
structures.
         f.   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade.
The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as
playground equipment, pavilions, and carports built at or below existing grade
that would not obstruct the flow of floodwaters.
The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square
feet in size, nor ten feet (10') in any one dimension (e.g., animal shelters
and toolsheds).
         g.   The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not
increase the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%), which are
located on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which
do not extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel to
the flow of floodwaters.
         h.   Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where:
            (1)   The affected length of stream is less than one thousand feet
(1,000').
            (2)   The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural
stream channels, or
            (3)   The cross sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall
be maintained.
   F.   Compensatory Storage:
      1.   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
      2.   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
      3.   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
      4.   All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall
be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (Ord. O-20-2008,
6-16-2008)
12-1-8: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
In addition to the requirements found in sections
12-1-7-1,
12-1-7-2 and
12-1-7-3 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, designated floodways
and SFHA or floodplains where no floodways have been identified (zones A, AO,
AH, AE, A1-A30, A99, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M, E, or D), the following requirements
shall be met:
   A.   Health Standards: Public health standards.
   B.   Storing Hazardous Materials: No developments in the SFHA shall include
locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes,
fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic
materials below the flood protection elevation (FPE).
   C.   Minimizing Flood Damage: Public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas and electric shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage. Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. New and
replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on site waste
disposal systems may be permitted providing all manholes or other aboveground
openings located below the FPE are watertight.
   D.   Carrying Capacity And Notification: For all projects involving channel
modification, fill or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying
capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In addition, the city shall
notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance
of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
   E.   Protecting Buildings:
      1.   All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also known as an
SFHA, and all buildings located outside the 100-year floodplain but within the
500-year floodplain, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood
protection elevation. This building protection criteria applies to the
following situations:
         a.   Construction or placement of a new building valued at more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
         b.   "Substantial improvement" to an existing building as defined in
section
12-1-4 of this chapter, including an increase to the first floor area by more
than twenty percent (20%). This alteration shall be figured cumulatively
beginning with any alteration which has taken place subsequent to April 1,
1990.
         c.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. This building protection requirement
does not apply to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully occupied
before it was removed to avoid flood damage.
         d.   Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
         e.   "Substantial damage" to an existing building as defined in
section
12-1-4 of this chapter. This alteration shall be figured cumulatively beginning
with any alteration which has taken place subsequent to April 1, 1990.
         f.   "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
12-1-4 of this chapter.
      2.   This building protection requirement may be met by one of the
following methods:
         a.   A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be
constructed on permanent landfill in accordance with the following:
            (1)   Lowest Floor: The lowest floor (including basement) shall be
at or above the flood protection elevation.
            (2)   Fill Requirements:
               (A)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one
foot (1') deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10')
beyond the foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection
elevation.
               (B)   The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection
elevation. However, the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural
engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages
due to hydrostatic pressures.
               (C)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour.
               (D)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties.
         b.   A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in
accordance with the following:
            (1)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl
space, stilts, piles, walls or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood. The openings must have a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding below the base flood elevation.
            (2)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and
aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating
debris.
            (3)   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
               (A)   The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical,
heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility
meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation.
               (B)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the flood protection elevation.
            (4)   The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be
used for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and not later modified or occupied as habitable space.
            (5)   Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, shall be elevated to or above
the flood protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules
and regulations for the Illinois mobile home tiedown act issued pursuant to 77
Illinois administrative code part 870. In addition, all manufactured homes
shall meet the following elevation requirements:
               (A)   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved: 1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 2) in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision, 3) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, or 4) in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage from a flood, the top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above
the flood protection elevation.
               (B)   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured
home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest floor is above the
base flood elevation or the chassis is at least thirty six inches (36") in
height above grade and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of
equivalent strength, whichever is less.
            (6)   Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to
meet the elevation and anchoring requirements of subsection E2b(5) of this
section unless:
               (A)   They are on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days; and
               (B)   They are fully licensed, ready for highway use, and used
only for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as a permanent
dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
         c.   Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry
floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that:
            (1)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood
protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood.
            (2)   The building design shall take into account flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of
buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice.
            (3)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms,
floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose
of this subsection).
         d.   A building may be constructed with a crawl space located below
the flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
            (1)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and
            (2)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade; and
            (3)   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood
protection elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade; and
            (4)   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the
interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the foundation wall must not
exceed four feet (4') at any point; and
            (5)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event; and
            (6)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
            (7)   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above
the flood protection elevation.
         e.   Critical facilities shall be protected to the 500-year flood
elevation. In addition, all ingress and egress from any critical facility must
be protected to the 500-year flood elevation.
         f.   Toolsheds, detached garages, and other minor accessory structures
on an existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed with the lowest
floor below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the following:
            (1)   The building is not used for human habitation.
            (2)   All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in
a designated floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as
not to block the flow of floodwaters and shall also meet the appropriate use
criteria of section
12-1-7-2 of this chapter. In addition, all other requirements of sections
12-1-7-1,
12-1-7-2 and
12-1-7-3 of this chapter must be met.
            (3)   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation.
            (4)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
            (5)   The building shall be valued at less than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) and be less than five hundred (500) square feet in floor
size.
            (6)   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles
or tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar
uses.
            (7)   The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of
subsection E2b(1) of this section.
         g.   Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall
also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in section
12-1-7-2 of this chapter. Nonconforming structures located in a designated
floodway may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally
altered in accordance with subsection
12-1-7-2C of this chapter. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire,
wind or other natural or manmade disaster may be restored unless the damage
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which
case it shall conform to this chapter. (Ord. O-20-2008, 6-16-2008)
12-1-9: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The city council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they
are known in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.
   A.   Review Of Developments: New subdivisions, manufactured home parks,
annexation agreements and planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA
shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with
sections
12-1-7-1,
12-1-7-2,
12-1-7-3 and
12-1-8 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans
for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs)
shall include a signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the
plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 .
   B.   Required Information And Data: Proposals for new subdivisions,
manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs)
and additions to manufactured home parks and additions to subdivisions shall
include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway
delineations.
      1.   Where this information is not available from an existing study filed
with the Illinois state water survey, the applicant's engineer shall be
responsible for calculating the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation per subsection
12-1-6C of this chapter and the floodway delineation per the definition in
section
12-1-4 of this chapter.
      2.   The applicant's engineer shall submit the data to IDNR/OWR for
review and approval as best available regulatory data and then send it to the
Illinois state water survey.
   C.   Design: Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be
located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural
streams and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included
within parks or other public grounds.
   D.   PUDs And Subdivision Plats Outside The City: The city council shall not
approve any planned unit development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located
outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
   E.   Other Activities: All other activities defined as development shall be
designed so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. O-20-2008, 6-16-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
12-1-10: VARIANCES:
   A.   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
"designated floodway" as defined in section
12-1-4 of this chapter.
      1.   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the city for a
variance.
      2.   The city shall review the applicant's request for a variance and
shall submit its recommendation to the city council.
   B.   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all
of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety,
beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation
of a nuisance;
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public
facilities;
      6.   The provisions of subsections
12-1-7-1C and
12-1-7-3D of this chapter shall still be met;
      7.   The activity is not in a designated floodway;
      8.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a
general problem; and
      9.   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character
of the area involved including existing stream uses.
   C.   The city shall notify an applicant, in writing, that a variance from
the requirements of section
12-1-8 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability.
   D.   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site
or "historic structure", as defined in section
12-1-4 of this chapter, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of subsections B and C of this section, subject to the conditions
that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure; and
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure. (Ord. O-20-2008, 6-16-2008)
12-1-11: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   A.   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.
   B.   Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or
natural causes.
   C.   This chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside
of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage.
   D.   This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. O-
20-2008, 6-16-2008)
12-1-12: PENALTIES:
   A.   Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a
variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due
investigation, the city may determine that a violation of the minimum standards
of this chapter exists. The city shall notify the owner in writing of such
violation.
   B.   If such owner fails, after ten (10) days' notice, to correct the
violation:
      1.   The city may make application to the circuit court for an injunction
requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as the court
deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
      4.   The city shall record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   C.   The city shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a
wilful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause coverage by a
standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
      1.   The city is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of
the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing, shall
indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary,
to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      2.   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked
until a hearing is held by the board of appeals. Written notice of such hearing
shall be served on the permittee and shall state: a) the grounds for complaint
or reasons for suspension or revocation; and b) the time and place of the
hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on his/her behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board
of appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   D.   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. O-20-2008, 6-16-2008)
CHAPTER 2
STORM WATER DRAINAGE AND DETENTION
SECTION:
12-2- 1: Authority
12-2- 2: Purpose
12-2- 3: Application of Provisions
12-2- 4: Definitions
12-2- 5: Drainage Plan
12-2- 6: Minimization of Increases in Runoff Volumes and Rates
12-2- 7: Water Quality and Multiple Uses
12-2- 8: Design Criteria, Standards and Methods
12-2- 9: Accommodating Flows from Upstream Tributary Areas
12-2-10: Early Completion of Detention Facilities
12-2-11: Fee in Lieu of Detention
12-2-12: Maintenance Responsibility
12-2-13: Inspections
12-2-14: Administration and Enforcement
12-2-15: Appeals
12-2-16: Penalties
12-2-1: AUTHORITY:
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to cities and
villages by the Illinois Revised Statutes chapter 24, sections 11-12-5, 11-12-
6, 11-12-12, 11-13-1, 11-14-1, 11-30-2, 11-30-8, 11-105-1, 11-109-1 and 11-110-
11 and chapter 85, section 1711 and P.A.'s 85-905 and 1266. (Ord. 0-61-90, 11-
10-90)
12-2-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to diminish threats to public health, safety and
welfare caused by runoff of excessive storm water from new development and
redevelopment. This excessive storm water could result in the inundation of
damageable properties, the erosion and destabilization of downstream channels
and the pollution of valuable stream and lake resources. The cause of increases
in storm water runoff quantity and rate and impairment of quality is the
development and improvement of land, and as such, this Chapter regulates these
activities to prevent adverse impacts.
This Chapter is adopted to accomplish the following objectives:
   A.   To assure that new development does not increase the drainage or flood
hazards to others or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
   B.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage due to increased storm water runoff;
   C.   To protect human life and health from the hazards of increased flooding
on a watershed basis;
   D.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood-control projects,
repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, correction of channel
erosion problems and flood rescue and relief operations caused by increased
storm water runoff quantities from new development;
   E.   To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and
water resources;
   F.   To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
watercourses and flood plains and to protect water quality and aquatic
habitats;
   G.   To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order to
moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil
erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development. (Ord. 0-61-90, 11-10-90)
12-2-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This Chapter shall apply to all development in the City. (Ord. 0-61-90, 11-10-
90)
12-2-4: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
ADVERSE IMPACTS: Any deleterious impact on water resources or wetlands
affecting their beneficial uses, including recreation, aesthetics, aquatic
habitat, quality and quantity.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm or governmental agency who executes the necessary
forms to procure official approval of a development or permit to carry out
construction of a development from the City.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation at all locations delineating the level of
flooding resulting from the 100-year frequency flood event.
BYPASS FLOWS: Storm water runoff from upstream properties tributary to a
property's drainage system but not under its control.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash or natural or man-made drainageway which has a definite bed and
bank or shoreline in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody rooted
vegetation. Channel modification does not include the clearing of debris or
removal of trash.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the flood plain used to balance the loss of natural
flood storage capacity when fill or structures are placed within the flood
plain.
CONDUIT: Any channel, pipe, sewer or culvert used for the conveyance of
movement of water, whether open or closed.
DETENTION BASIN: A facility constructed or modified to provide for the
temporary storage of storm water runoff and the controlled release by gravity
of this runoff at a prescribed rate during and after a flood or storm.
DETENTION TIME: The mean residence time of storm water in a detention basin.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
   A.   Preparation of a plot of subdivision;
   B.   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition
to a building;
   C.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days;
   D.   Construction of roads, bridges or similar projects;
   E.   Redevelopment of a site;
   F.   Filling, dredging, grading, clearing, excavating, paving or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface;
   G.   Storage of materials or deposit of solid or liquid waste;
   H.   Any other activity that might alter the magnitude, frequency,
deviation, direction or velocity of storm water flows from a property.
DRAINAGE PLAN: A plan, including engineering drawings and supporting
calculations, which describes the existing storm water drainage system and
environmental features as well as the drainage system and environmental feature
which are proposed after development of a property.
DRY BASIN: A detention basin designed to draw completely after temporary
storage of storm water flows and to normally be dry over the majority of its
bottom area.
EROSION: The general process whereby earth is removed by flowing water or wave
action.
EXCESS STORM WATER RUNOFF: The volume and rate of flow of storm water
discharged from an urbanized drainage area which is or will be in excess of
that volume and rate which pertained before urbanization.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the flood plain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD PLAIN: That land adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. The flood plain is also known as the special flood hazard area
(SFHA) 1 .
FLOODWAY: The channel and that portion of the flood plain adjacent to a stream
or watercourse which is needed to store and convey the anticipated existing and
future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth of one
foot (0.1') increase in stage due to any loss of flood conveyance or storage
and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities.
HYDROGRAPH: A graph showing, for a given location on a stream or conduit, the
flow rate with respect to time.
INFILTRATION: The passage or movement of water into the soil surfaces.
MAJOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM: That portion of a drainage system needed to store and
convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor drainage system.
MINOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM: That portion of a drainage system designed for the
convenience of the public. It consists of street gutters, storm sewers, small
open channels and swales and where manmade, is usually designed to handle the
10-year runoff event or less.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects
which storm water drainage and development activities might have on the public
health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory
storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control and channel restoration.
NATURAL: Conditions resulting from physical, chemical and biological processes
without intervention by man.
100-YEAR EVENT: A rainfall, runoff or flood event having a one percent (1%)
chance of occurring in any given year.
PEAK FLOW: The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel or
conduit.
POSITIVE DRAINAGE: Provision for overland paths for all areas of a property,
including depressional areas, that may also be drained by storm sewer.
PROPERTY: A parcel of real estate.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion
of the flood plain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, as designated by the
DWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated future
100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth foot (0.1')
increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage and no more
than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities. The regulatory floodways are
designated for Addison Creek on the following map number 17031C and panels
0366F, 0367F, 0368F, 0369F dated November 6, 2000, of the Countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Map for Cook County prepared by FEMA and for Addison Creek on
the Regulatory Flood Plain Map prepared by DWR 2 . When two (2) floodway maps
exist for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall prevail. The
regulatory floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are
within extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City that may be annexed into the
City are designated for Addison Creek on the following map number 17031C and
panel 0386F dated November 6, 2000, of the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map
for Cook County prepared by DWR. When two (2) floodway maps exist for a
waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall prevail. To locate the
regulatory floodway boundary on any site, the designated floodway boundary
should be scaled off the designated floodway map and located on a site plan,
using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to
determine the exact location of the designated floodway boundary, the DWR
should be contacted for the interpretation.
RETENTION BASIN: A facility designed to completely retain a specified amount of
storm water runoff without release except by means of evaporation,
infiltration, emergency bypass or pumping.
SEDIMENTATION: The process that deposits soils, debris and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or storm water drainage
systems.
STORM SEWER: A closed conduit for conveying collected storm water.
STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM: All means, natural or manmade, used for conducting
storm water to, through or from a drainage area to the point of final outlet
from a property. The storm water drainage system includes, but is not limited
to, any of the following: conduits and appurtenance features, canals, channels,
ditches, streams, culverts, streets, storm sewers, detention basins, swales and
pumping stations.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within
a tributary drainage basin which are in excess of the infiltration capacity of
the soils of that basin, which flow over the surface of the ground or are
collected in channels or conduits.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION: The elapsed time for storm water to flow from the most
hydraulically remote point in a drainage basin to a particular point of
interest in that watershed.
TRIBUTARY WATERSHED: All of the land surface area that contributes runoff to a
given point.
2-YEAR EVENT: A runoff, rainfall or flood event having a fifty percent (50%)
chance of occurring in any given year.
WET BASIN: A detention basin designed to maintain a permanent pool of water
after the temporary storage of storm water runoff. (Ord. O-61-90, 11-10-1990;
amd. Ord. O-25-2000, 8-21-2000)
12-2-5: DRAINAGE PLAN:
Each applicant shall submit the following information, depending on development
size, to ensure that the provisions of this Chapter are met. The submittal
shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental
characteristics of the property, the potential adverse impacts of the
development on water resources, both on-site and downstream, and the
effectiveness of the proposed drainage plan in managing storm water runoff. The
applicant shall certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage
and construction shall be accomplished in strict conformance with the drainage
plan. The following information shall be submitted for both existing and
proposed property conditions. Properties smaller than ten (10) acres shall
submit only the basic drainage plan called for in subsection A of this Section.
Properties larger than ten (10) acres shall comply with the submittal
requirements of both the basic drainage plan and the advanced drainage plan of
subsection B of this Section.
   A.   Basic Drainage Plan:
      1.   Topographic Map: A topographic survey of the property at one foot
(1') contours under existing and proposed conditions, and areas upstream and
downstream, necessary to determine off-site impacts of the proposed drainage
plan. The map shall be keyed to a consistent datum specified by the City.
      2.   Drainage System: Mapping and descriptions, where relevant, of
existing and proposed drainage system features of the property and immediate
vicinity, including:
         a.   The banks and center line of streams and channels;
         b.   Shoreline of lakes, ponds and detention basins;
         c.   Farm drains and tiles;
         d.   Sub-watershed boundaries within the property;
         e.   Watershed soils classifications;
         f.   The property's location within the larger watershed;
         g.   Location, size and slope of storm water conduits and drainage
swales;
         h.   Sanitary or combined sewers;
         i.   Depressional storage areas;
         j.   Delineation of upstream and downstream drainage features and
watersheds which might be affected by the development;
         k.   Detention facilities;
         l.   Roads and streets and associated storm water inlets;
         m.   Base flood elevation and regulatory floodway where identified for
the property; and
         n.   Basis of design for the final drainage network components.
      3.   Environmental Features: A depiction of environmental features of the
property and immediate vicinity, including the following:
         a.   The limits of wetland areas;
         b.   Any designated natural areas; and
         c.   Any proposed environmental mitigation features.
   B.   Advanced Drainage Plan: The same information as required in subsection
A of this Section is required for properties larger than ten (10) acres along
with the following additional information for the minor drainage system's
design runoff event and the 100-year runoff event of critical duration:
      1.   Elevations and maps of 100-year flooding;
      2.   Cross-section data for open channel flow paths and designated
overland flow paths;
      3.   Direction of storm flows;
      4.   Flow rates and velocities at representative points in the drainage
system; and (Ord. 0-61-90, 11-10-90)
      5.   A statement by the registered professional engineer of the drainage
system's provisions for handling events greater than the 100-year's runoff.
(Ord. 0-61-90, 11-10-90; 1992 Code)
12-2-6: MINIMIZATION OF INCREASES IN RUNOFF VOLUMES AND RATES:
In the selection of a drainage plan for a development, the applicant shall
evaluate and implement, where practicable, site design features which minimize
the increase in runoff volumes and rates from the site. The applicant's
drainage plan submittal shall include evaluations of site design features which
are consistent with the following hierarchy:
   A.   Minimize impervious surfaces on the property, consistent with the needs
of the project;
   B.   Attenuate flows by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions
and preserve existing natural stream channels;
   C.   Infiltrate runoff on-site;
   D.   Provide storm water retention structures;
   E.   Provide storm water detention structures; and
   F.   Construct storm sewers. (Ord. 0-61-90, 11-10-90)
12-2-7: WATER QUALITY AND MULTIPLE USES:
The drainage system should be designed to minimize adverse water quality
impacts downstream and on the property itself. Detention basins shall
incorporate design features to capture storm water runoff pollutants. Retention
and infiltration of storm water shall be promoted throughout the property's
drainage system to reduce the volume of storm water runoff and to reduce the
quantity of runoff pollutants. The drainage system should incorporate multiple
uses where practicable. Uses considered compatible with storm water management
include open space, aesthetics, aquatic habitat, recreation (boating, trails,
playing fields), wetlands and water quality mitigation. The applicant should
avoid using portions of the property exclusively for storm water management.
(Ord. 0-61-90, 11-10-90)
12-2-8: DESIGN CRITERIA, STANDARDS AND METHODS:
   A.   Release Rates: The drainage system for a property shall be designed to
control the peak rate of discharge from the property for the 2-year, 24-hour
and 100-year, 24-hour events to levels which will not cause an increase in
flooding or channel instability downstream when considered in aggregate with
other developed properties and and downstream drainage capacities. The peak
discharge from events less than or equal to the 2-year event shall not be
greater than four one-hundredths (0.04) cfs per acre of property drained. The
peak 100-year discharge shall not be greater than fifteen one-hundredths (0.15)
cfs per acre of property drained.
   B.   Detention Basins Generally:
      1.   Outlet Design:
         a.   Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream drainage
system shall be evaluated when designing the outlet.
         b.   Where a single pipe outlet or orifice plate is to be used to
control discharge, it shall have a minimum diameter of four inches (4"). If
this minimum orifice size permits release rates greater than those specified in
this Section, and regional detention is not a practical alternative,
alternative outlet designs shall be utilized which incorporate self-cleaning
flow restrictors.
      2.   Detention Storage Requirements: The design maximum storage to be
provided in a detention basin shall be based on the runoff from the 100-year,
24-hour event and reservoir (also called modified puls or level pool) routing
or equal. Detention storage shall be computed using hydrograph methods as
described in this Section.
      3.   Wet Detention Basin Design:
         a.   Purpose: Wet detention basins shall be designed to remove storm
water pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing and, as much as
feasible, to be available for recreational use.
         b.   Depths: Wet basins shall be at least three feet (3') deep,
excluding nearshore banks and safety ledges. If fish habitat is to be provided,
they shall be at least ten feet (10') deep over twenty five percent (25%) of
the bottom area to prevent winter freeze-out.
         c.   Shoreline Slopes: The side slopes of wet basins at the normal
pool elevation shall not be steeper than five to one (5:1) (horizontal to
vertical).
         d.   Permanent Pool Volume: The permanent pool volume in a wet basin
at normal depth shall be equal to the runoff volume from its watershed for the
2-year event.
         e.   Inlet and Outlet Orientation: To the extent feasible, the
distance between detention inlets and outlets shall be maximized. If possible,
they should be at opposite ends of the basin.
      4.   Dry Detention Basin Design:
         a.   Purpose: In addition to the other requirements of this Chapter,
dry basins shall be designed to remove storm water pollutants, to be safe, to
be aesthetically pleasing and, as much as feasible, to be available for
multiple uses.
         b.   Drainage: Dry basins shall be designed so that eighty percent
(80%) of their bottom area shall have standing water no longer than seventy two
(72) hours for any runoff event less than the 100-year event. Underdrains
directed to the outlet control shall be used if necessary to accomplish this
requirement.
         c.   Velocity Dissipation: Velocity dissipation measures shall be
incorporated into dry basin designs to minimize erosion at inlets and outlets
and to minimize the resuspension of pollutants.
         d.   Inlet and Outlet Orientation: To the extent feasible, the
distance between detention inlets and outlets shall be maximized. If possible,
they should be at opposite ends of the basin.
   C.   Drainage System Design and Evaluation: The following criteria should be
used in evaluating and designing the drainage system. The underlying objective
is to provide capacity to pass the 10- year peak flow in the minor drainage
system and an overload flow path for flows in excess of the design capacity.
      1.   Design Methodologies: Major and minor conveyance systems for areas
up to ten (10) acres may be designed using the rational formula. The rational
formula may also be used in sizing the minor drainage system for larger sites.
Runoff hydrograph methods, as described in subsection D of this Section, must
be used for major drainage system design for all systems with greater than ten
(10) acres of drainage area and for the design of all detention basins.
      2.   Positive Drainage: Whenever practicable, all areas of the property
must be provided an overland flow path that will pass the 100-year flow at a
stage at least one foot (1') below the lowest foundation grade in the vicinity
of the flow path. Overland flow paths designed to handle flows in excess of the
minor drainage system capacity shall be provided. Drainage easements, street
ponding and flow depths shall not exceed curb heights by more than one inch
(1").
   D.   Methods for Generating Runoff Hydrographs: Runoff hydrographs shall be
developed incorporating the following assumptions of rainfall amounts and
antecedent moisture:
      1.   Rainfall: Unless a continuous simulation approach to drainage system
hydrology is used, all design rainfall events shall be based on the Illinois
State Water Survey's Bulletin 70. The first quartile point rainfall
distribution shall be used for the design and analysis of conveyance systems
with critical durations less than or equal to twelve (12) hours. The third
quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for the design and analysis
of detention basins and conveyance system with critical durations greater than
twelve (12) hours and less than or equal to twenty four (24) hours. The fourth
quartile distribution shall be used in the design and analysis of systems with
durations greater than twenty four (24) hours. The first, third and fourth
quartile distributions described by Huff are presented in Table 37 of Bulletin
70. The SCS Type II distribution may be used as an alternate to the Huff
distributions.
      2.   Antecedent Moisture: Computations of runoff hydrographs which do not
rely on a continuous accounting of antecedent moisture conditions shall assume
a conservative wet antecedent moisture condition as a minimum.
   E.   Detention in Floodplains: The placement of detention basins within the
floodplain is strongly discouraged because of questions about their reliable
operation during flood events. However, the storm water detention requirements
of this Chapter may be fulfilled by providing detention storage within flood
fringe areas on the project site, provided the following provisions are met:
      1.   Detention in Flood Fringe Areas: The placement of a detention basin
in a flood fringe area shall require compensatory storage for one and one-half
(1.5) times the volume below the base flood elevation occupied by the detention
basin, including any berms. The release from the detention storage provided
shall still be controlled consistent with the requirements of this Section. The
applicant shall demonstrate its operation for all streamflow and flood plain
backwater conditions. Excavations for compensatory storage along watercourses
shall be opposite or adjacent to the area occupied by detention. All flood
plain storage lost below the 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below
the 10-year flood elevation. All flood plain storage lost above the existing
10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10- year flood
elevation. All compensatory storage excavations shall be constructed to drain
freely and openly to the watercourse.
      2.   Detention in Floodways: Detention basins shall be placed in the
floodway only in accordance with subsection E3 of this Section.
      3.   On-Stream Detention: On-stream detention basins are discouraged but
allowable if they provide regional public benefits and if they meet the other
provisions of this Chapter with respect to water quality and control of the 2-
year and 100- year, 24-hour events from the property. Further criteria are
presented in Section 12-2-9 of this Chapter. If on-stream detention is used for
watersheds larger than one square mile, it is recommended that the applicant
use dynamic modeling to demonstrate that the design will not increase stage for
any properties upstream or downstream of the property. Also, impoundment of the
stream as part of on-stream detention:
         a.   Shall not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species which
require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for
spawning;
         b.   Shall not cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality
or stream aquatic habitat;
         c.   Shall include a design calling for gradual bank slopes,
appropriate bank stabilization measures and a pre-sedimentation basin;
         d.   Shall not involve any stream channelization or the filling of
wetlands;
         e.   Shall require the implementation of an effective nonpoint source
management program throughout the upstream watershed;
         f.   Shall not occur downstream of a wastewater discharge; and
         g.   Shall comply with 92 Illinois Administrative Code Parts 702 and
708 and the Flood Plain Ordinance of the City. 3
   F.   Drainage into Wetlands: Wetlands shall be protected from damaging
modifications and adverse changes in runoff quality and quantity associated
with land developments. In addition to the other requirements of this Chapter,
the following requirements shall be met for all developments whose drainage
flows into wetlands:
      1.   Detention in Wetlands: Existing wetlands shall not be modified for
the purposes of storm water detention unless it is demonstrated that the
existing wetland is low in quality and the proposed modifications will maintain
or improve its habitat and ability to perform beneficial functions. Existing
depressional storage in wetlands shall be maintained, and the volume of
detention storage provided to meet the requirements of this Section shall be in
addition to this existing storage.
      2.   Sediment Control: The existing wetland shall be protected during
construction by appropriate soil erosion and sediment control measures and
shall not be filled.
      3.   Alteration of Drainage Patterns: Site drainage patterns shall not be
altered to substantially decrease or increase the existing area tributary to
the wetland.
      4.   Detention/Sedimentation Basin: All runoff from the development shall
be routed through a preliminary detention/sedimentation basin designed to
capture the 2-year, 24-hour event and hold it for at least twenty four (24)
hours before being discharged to the wetland. This basin shall be constructed
before property grading begins. In addition, the drainage hierarchy defined in
Section 12-2-6 of this Chapter should be followed to minimize runoff volumes
and rates being discharged to the wetland.
      5.   Vegetated Buffer Strip: A buffer strip of at least twenty five feet
(25') in width, preferably vegetated with native plant species, shall be
maintained or restored around the periphery of the wetland.
   G.   Street, Parking Lot and Culvert Drainage:
      1.   Streets: If streets are to be used as part of the minor or major
drainage system, ponding depths shall not exceed curb heights by more than one
inch (1") and shall not remain flooded for more than eight (8) hours for any
event less than or equal to the 100-year event.
      2.   Parking Lots: The maximum storm water ponding depth in any parking
area shall not exceed six inches (6") for more than four (4) hours.
      3.   Culvert Road and Driveway Crossings: Sizing of culvert crossings
shall consider entrance and exit losses as well as tailwater conditions on the
culvert.
   H.   Infiltration Practices: To effectively reduce runoff volumes,
infiltration practices, including basins, trenches and porous pavement, should
be located on soils in hydrologic soil groups "A" or "B" as designated by the
U.S. Soil Conservation Service. Infiltration basins and trenches designed to
recharge ground water shall not be located within seventy five feet (75') of a
water supply well or a building foundation. A sediment settling basin shall be
provided to remove coarse sediment from storm water flows before they reach
infiltration basins or trenches. Storm water shall not be allowed to stand more
than seventy two (72) hours over eighty percent (80%) of a dry basin's bottom
area for the maximum design event to be ex-filtrated. The bottom of
infiltration facilities shall be a minimum of four feet (4') above seasonably
high ground water and bedrock.
   I.   Safety Considerations:
      1.   Generally: The drainage system components, especially all detention
basins, shall be designed to protect the safety of any children or adults
coming in contact with the system during runoff events.
      2.   Side Slopes: The side slopes of all detention basins at 100- year
capacity shall be as level as practicable to prevent accidental falls into the
basin and for stability and ease of maintenance. Side slopes of detention
basins and open channels shall not be steeper than three to one (3:1)
(horizontal to vertical).
      3.   Safety Ledge: All wet detention basins shall have a level safety
ledge at least four feet (4') in width, two and one-half to three feet (2.5' -
3') below the normal water depth.
      4.   Velocity: Velocities throughout the surface drainage system shall be
controlled to safe levels taking into consideration rates and depths of flow.
      5.   Overflow Structures: All storm water detention basins shall be
provided with an overflow structure capable of safely passing excess flows at a
stage at least one foot (1') below the lowest foundation grade in the vicinity
of the detention basin. The design flow rate of the overflow structure shall be
equivalent to the 100-year inflow rate.
   J.   Maintenance Consideration: The storm water drainage system shall be
designed to minimize and facilitate maintenance. Turfed sideslopes shall be
designed to allow lawnmowing equipment to easily negotiate them. Wet basins
shall be provided with alternate outflows which can be used to completely drain
the pool for sediment removal. (Pumping may be considered if drainage by
gravity is not feasible.) Pre-sedimentation basins shall be included, where
feasible, for localizing sediment deposition and removal. Access for heavy
equipment shall be provided. (Ord. 0-61-90, 11-10-90)
12-2-9: ACCOMMODATING FLOWS FROM UPSTREAM TRIBUTARY AREAS:
   A.   Generally: Storm water runoff from areas tributary to the property
shall be considered in the design of the property's drainage system. Whenever
practicable, flows from upstream areas that are not to be detained should be
routed around the basin being provided for the site being developed.
   B.   Upstream Areas Not Meeting Requirements of this Chapter:
      1.   When there are areas not meeting the storage and release rates of
this Chapter, tributary to the applicant's property, regionalized detention on
the applicant's property shall be explored by the applicant. The following
steps shall be followed:
         a.   The applicant shall compute the storage volume needed for his
property using the release rates of Section 12-2-7 of this Chapter, the
applicant's property area and the procedures described in Section 12-2-8 of
this Chapter.
         b.   Areas tributary to the applicant's property not meeting the
storage and release rate requirements of this Chapter shall be identified.
         c.   Using the areas determined in subsection B1b above plus the
applicant's property area, total storage needed for the combined properties
shall be computed.
      2.   Allowable release rates shall be computed using the combined
property areas. Storage shall be computed as described in Section 12-2-8 of
this Chapter. If tributary areas are not developed, a reasonable fully
developed land cover, based on local zoning, shall be assumed for the purpose
of computing storage.
      3.   Once the necessary combined storage is computed, the City may choose
to pay for oversizing the applicant's detention basin to accommodate the
regional flows. The applicant's responsibility will be limited to the storage
for his property as computed in subsection B1a above. If regional storage is
selected by the City, then the design produced in subsection B1c above shall be
implemented. If regional storage is rejected by the City, the applicant shall
bypass all tributary area flows around the applicant's basin whenever
practicable. If the applicant must route upstream flows through his basin and
the upstream areas exceed one square mile in size, the applicant must meet the
provisions of subsection 12-2-8E3 of this Chapter for on-stream basins.
   C.   Upstream Areas Meeting Requirements of this Chapter: When there are
areas which meet the storage and release rate requirements of this Chapter,
tributary to the applicant's property, the upstream flows shall be bypassed
around the applicant's detention basin or be routed through the applicant's
detention basin if this is the only practicable alternative. Storage needed for
the applicant's property shall still be computed as described in subsection B1a
of this Section. However, if the City decides to route tributary area flows
through an applicant's basin, the final design storm water releases shall be
based on the combined total of the applicant's property plus tributary areas.
It must be shown that at no time will the runoff rate from the applicant's
property exceed the allowable release rate for his/her property alone. (Ord. 0-
61-90, 11-10-90)
12-2-10: EARLY COMPLETION OF DETENTION FACILITIES:
Where detention, retention or depressional storage areas are to be used as part
of the drainage system for a property, they shall be constructed as the first
element of the initial earthwork program. Any eroded sediment captured in these
facilities shall be removed by the applicant before project completion in order
to maintain the design volume of the facilities. (Ord. 0-61-90, 11-10-90)
12-2-11: FEE IN LIEU OF DETENTION:
All single-family residential developments under five (5) acres in size and all
other development under one acre in size shall pay a fee of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) for each acre-foot of detention which would be required
under this Chapter rather than installing detention facilities on the property,
unless specifically directed to do otherwise by the Director of Health and
Inspectional Services. In instances where regional benefits and economies of
scale can be achieved, it will be permissible for adjacent properties to
utilize a common regional detention basin. Applicants shall have the option of
paying a fee of their proportional cost of construction of detention required
so that the City can build regional facilities, or they can jointly build the
necessary facilities themselves. (Ord. 0-61-90, 11-10-90; 1992 Code)
12-2-12: MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY:
Maintenance of storm water drainage facilities located on private property
shall be the responsibility of the owner of that property. Before a storm water
detention permit is obtained from the City, the applicant shall execute a
maintenance agreement with the City guaranteeing that the applicant and all
future owners of the property will maintain its storm water drainage system.
The maintenance agreement shall also specifically authorize representatives of
the City to enter onto the property for the purpose of inspections and
maintenance of the drainage system. Such agreement shall be recorded with the
Recorder of Deeds of Cook County. The maintenance agreement shall include a
schedule for regulate maintenance of each aspect of the property's storm water
drainage system and shall provide for access to the system for inspection by
authorized personnel of the City. The maintenance agreement shall also
stipulate that if the Director of Health and Inspectional Services of the City
or his authorized representative notifies the property owner, in writing, of
maintenance problems which require correction, the property owner shall make
such corrections within thirty (30) calendar days of such notification. If the
corrections are not made within this time period, the City may have the
necessary work completed and assess the cost to the property owner.
The City has the option of requiring a bond to be filed by the property owner
for maintenance of the storm water drainage system. (Ord. 0-61-90, 11-10-90)
12-2-13: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Inspections During Construction: General site grading shall not begin
until the Director of Health and Inspectional Services has certified, in
writing, to the applicant that any necessary detention facilities are in place
and operational. The Director of Health and Inspectional Services or his
representative will also conduct periodic inspections of the work in progress
to be certain that the drainage system is being built as designed. If any
violations of the provisions or requirements of this Chapter are noted during
such inspections, the Director of Health and Inspectional Services shall notify
the property owner, in writing, of the items needing correction. The property
owner shall have ten (10) calendar days to make such corrections unless given a
specific extension of time, in writing, by the Director of Health and
Inspectional Services. Failure to complete such corrections within the
specified time period shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
   B.   Final Inspection: Upon notification by the applicant that the drainage
system is completed, the Director of Health and Inspectional Services or his
representative shall conduct a final inspection. If the drainage system is
found to contain deficiencies which require correction, the Director of Health
and Inspectional Services or his representative shall notify the property owner
of the necessary corrections. The property owner shall correct such
deficiencies within ten (10) calendar days unless given a specific extension of
time, in writing, by the Director of Health and Inspectional Services. Failure
to make necessary corrections within the specified time period shall constitute
a violation of this Chapter.
Upon finding that the drainage system meets the provisions and requirements of
this Chapter the Director of Health and Inspectional Services shall issue, in
writing, a notice of drainage system completion to the property owner.
   C.   Routine Inspections: All privately owned drainage systems shall be
inspected by representatives of the City not less often than once per year. A
written report shall be filed of the results of any inspection and a copy sent
to the property owner detailing any problems which need correction. (Ord. 0-61-
90, 11-10-90)
12-2-14: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The administration and enforcement of this Chapter shall be the responsibility
of the Director of Health and Inspectional Services of the City or his
representatives. (Ord. 0-61-90, 11-10-90)
12-2-15:APPEALS:
All appeals to the Director of Health and Inspectional Services decisions
regarding the interpretation of this Chapter shall be heard by the City
Council. (Ord. 0-61-90, 11-10-90; 1992 Code)
12-2-16: PENALTIES:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions or requirements of this
Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day the violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 0-61-90, 11-10-90)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 1 of this Title.
2 1. See Section
  12-1-6 of this Title.
3 1. See Chapter 1 of this Title.
