OAK FOREST, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code contains:
Local legislation current through 8-12-2025; and
State legislation current through 2025 Illinois Legislative Service, Pamphlet
#1
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE: 2008-12-0208O
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF OAK FOREST,
ILLINOIS, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF OAK FOREST AND DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES.
WHEREAS, the City of Oak Forest is an Illinois municipal corporation organized
and operated under the laws of the State of Illinois; and
WHEREAS, the City of Oak Forest is a home rule municipality as defined by
Article VII of the Illinois Constitution; and
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Oak Forest
need to be updated, more efficiently arranged and classified and are
insufficient in form and substance for the complete preservation of the public
peace, health, safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the
proper conduct of its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Illinois General Assembly has empowered and authorized
municipalities to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing
ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to
incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the Oak Forest City Council has authorized a general compilation,
revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of Oak Forest of a
general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form;
and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF OAK
FOREST, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Oak Forest as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Oak Forest,
Illinois."
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
   •   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   •   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   •   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   •   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   •   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   •   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   •   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   •   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   •   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Mayor and City Council, and the Clerk of the City of Oak
Forest is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
8, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6.   If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this Ordinance
shall be held invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other
provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 7.   All Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the
extent of such conflict.
Section 8.   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication as provided by law.
ADOPTED
This 9th Day of December, 2008
APPROVED By Me
This 10th Day of December, 2008
Aldermen           Aye Nay Abstain Absent
Laura Clemons                      X
First Ward
Richard D. Simon   X
Second Ward
Diane Wolf         X
Third Ward
Chuck Toland       X
Fourth Ward
Nancy L. Hullinger X
Fifth Ward
Gregory A. Simos   X
Sixth Ward
Paul W. Wechet     X
Seventh Ward
JoAnn Kelly
Mayor
 
   JoAnn M. Kelly /s/
   JOANN KELLY, MAYOR
ATTEST:
Scott Burkhardt /s/
SCOTT BURKHARDT, CITY CLERK
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section headings
   
10.04   Rules of construction
   
10.05   Official time
   
10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Amendments to code
   
10.10   Severability
   
10.11   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Ordinances saved
   
10.16   Technical codes
   
10.17   Historical and statutory references
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification by and for the City of Oak Forest shall be designated as
the Code of Oak Forest, and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   CITY, MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. The City of Oak Forest,
irrespective of its population or legal classification.
   COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL. The Council of the City of Oak Forest.
   COUNTY. Cook County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Cook County, Illinois.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07)
   COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.
   DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT.  
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24)
   ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2)
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may
include any deputy or other person performing the duties of that officer,
either generally or in special cases.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08)
   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the day on
which the ordinance, resolution or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at any
time after that date.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17)
   HIGHWAY, ROAD or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of the
United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this state, and
all bridges thereupon.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16)
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter amended.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves, or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Oak Forest.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5.
   OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12)
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures and bodies politic and corporate, as well as individuals.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   POLICE OFFICERS. Police officers employed and in the service of the City of
Oak Forest. POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include such persons in the
employ of a city as members of the Department of Police, who are or shall
hereafter be appointed and sworn as POLICE OFFICERS.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and other interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government; the
village, city, county, state or federal governments, officers and agencies
thereof, or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly authorized
public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale
of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes CERTIFIED MAIL and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
REGISTERED MAIL.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution
of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares and other public thoroughfares.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The city code hereby adopted, and as
hereinafter modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption of new titles,
chapters or sections.
   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in § 1 of Article VII of
the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28)
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, electronic and any other mode of
representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required by law, it
shall be:
      (1)   In the proper handwriting of that person, or in case he or she is
unable to write, his or her proper mark; or
      (2)   An electronic signature as defined in the Uniform Electronic
Transactions Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act 175, §§ 1-101 et seq., except as otherwise
provided by law.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15)
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is
equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord.”
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)
§ 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference purposes
only, and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to
the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a
technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed.
      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03)
      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02)
      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day
is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or
hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the
day succeeding Saturday, Sunday or a holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday or
Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11)
   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or persons.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09)
   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction, or
when the subject matter or context of this code may be repugnant thereto.
   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Mayor and
City Council may be fully carried out.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01)
   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, in so far as they are the same as
those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions, and not as a new enactment.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2)
§ 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the city shall be as set by federal law.
§ 10.06 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment or repeal of an ordinance does not do any
of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment. The
investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the context clearly
indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was not
intended.
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of these codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a
whole.
§ 10.09 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or in any
way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections and divisions, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by the omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of ordinances and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new code of ordinances by
the City Council.
§ 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   (A)   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to
any office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
   (B)   References shall also include the designee or agent of any such
officer or office, unless the law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be
corrected, and the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced.
   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not limited
to tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the city; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this
code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the City
Council or a certain city officer or employee to make additional regulations
for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all regulations of
a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the codification and
not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.
§ 10.16 TECHNICAL CODES.
   (A)   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to such technical codes shall automatically
become a part of this code and shall be made available for public inspection by
the city.
   (B)   Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
§ 10.17 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-2-1)
      (2)   An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
   § 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      The city shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all
public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   Statutory reference:
      Freedom of Information Act, see ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this city
for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined not more
than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, § 1-2-1.1
   Limitations on penalties, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   GOVERNING BODY
         
31.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
         
32.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS AND PROGRAMS
         
33.   REVENUE AND FINANCE
CHAPTER 30: GOVERNING BODY
Section
City Council
   
30.01   Meetings
   
30.02   Presiding officer, Mayor pro tem and temporary chairperson
   
30.03   Roll call; compelling attendance of absent members
   
30.04   Quorum; order of business
   
30.05   Powers and duties of presiding officer
   
30.06   Powers and duties of members
   
30.07   Right of nonmembers to address Council
   
30.08   New business; deferment of committee reports
   
30.09   Debates
   
30.10   Call of member to order
   
30.11   Appeals from decisions of chair
   
30.12   Question of personal privilege
   
30.13   Voting
   
30.14   Special order of business
   
30.15   Enactment of ordinances and resolutions
   
30.16   Reading of motions, resolutions, ordinances, minutes and correspondence
   
30.17   Withdrawal of motions and resolutions
   
30.18   Division of questions
   
30.19   Record of motions and resolutions
   
30.20   Taking and entering votes
   
30.21   Announcement and changes of vote
   
30.22   Precedence of motions
   
30.23   Journal; minutes
   
30.24   Adoption of Robert’s Rules of Order Revised
   
30.25   Temporary suspension of rules; amendment of rules
   
30.26   Censure and expulsion of members
   
30.27   Minutes of meetings
   
30.28   Verbatim records of closed meetings
   
30.29   Style of ordinances
   
30.30   Voting
   
30.31   Approval or veto of ordinances by Mayor
   
30.32   Record of ordinances
   
30.33   Publication and display of ordinances
   
30.34   Time of taking effect; emergency measures
Composition of City Council and Elections
   
30.40   Composition of City Council; election; functions
   
30.41   Election of City Clerk, Treasurer
   
30.42   Election schedule and taking office
   
30.43   Elections; terms of office; city wards
Code of Conduct
   
30.45   Declaration of policy
   
30.46   Definitions
   
30.47   Prohibited political activities
   
30.48   Gift ban
   
30.49   Gift ban exceptions
   
30.50   Disposition of gifts
   
30.51   Prohibited personal financial interest in contracts; adoption by
reference
   
30.52   Whistle blower protection
 
   
30.99   Penalty
CITY COUNCIL
§ 30.01 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Mayor and Council shall generally be held on
the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month; however the Council will meet a
minimum of at least once a month. Each meeting shall be held in the Council
chambers of the City Hall, located at 15440 South Central Avenue. Meeting dates
and times will be scheduled at the discretion of the Council. Advanced notice
of any council meeting date ro time change will be provided to the public
through the City’s website and posting notice of such time change in the City
Clerk’s office in City Hall.
   (B)   Any regular meeting falling on a legal holiday shall be rescheduled at
the discretion of Council.
   (C)   Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by any three members of
Council by filing a written request or notice therefor with the City Clerk at
least 60 hours prior to the time specified for the meeting. At least 48 hours’
written notice of the special meeting shall be given by the City Clerk, which
notice shall specify the time and purpose of the meeting and be delivered to
each member of Council personally if he or she can be found, and if he or she
cannot be found, then by leaving a copy of the notice at the home of the
Council member in the presence of an adult member of the family of the member.
The City Clerk shall cause an affidavit showing service of the notice, as
provided in this section, to be filed inhis or her office prior to the time
fixed for the special meeting, together with a statement of compliance with the
provisions relating to notices to members of the media, as provided in the Open
Meetings Act, ILCSCh. 5, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq. (1993), as amended. Any special
meeting attended by all of the members of Council shall be a regular meeting
for the transaction of any business that may come before the meeting if all
members so agree. All meetings of Council shall be held in the City Hall,
including special and adjourned meetings, and all meetings, except executive
sessions, shall be open to the public, as required by statute.
   (D)   Committee of the Whole meetings may be scheduled when appropriate. The
Committee of the Whole format may be utilized to discuss general items of
business, or discuss legislative matters prior to placement upon the regular
meeting agenda.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.010) (Ord. 2327, §1, passed --1998; Ord. 2006-08-0050O,
passed 8-8-2006; Ord. 2010-03-0283O, passed 3-9-2010 )
§ 30.02 PRESIDING OFFICER, MAYOR PRO TEM AND TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON.
   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of Council, but he or she
shall have a vote only where state statutes or municipal ordinances require
more than a majority vote of Council, or in the event of a tie, or where one-
half of the Council members elected have voted in favor of an ordinance,
resolution or motion, even though there is no tie vote.
   (B)   During the absence or disability of the Mayor, Council shall elect one
member Mayor pro tem of Council, and he or she shall act as presiding officer
of Council. Where the absence or disability of the Mayor is to be of a very
short duration and no individual is required to be granted the powers of the
Mayor, Council shall elect one member temporary chairperson. The Mayor pro tem
or the temporary chairperson, when acting as presiding officer, shall vote on
all questions on which the vote is taken as “yeas” and “nays,” his or her name
being called last. The Mayor pro tem shall have all of the powers and duties of
the Mayor. The temporary chairperson shall have only such powers and duties as
accrue to a presiding officer.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.020)
§ 30.03 ROLL CALL; COMPELLING ATTENDANCE OF ABSENT MEMBERS.
   (A)   Each meeting of Council shall convene at the time appointed for the
meeting, as provided in §
30.01 above. The City Clerk or someone appointed to fill his or her place by
the presiding officer shall thereupon immediately call the roll of members. If
no quorum is present, Council shall not thereby stand adjourned, but the
members present shall be competent to adjourn or recess Council by a majority
vote.
   (B)   If no quorum is present and the members present wish to compel the
attendance of absent members, they themselves, or their agents, shall attempt
to communicate the call to the session personally to the absentees. Any absent
member who refuses to attend the meeting after personal notice to attend may be
fined by the members present a sum of not to exceed $25 for each occurrence.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.030)
§ 30.04 QUORUM; ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of a majority
of all Council members entitled by law to be elected.
   (B)   The order of business shall be as follows:
      (1)   Call to order by presiding officer;
      (2)   Pledge of allegiance;
      (3)   Roll call;
      (4)   Establishment of quorum;
      (5)   Establish consent calendar:
      (6)   Motion to approve consent calendar:
         (a)   Reports of commissions;
         (b)   Lists of bills to be paid;
         (c)   Approval of minutes;
         (d)   Acknowledgment of petitions and correspondence; and
         (e)   Resolutions, appointments and ordinances.
      (7)   Consideration of items removed from consent calendar (if any);
      (8)   Agenda items;
      (9)   Citizens participation;
      (10)   Unfinished business;
      (11)   New business;
      (12)   Executive session; and
      (13)   Adjournment.
   (C)   (1)   Except for matters already under discussion, no new matter shall
be brought up after 11:00 p.m.
      (2)   This provision may be waived by the majority consent of Council.
      (3)   Items on the agenda not already under discussion are automatically
tabled to the next regular meeting
(2000 Code, § 2.02.040) (Ord. 2489, § 1, passed - -2000; Ord. 2006-06-0033O,
passed 6-13-2006)
§ 30.05 POWERS AND DUTIES OF PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, may speak to
points of order in preference to other members and shall decide all questions
of order subject to appeal. If he or she refuses to allow the members of
Council to exercise their right to appeal a decision of the chair, the members
of Council may consider and pass upon the matter in spite of the chair’s
failure to grant them an appeal.
   (B)   In case of any disturbance or disorderly conduct, the presiding
officer shall have the power to require the chambers to be cleared.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.050)
§ 30.06 POWERS AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   While the presiding officer is putting a question, no member of
Council shall walk across or out of the Council chambers.
   (B)   Every member, previous to his or her speaking, making a motion or
seconding the same, shall address himself or herself to the presiding officer
and say: “Mr. Mayor,” and shall not proceed with his or her remarks until
recognized and named by the chair. He or she shall confine himself or herself
to the question under debate, avoiding personalities and refraining from
impugning the motives of any other member’s argument or vote. When two or more
members address the chair at the same time, the presiding officer shall name
the member who is first to speak. The members may, by a two-thirds vote, expel
a member for disorderly conduct. That member may not be expelled a second time
for the same offense.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.060)
§ 30.07 RIGHT OF NONMEMBERS TO ADDRESS COUNCIL.
   Except during the time allotted for public discussion and comment, no
person, other than a member of Council, shall address Council, except with the
consent of two of the members present.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.070)
§ 30.08 NEW BUSINESS; DEFERMENT OF COMMITTEE REPORTS.
   When a member of Council wishes to present a communication, petition, order,
resolution, ordinance or other original matter, he or she shall send it to the
desk of the City Clerk, who shall read such matter when reached in its proper
order. Upon the request of any two members present, any report of a committee
of Council shall be deferred for final action thereon to the next regular
meeting of Council after the report is made.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.080)
§ 30.09 DEBATES.
   (A)   No member shall speak more than twice on the same question, except by
unanimous consent, and then not until every other member desiring to speak has
had an opportunity to do so; provided, however, that the proponent of the
matter under consideration or the chairperson of the committee whose report is
under consideration, as the case may be, shall have the right to open and close
the debate.
   (B)   No member shall speak longer than five minutes at any one time, except
by consent of Council, and in closing debate on any question, as provided in
this section, the speaker shall be limited to five minutes, except by special
consent of Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.090)
§ 30.10 CALL OF MEMBER TO ORDER.
   A member of Council, when called to order by the chair, shall thereupon
discontinue speaking and take his or her seat, and the order or ruling of the
chair shall be binding and conclusive, subject only to the right of appeal.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.100)
§ 30.11 APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF CHAIR.
   (A)   Any member may appeal to Council from a ruling of the chair and, if
the appeal is seconded, the member making the appeal may briefly state his or
her reason for the same, and the chair may briefly explain his or her ruling,
but there shall be no debate on the appeal and no other member shall
participate in the discussion.
   (B)   The chair shall then put the question: “Shall the decision of the
chair be sustained?”
   (C)   If a majority of the members present vote “no,” the decision of the
chair shall be overruled; otherwise, it shall be sustained.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.110)
§ 30.12 QUESTION OF PERSONAL PRIVILEGE.
   The right of a member of Council to address Council on a question of
personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which his or her integrity,
character or motives are assailed, questioned or impugned.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.120)
§ 30.13 VOTING.
   Every member who is present when a question is stated from the chair shall
vote thereon, unless excused by Council, or unless he or she is personally
interested in the question, in which cases he or she shall not vote.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.130)
§ 30.14 SPECIAL ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   Any matter before Council may be set down as a special order of business at
a certain time, if two-thirds of the members present vote in the affirmative,
but not otherwise.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.140)
§ 30.15 ENACTMENT OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   (A)   No ordinance, resolution or other legislative enactment which involves
an expenditure of city funds will be passed and enacted without having first
been placed on the regular published agenda.
   (B)   In the event of an emergency need, the Council may immediately place a
legislative proposal on the agenda by a two-thirds vote of the Council members.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.150) (Ord. 2324, § 1, passed - -1998)
§ 30.16 READING OF MOTIONS, RESOLUTIONS, ORDINANCES, MINUTES AND
CORRESPONDENCE.
   (A)   No motion shall be put or debated in Council or in committee unless it
is seconded.
   (B)   When a motion is seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding officer
before debate, and every motion in Council, except motions of procedure, shall
be reduced to writing, if required by a member, and the member who proposed the
motion shall be entitled to the floor.
   (C)   The reading of any motion, resolution or ordinance may be waived, as
may the reading of the minutes of a previous meeting.
   (D)   Copies of correspondence received by the City Clerk or the Mayor shall
be distributed before the meeting to all members of Council.
   (E)   Correspondence received by municipal officials need not be read in
full at Council meetings unless pertinent to a matter before discussion.
   (F)   Correspondence received may be summarized to Council meetings.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.160) (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)
§ 30.17 WITHDRAWAL OF MOTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS.
   After a motion or resolution is stated by the presiding officer, it shall be
deemed to be in possession of Council, but it may be withdrawn at any time
before decision, by consent of Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.170) (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)
§ 30.18 DIVISION OF QUESTIONS.
   If any question under consideration contains several distinct propositions,
Council may, by a majority vote of the members present, divide the question.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.180) (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)
§ 30.19 RECORD OF MOTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS.
   In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered in the journal, the
names of the members moving and seconding the same shall be entered.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.190) (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)
§ 30.20 TAKING AND ENTERING VOTES.
   (A)   The “yeas” and “nays” upon any question shall be taken and entered in
the journal. When the City Clerk has commenced to call the roll of Council for
the taking of a vote by yeas and nays, all debate on the question before
Council shall be deemed concluded. During the taking of the vote, a member
shall be permitted to briefly explain his or her vote and shall respond to the
calling of his or her name by the City Clerk by answering yea or nay, as the
case may be.
   (B)   The City Clerk, when calling the roll of Council for the taking of
votes, shall always start the roll with the maker of the motion and continue
with the roll from that point (i.e., if the first seated fifth ward member
makes the motion, then he or she shall be the first called upon. The next
seated fifth ward member would be called upon second. This would continue in
order of seating until the last one called upon would be the second seated
fourth ward member).
(2000 Code, § 2.02.200) (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)
§ 30.21 ANNOUNCEMENT AND CHANGES OF VOTE.
   The result of all votes by yeas and nays shall be announced by the City
Clerk, and no vote shall be changed after the announcement.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.210) (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)
§ 30.22 PRECEDENCE OF MOTIONS.
   (A)   The following chart sets out commonly used motions in the order of
their precedence as determined by Robert’s Rules of Order.
   (B)   The main or principal motion is at the bottom in rank.
   (C)   The other motions may be made while the main motion is pending and
must be dealt with before the main motion.
   (D)   They are arranged according to rank, the highest at the top of the
list.
   (E)   Incidental motions, however, have no rank among themselves, yet take
precedence over subsidiary motions.
   (F)   When any one motion is immediately pending, the motions above it on
the list are in order and those below it are out of order.
      (1)   Privileged motions. The following motions are undebatable:
         (a)   Fix time to adjourn;
         (b)   Adjourn;
         (c)   Take recess; and
         (d)   Question of privilege.
      (2)   Incidental motions. The following motions are undebatable, except
the motion to appeal:
         (a)   Appeal;
         (b)   Division of assembly;
         (c)   Division of a question;
         (d)   Filling blanks;
         (e)   Objection;
         (f)   Parliamentary inquiry;
         (g)   Point of information;
         (h)   Point of order;
         (i)   Suspend the rules (requires a two-thirds majority vote); and
         (j)   Withdraw a motion.
      (3)   Subsidiary motions.
         (a)   The following motions are undebatable:
            1.   Lay on the table;
            2.   The previous question (close debate) (requires a two-thirds
majority vote); and
            3.   Limit or extend debate.
         (b)   The following motions are debatable:
            1.   Postpone to a definite time;
            2.   Refer to a committee;
            3.   Amend the amendment;
            4.   Amendment;
            5.   Postpone indefinitely; and
            6.   Main or principal motion.
      (4)   Miscellaneous motions. After action has been taken on a main or
principal motion, the following motions may be made:
         (a)   Take from table (undebatable) (requires two-thirds vote without
notice; majority vote with notice);
         (b)   Rescind (debatable);
         (c)   Reconsider (debatable); and
         (d)   Ratify (debatable).
      (5)   Motion to refer. A motion to refer to a standing committee shall
take precedence over a similar motion to refer to a special committee.
      (6)   Motion to amend.
         (a)   A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to
amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained.
         (b)   An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in
order, but an amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in order.
         (c)   On an amendment to “strike out and insert,” the paragraph to be
amended shall first be read as it stands, then the words proposed to be
stricken out, then those to be inserted and finally the paragraph as it will
stand if so amended shall be read.
         (d)   An amendment to the main question or another pending question
may be referred to a committee, and neither the main question nor such other
pending question shall be affected thereby.
      (7)   Filling of blanks. When a blank is to be filled, and different sums
or times are proposed, the question shall be taken first on the last sum or the
longest time.
      (8)   Motion to substitute. A substitute for any original proposition
under debate or for any pending amendment to the proposition may be
entertained, notwithstanding that at such time further amendment is admissible,
and if accepted by Council by vote, shall entirely supersede the original
proposition or amendment, as the case may be, and cut off all amendments
appertaining thereto.
      (9)   Reconsideration.
         (a)   A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time during the
same meeting, or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A motion for
reconsideration, once having been made and decided in the negative, shall not
be renewed, nor shall a motion to reconsider be reconsidered. No motion to
reconsider the approval or denial of the recommendation of an advisory body
required to hold public hearings shall be entertained, except at the same
meeting at which the original action was taken or after the matter has been
referred to the advisory body for a further hearing and recommendation.
         (b)   A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by members who
voted on the prevailing side of the question to be reconsidered, unless
otherwise provided by law. However, where a motion has received a majority vote
in the affirmative, but is declared lost solely on the ground that a greater
number of affirmative votes is required by statute for the passage or adoption
of the motion, then in such case a motion to reconsider may be made and
seconded only by those who voted in the affirmative on the question to be
reconsidered, so long as the issue presented is the same, no new information is
forthcoming and the rights of third parties have not intervened.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.220) (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)
§ 30.23 JOURNAL; MINUTES.
   The City Clerk shall keep the journal of the proceedings of Council. Within
not more than ten days after each meeting of Council, the City Clerk shall
supply to each member a typewritten copy of the proceedings.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.230) (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)
§ 30.24 ADOPTION OF ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER REVISED.
   The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in the latest published
edition of Robert’s Rules of Order Revised shall govern Council in all cases to
which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the
special rules of Council or the statutes or laws of the state.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.240) (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)
§ 30.25 TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF RULES; AMENDMENT OF RULES.
   The rules set forth in this chapter may be temporarily suspended or repealed
or amended only by a vote of two-thirds of all the members of Council entitled
by law to be elected.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.250) (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)
§ 30.26 CENSURE AND EXPULSION OF MEMBERS.
   Any member acting or appearing in a lewd or disgraceful manner, or who uses
opprobius, obscene or insulting language to or about any member of Council, or
who does not obey an order of the chair, shall be, on motion, censured by a
majority vote of the Mayor and Council and, in addition, may be fined not to
exceed $25 for each such occurrence. With the concurrence of two-thirds of the
members elected, Council may expel a member, but not a second time for the same
offense.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.260) (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)
§ 30.27 MINUTES OF MEETINGS.
   Minutes of all meetings of the City Council, whether open or closed, shall
be recorded and kept in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, ILCS
Ch. 5, Act 120, which Act, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby
incorporated into this section as if fully set forth herein.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.270) (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998; Ord. 2008-03-
0162O, passed 3-11-2008)
§ 30.28 VERBATIM RECORDS OF CLOSED MEETINGS.
   (A)   Verbatim recording.
      (1)   A verbatim record of all closed meetings of the City of Oak Forest
shall be kept in the form of an audio recording.
      (2)   The City of Oak Forest shall provide the recording device and only
one recording device will be allowed.
      (3)   Individuals shall not be allowed to bring their own recording
device to closed meetings.
   (B)   Operator of recording device.
      (1)   The City Clerk, or his or her designee if he or she is unavailable,
will be responsible for operating the recording device for all closed meetings
of the City of Oak Forest.
      (2)   Each committee of the City of Oak Forest shall designate in writing
the individual responsible for recording closed meetings and submit the
designation to the Clerk of the City of Oak Forest.
   (C)   Maintenance of tapes.
      (1)   The City Clerk shall maintain the audio tapes in a safe and secure
location under lock and key.
      (2)   Access to nonreleased tapes shall be limited to the City Clerk, or
his or her designee, unless otherwise directed in writing by the Oak Forest
City Council.
      (3)   Individuals allowed access shall sign a log indicating the date and
time they listened to a particular tape.
      (4)   Individuals allowed access shall listen to a tape only under
supervision.
      (5)   No copies of any non-released tape shall be made.
   (D)   Destruction of tapes. The verbatim record of a closed meeting may be
destroyed 18 months after the completion of the meeting if the Oak Forest City
Council approves the destruction of the particular recording and it approves
written minutes for the particular closed meeting that contain the following,
as required by § 2.06 of the Open Meetings Act:
      (1)   The date, time and place of the meeting;
      (2)   The members of the public body recorded as either present or
absent; and
      (3)   A summary of discussion on all matters proposed, deliberated or
decided, and a record of any votes taken.
   (E)   Review of tapes. The City Clerk shall, on a periodic basis, but not
less frequently than quarterly, inspect the recordings to check their quality
and completeness and report on any problems, in writing, to the Oak Forest City
Council.
   (F)   Confidentiality of recordings. Unless the Oak Forest City Council has
determined that a recording no longer requires confidential treatment, or
otherwise consents to disclosure, the verbatim recording of closed meetings
made pursuant to division (A) above shall not be either open for public
inspection or subject to discovery in any administrative proceeding other than
one brought to enforce the provisions of the Open Meetings Act. In a civil
action brought to enforce the provisions of the Open Meetings Act, a recording
will be made available to the court or in camera examination for the purpose of
determining whether a violation of the Open Meetings Act exists. In the case of
a criminal proceeding, a recording will be made available to the court for in
camera examination for the purpose of determining what provisions, if any, must
be made available to the parties for use as evidence in the prosecution.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.070) (Ord. 2819, § 1, passed - -2004)
§ 30.29 STYLE OF ORDINANCES.
   The style of all ordinances shall be: “BE IT ORDAINED BY the City Council of
the City of Oak Forest, County of Cook, State of Illinois...,” as provided by
statute.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.280)
§ 30.30 VOTING.
   (A)   The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances
and on all propositions to create any liability against the city, or for the
expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in all other cases at the
request of any member of Council. The vote shall be entered on the journal of
the proceedings, as provided by statute.
   (B)   “Yea” and “yes” shall be used interchangeably in this chapter. “Nay”
and “no” shall be used interchangeably in this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.290)
§ 30.31 APPROVAL OR VETO OF ORDINANCES BY MAYOR.
   (A)   An ordinance passed by Council, before it takes effect, shall be
deposited with the City Clerk, and if the Mayor approves it, he or she shall
sign the same, and if he or she does not approve it, he or she shall return it
to Council, with his or her objections thereto, in writing, at the next regular
meeting occurring not less than five days after the passage thereof. The veto
may extend to any one or more items or appropriations contained in any
ordinance making an appropriation, or to the entire ordinance. If the veto only
extends to a part of the ordinance, the residue thereof shall take effect and
be in force. If the Mayor fails to return any ordinance with his or her
objections thereto by the time set forth in this section, he or she shall be
deemed to have approved the ordinance and the same shall take effect
accordingly.
   (B)   Upon the return of any ordinance by the Mayor, the vote by which the
same was passed shall be reconsidered by Council. If, after the
reconsideration, two-thirds of all the members elected to Council agree, by
yeas and nays, to pass the same, it shall go into effect notwithstanding that
the Mayor may refuse to approve thereof.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.300)
§ 30.32 RECORD OF ORDINANCES.
   The City Clerk shall keep a record of all ordinances passed in an ordinance
book for that purpose.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.310)
§ 30.33 PUBLICATION AND DISPLAY OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   An ordinance imposing any penalty for a violation thereof or making
any appropriation shall be published, as required by statute, either in a
newspaper or in pamphlet form.
   (B)   If published in pamphlet form, the ordinance, in its pamphlet form,
shall be displayed for a reasonable period in a public place in the City Hall.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.320)
§ 30.34 TIME OF TAKING EFFECT; EMERGENCY MEASURES.
   (A)   No ordinance which must be published as set forth in §
30.33 above shall go into effect until ten days after it is so published,
unless a statement of the urgency of the ordinance is contained in it and it
achieves passage by a two-thirds vote of the members of Council.
   (B)   In all other cases, the ordinance shall go into effect upon the
passage thereof, as provided by statute, even though the operation of the
ordinance may not take effect until a later date.
(2000 Code, § 2.02.330)
COMPOSITION OF CITY COUNCIL AND ELECTIONS
§ 30.40 COMPOSITION OF CITY COUNCIL; ELECTION; FUNCTIONS.
   (A)   The City Council shall consist of the Mayor and seven Aldermen. One
Alderman shall be elected from each of the seven wards into which the city is
divided. The Mayor shall be elected at-large from all voters in the city.
   (B)   The seven wards of the city shall be drawn and delineated as depicted
in the most recent redistricting ordinance adopted by the City Council and
revised as provided by law. Said redistricting ordinance, upon its approval,
shall be filed with the City Clerk.
   (C)   The Mayor and City Council shall be the legislative department of the
city government, and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be
authorized by statute and by exercise of the home rule authority of the city.
(Ord. 2024–2-1019O, passed 2-27-2024)
§ 30.41 ELECTION OF CITY CLERK, TREASURER.
   The election of the City Clerk and Treasurer shall be as provided herein.
The City Clerk and City Treasurer shall serve for four-year terms.
(Ord. 2024–2-1019O, passed 2-27-2024)
§ 30.42 ELECTION SCHEDULE AND TAKING OFFICE.
   The primary and consolidated elections for the Mayor and Aldermen of the
City of Oak Forest shall be conducted pursuant to the applicable provisions of
the Illinois Municipal Code and Election Code as partisan elections. The
results of any primary or consolidated election conducted for the aforesaid
offices shall be certified and proclaimed by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting (or as otherwise
provided by law) following the official canvass and certification of the
consolidated election results. Upon passage of the resolution, the current
Mayor and City Council shall adjourn their meeting and a new meeting shall be
convened at the call of the current Mayor. At the new meeting, the newly
elected officials shall take their respective oaths and commence their terms of
office.
(Ord. 2024–2-1019O, passed 2-27-2024)
§ 30.43 ELECTIONS; TERMS OF OFFICE; CITY WARDS.
   The election of the Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer and Aldermen shall be staggered
as follows:
   (A)   The city shall be divided into seven compact and contiguous wards of
approximately equal population, consistent with relevant city internal
boundaries and applicable law and the membership of the City Council shall be
seven Aldermen, with one Alderman to be elected from each ward, for a term of
four years. The election for Alderman shall take place every two years, at the
odd-numbered year April consolidated election. The Aldermen of wards 2, 4 and 6
shall be elected at the same consolidated election. The Alderman of wards 1, 3,
5 and 7 shall be elected two years thereafter at the next odd-numbered year
April consolidated election. The Aldermen shall be elected from each of their
respective wards each for a term of four years.
   (B)   The Mayor, City Clerk and City Treasurer shall be elected with the
Aldermen of wards 2, 4 and 6 at the same consolidated election every four
years.
   (C)   At the election of Aldermen from election wards, each elector shall
vote for one Alderman from the elector's respective ward at the primary
election, if any, and at the consolidated election. At the election of the
Mayor, City Clerk and City Treasurer, one candidate for Mayor, one candidate
for City Clerk and one candidate for City Treasurer shall be voted for by each
elector at the primary election, if any, and at the consolidated election.
   (D)   The city election wards shall be designated as Ward 1, Ward 2, Ward 3,
Ward 4, Ward 5, Ward 6 and Ward 7, respectively. The seven city election wards
shall be comprised of the geographic locations described as follows:
      (1)   Ward 1. Beginning at the intersection of the municipal boundary and
Cicero Avenue at approximately Knottingwood Avenue, then easterly, northerly
and easterly along the municipal boundary to Interstate 57, then southerly and
westerly along the municipal boundary to Central Avenue and the municipal
boundary, then northerly on Central Avenue and municipal boundary to Lockwood
Avenue, then south on Lockwood Avenue to 170th Place, then east on 170th Place
to Thackery Street and Thackery Street extended, then south on Thackery Street
and Thackery Street extended to the municipal boundary, then westerly on the
municipal boundary to Lockwood Avenue and the municipal boundary, then
southerly, easterly, northerly and westerly on the municipal boundary to
Hawthorne Road extended, then northeast on Hawthorne Road extended and
Hawthorne Road to Laramie Avenue, then north on Laramie Avenue to Elmwood Road,
then east on Elmwood Road to LeClaire Avenue, then north on LeClaire Avenue to
167th Street, then east on 167th Street to Cicero Avenue, then north on Cicero
Avenue to the place of beginning.
      (2)   Ward 2. Beginning at 155th Street and Long Avenue, then south on
Long Avenue to the eastern edge of Central Park and continuing south on the
eastern edge of Central Park and the eastern edge of Central Park extended to
Long Avenue, then south on Long Avenue to 159th Street, then east on 159th
Street Cicero Avenue, then south on Cicero Avenue to 167th Street, then west on
167th Street to LeClaire Avenue, then south on LeClaire Avenue to Elmwood Road,
then west on Elmwood Road to Laramie Avenue, then south on Laramie Avenue to
Hawthorne Road, then southwest on Hawthorne Road and Hawthorne Road extended to
the municipal boundary, then west and north on the municipal boundary to
Thackery Street extended and Thackery Street, then north on Thackery Street to
170th Place, then west on 170th Place to Lockwood Avenue, then north on
Lockwood Avenue to Lockwood and the municipal boundary, then northly and
westerly on the municipal boundary to Peggy Lane, then north on Peggy Lane to
Independence Avenue, then east on Independence Avenue to Central Avenue, then
north on Central Avenue to Aldeline Place, the east on Aldeline Place to
Natalie Drive, then north on Natalie Drive to 155th Street, then east on 155th
Street to the place of the beginning.
      (3)   Ward 3. Beginning at the intersection of 151st Street and Kenton
Avenue at the municipal boundary, then south and east on the municipal boundary
to 159th Street and the municipal boundary, then west on 159th Street to Long
Avenue, then north on Long Avenue and on the eastern edge extended of Central
Park and eastern edge of Central Park to 155th Street, to Long Avenue, then
north on Long Avenue to 155th Street, then east on 155th Street to Laramie
Avenue, then north on Laramie Avenue to 151st Street, then east on 151st Street
to Laverne Avenue, then north on Laverne Avenue to 148th Street and the
municipal boundary, then east, south and east on the municipal boundary to the
place of the beginning.
      (4)   Ward 4. Beginning at the intersection of 151st Street and Laramie
Avenue, then south on Laramie Avenue to 155th Street, then west on 155th Street
to Natalie Drive, then south on Natalie Drive to Adeline Place, then west on
Adeline Place to Central Avenue, then south on Central Avenue to Independence
Avenue, then west on Independence to Reynolds Lane, then north on Reynolds Lane
to Stuart Lane, then east on Stuart Lane to Albert Drive, then north on Albert
Drive to Victoria Drive, then west on Victoria Drive to Tudor Road, then north
on Tudor Road to Rob Roy Drive, then west on Rob Roy Drive
to Las Flores Lane, then north on Las Flores Lane to Oakland Avenue, then west
on Oakland Avenue to Boca Rio Drive, then north on Boca Rio Drive to 151st
Street, then east on 151 st Street to the place of the beginning.
      (5)   Ward 5. Beginning at the intersection of 148th Street and LaVergne
Avenue and the municipal boundary, then south on LaVergne Avenue to 151st
Street, then west on 151st Street to Ridgeland Avenue and the municipal
boundary, then north on Ridgeland Avenue and the municipal boundary to 147th
Street and the municipal boundary, then westerly, northerly, easterly,
southerly, and easterly on the municipal boundary to Central Avenue and the
municipal boundary, then north on Central Avenue and the municipal boundary,
and then east, south, and easterly on the municipal boundary to the place of
the beginning.
      (6)   Ward 6. Beginning at Forest View Drive and Boca Rio Drive, then
south on Boca Rio Drive to Oakland Avenue, then east on Oakland Drive to Las
Flores Lane, then south Las Flores Lance to Rob Roy Drive, then east on Rob Roy
Drive to Tudor Drive, then south on Tudor Drive to Victoria Drive, then east on
Victoria Drive to Albert Drive, then south on Albert Drive to Stuart Lane, then
west on Stuart Lane to Reynolds Lane, then south on Reynolds Lane to
Independence Avenue, then east on Independence Avenue to Peggy Lane, then south
on Peggy Lane to 159th Street and the municipal boundary, then west on 159th
Street and the municipal boundary to Ridgeland Avenue, then north on Ridgeland
Avenue to Catalina Avenue, then east on Catalina Avenue to Las Robles Street,
then north on Las Robles Street to Rio Verde Avenue, then east on Rio Verde
Avenue to Alameda Avenue, then north on Alameda Avenue to Arroyo Drive and
Forest View Drive, then east on Forest View Drive to the place of the
beginning.
      (7)   Ward 7. Beginning at 151st Street and Boca Rio Drive, then south on
Boca Rio Drive to Forest View Drive, then west on Forest View Drive to Alameda
Avenue and Arroyo Drive, then south on Alameda Avenue to Rio Verde Avenue, then
west on Rio Verde Avenue to Las Robles Street, then south on Las Robles Street
to Catalina Avenue, then west on Catalina Avenue to Ridgeland Avenue, then
south on Ridgeland Avenue to 159th Street and the municipal boundary, then west
on 159th Street and the municipal boundary to Oak Park Avenue and the municipal
boundary, then north, west, north and east on the municipal boundary to 151st
Street and the municipal boundary at Ridgeland Avenue, then east on 151 st
Street to the place of the beginning.
   (E)   All streets or other geographic features referenced in division (D)
above are those that are so shown on the maps published by the United States
Bureau of the Census for the 2020 census.
   (F)   Any part of the city that has not been described as included in one of
the wards set forth in division (D) above shall be included within the ward
that:
      (1)   Is contiguous to the part; and
      (2)   Contains the least population of all wards contiguous to the part
according to the 2020 census.
   (G)   If any part of the city is described in division (D) above as being in
more than one ward, said part shall be included within the ward that:
      (1)   Is one of the wards in which that part is described in division (D)
above;
      (2)   Is contiguous to that part; and
      (3)   Contains the least population according to the 2020 census.
   (H)   If any part of the city:
      (1)   Is described in division (D) above as being in one ward; and
      (2)   Is entirely surrounded by another ward;
      That part shall be incorporated into the ward that surrounds the part.
   (I)   If any part of the city:
      (1)   Is described in division (D) above as being in one ward; and
      (2)   Is not contiguous to another part of that ward;
      That part shall be included within the contiguous ward that contains the
least population according to the 2020 census.
   (J)   Generally, the centerline of the identified right-of-way in a
redistricting ordinance shall be the boundary line unless otherwise noted.
   (K)   Property annexed into the city following the adoption of a
redistricting ordinance shall, upon annexation and without further action by
the City Council be made a part of the adjacent or surrounding ward, provided
that whenever two or more wards surround or are contiguous with the annexed
territory, the City Council shall provide as part of the ordinance annexing the
territory, what ward or wards the territory shall be made a part of.
   (L)   Should the City Council fail to so designate the ward upon annexation,
by default the annexed territory shall become part of that contiguous ward
which has the smallest overall population.
   (M)   Elections for municipal officers in the city shall otherwise be held
as is provided by statute, and at the time prescribed by statute.
(Ord. 2024–2-1019O, passed 2-27-2024)
CODE OF CONDUCT
§ 30.45 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city that in all cases its elected and
appointed officers and employees perform their duties for the benefit of the
citizens of the city.
   (B)   They shall conduct the affairs of the city with integrity and
impartiality, without allowing prejudice, favoritism or the opportunity for
personal gain to influence their decisions or actions or to interfere with
serving the public interest.
   (C)   Continuing observance of this policy is essential to maintaining the
public trust necessary for good government. This subchapter establishes
guidelines for an ethical standard of conduct for those to whom it applies.
(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)
§ 30.46 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE. Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination or election of Presidential or Vice
Presidential electors, but does not include activities:
      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative
or administrative action;
      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   CANDIDATE. A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a regular election, as defined in § 1-3 of the Election Code, ILCS Ch. 10,
Act 5, § 1-3.
   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING. Has the same meaning as that term is defined in § 3
of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act 315, § 3.
   COMPENSATED TIME.  With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of §§
30.45 through
30.52, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer is on premises
under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF. Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   CONTRIBUTION. Has the same meaning as that term is defined in § 9-1.4 of the
Election Code, ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-1.4.
   EMPLOYEE. A person employed by the City of Oak Forest, whether on a full-
time or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to
the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of
how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent
contractor.
   EMPLOYER. The City of Oak Forest.
   GIFT. Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
   LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Any period during which an employee does not receive:
      (1)   Compensation for employment;
      (2)   Service credit towards pension benefits; and
      (3)   Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   OFFICER. Any person holding any elected or appointed office of the city
created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether compensation is
provided. The terms OFFICIAL and OFFICER are used interchangeably in this
subchapter and shall have the same meaning.
   POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:
      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative
or administrative action;
      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
      (1)   Preparing for, organizing or participating in any political
meeting, political rally, political demonstration or other political event.
      (2)   Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase
of, selling, distributing or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting or other political event.
      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document
or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
      (4)   Planning, conducting or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters
in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      (6)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office
in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
      (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
      (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
      (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
      (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      (14)   Serving as a delegate, alternate or proxy to a political party
convention.
      (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE. Any person or entity who:
      (1)   Is seeking official action by either an officer or an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
      (2)   Does business or seeks to do business with either the officer or
employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
      (3)   Conducts activities regulated either an officer or by an employee
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
      (4)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance
or non-performance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)
§ 30.47 PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the City of
Oak Forest in connection with any prohibited political activity.
   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity:
      (1)   As part of that officer or employee’s duties;
      (2)   As a condition of employment; or
      (3)   During any compensated time off, including holidays, vacation or
other personal time off.
   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by §§
30.45 through
30.52.
   (E)   No person either in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or in a position the salary for which is paid
in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the Federal
Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to grant-
in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club.
(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)
§ 30.48 GIFT BAN.
   No officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living
with any officer or employee, shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift
from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited
by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a
gift that violates this section, except as otherwise permitted in §
30.49 below.
(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008) Penalty, see §
30.99
§ 30.49 GIFT BAN EXCEPTIONS.
   Section
30.48 above does not apply to the following:
   (A)   Opportunities, benefits and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public;
   (B)   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family, pays the fair market value;
   (C)   Any contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code;
   (D)   Any activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a
political organization or candidate;
   (E)   Educational materials and missions;
   (F)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business;
   (G)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the officer or
employee as a first cousin or closer, including, but not limited to
grandparents, grandchildren, immediate family in-laws, immediate step-families,
and the individual’s fiancé or fiancée;
   (H)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the officer or employee, spouse or immediate family member
living with the officer or employee has reason to believe that, under the
totality of the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official
position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate
family member, rather than because of the friendship. In determining whether a
gift is provided on the basis of friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, including the history of the
relationship, whether any previous gifts of comparable value had been exchanged
between the individuals in question, whether the recipient is aware whether the
gift giver paid for the gift personally or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift, or whether the recipient is aware that the gift
giver gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their
spouses or immediate family members;
   (I)   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on a single
calendar day, provided that the food or refreshments are either consumed on the
premises from which they were purchased or prepared, or on the premises to
which the items were catered or delivered;
   (J)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances;
   (K)   Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts, including those gifts
given to an officer or employee from another officer or employee or any gifts
given by an officer or employee of another governmental entity;
   (L)   Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death; or
   (M)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar
year having a cumulative total of less than $100.
(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)
§ 30.50 DISPOSITION OF GIFTS.
   An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member
living with the officer or employee, does not violate §§
30.45 through
30.52 if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a
prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its
value to an appropriate 501(c)(3) tax-exempt charitable organization.
(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)
§ 30.51 PROHIBITED PERSONAL FINANCIAL INTEREST IN CONTRACTS; ADOPTION BY
REFERENCE.
   The regulations and exceptions enumerated in § 3 of the Public Officer
Prohibited Activities Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 105, § 3, governing prohibited
pecuniary interests in contracts, are hereby adopted in full by reference and
made applicable to the officers of the City of Oak Forest.
(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)
§ 30.52 WHISTLE BLOWER PROTECTION.
   (A)   No complainant, or employee acting on behalf of a complainant shall be
discharged, threatened or otherwise discriminated against regarding
compensation, terms, conditions, location or privileges of employment when the
complainant, or employee acting on behalf of the complainant, reports; or is
about to report, verbally or in writing, a violation or suspected violation of
this subchapter, or when the complainant is requested to participate in an
investigation, hearing or inquiry held pursuant to this subchapter or in any
related court action.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to a complainant, or employee acting on
behalf of a complainant, who knowingly makes a false report.
(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)
§ 30.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of §
30.47 may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other
than a penitentiary for a period less than one year, and may be fined in an
amount not to exceed $2,500.
      (2)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of §§
30.48 through
30.50 may be punished by a fine greater than $1,000 but less than $5,000.
      (3)   Any person who intentionally violates any provision of §
30.51 is guilty of a Class 4 felony and any office or official position held by
any person so convicted shall become vacant.
      (4)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of §§
30.45 through
30.52 to local enforcement authorities, the State’s Attorney, City Attorney or
other law enforcement official, may be punished by a term of incarceration in a
penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of less than one year,
and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
      (5)   A violation of §
30.47 shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney for the City of
Oak Forest by filing in the circuit court information, or sworn complaint,
charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules
of criminal procedure.
      (6)   A violation of §§
30.48 through
30.50 may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an attorney for the City
of Oak Forest, or using existing administrative adjudication procedures.
      (7)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of §§
30.45 through
30.52 is subject to discipline or discharge, at the discretion of the corporate
authorities. If the violator is a member of the corporate authorities, he or
she must recuse himself or herself from any deliberations on the matter.
(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
Officers and Employees Generally
   
31.001   Nondiscrimination and affirmative action
   
31.002   Information regarding elective offices
   
31.003   Mayor-nominated appointments
   
31.004   Oath of office
   
31.005   Bonds
   
31.006   Access to records; reports from officers
   
31.007   Successors in office
   
31.008   General duties of city officers
   
31.009   Compensation
   
31.010   Deferred compensation
   
31.011   Use of seat belts by city employees
   
31.012   Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
   
31.013   Retirement incentive bonus
   
31.014   Sexual harassment policy
   
31.015   Mayor as Liquor Control Commissioner; review and appeal
   
31.016   Mayoral authority to declare a state of emergency
City Administrator
   
31.030   Establishment of position, compensation, and bond
   
31.031   Removal and severance pay
   
31.032   Resignation and severance pay
   
31.033   Vacating of position
   
31.034   Responsibilities, powers and duties
   
31.035   Continuity of programs and policies
   
31.036    Hearing Officer for the purpose of the Public Safety Employee
Benefits Act
   
31.037   Superior authority of Mayor
City Clerk
   
31.050   Bond
   
31.051   Keeper of corporate seal; records
   
31.052   Record of ordinances
   
31.053   Duties
   
31.054   Deputy
   
31.055   Register of dogs; license book
   
31.056   Filing and preservation of records
   
31.057   Acting clerk
   
31.058   Clerk as Business License Commissioner
City Treasurer
   
31.070   Bond
   
31.071   Term of office
   
31.072   Compensation
   
31.073   Accounts; warrants
   
31.074   Books; separate accounts for funds and appropriations
   
31.075   Special assessments
   
31.076   Council approval required before payment or transfer of money
   
31.077   Reports
   
31.078   Cancellation of warrants; documentation of expenditures
   
31.079   Register of warrants
   
31.080   Records
   
31.081   Balancing of accounts
   
31.082   Depository banks
   
31.083   Responsibilities upon expiration of term of office
   
31.084   Misuse of funds; removal from office
Finance Director
   
31.095   Establishment of position; appointment, status and compensation
   
31.096   Duties
   
31.097   Chain of command
City Collector
   
31.110   Establishment of office
   
31.111   Duties
   
31.112   City Clerk to be City Collector
   
31.113   Compensation
City Attorney
   
31.125   Appointment and term of office; removal
   
31.126   Compensation; duties
   
31.127   Special counsel
City Health Inspector
   
31.140   Position of Health Inspector created
   
31.141   Appointment of City Health Inspectors
   
31.142   General duties of Health Inspectors
   
31.143   Regulation; adoption of code
   
31.144   Compliance procedures
   
31.145   License required; application
   
31.146   License fee
   
31.147   Issuance of permit, license or certificate
   
31.148   Suspension or denial of permit, license or certificate
   
31.149   Revocation of permit, license or certificate
   
31.150   Service of notices
   
31.151   Hearings
   
31.152   Appeals
   
31.153   Inspection frequency
   
31.154   Access
   
31.155   Report of inspections
   
31.156   Correction of violations
   
31.157   Examination and condemnation of food
   
31.158   Submission of plans
   
31.159   Procedure when infection is suspected
   
31.160   Reinspection costs
   
31.161   Conditional permit, license or certificate
Taxpayer Advocate
   
31.205   Office created
   
31.206   Qualifications for office
   
31.207   Nonpartisan office
   
31.208   Powers and duties
   
31.209   Prohibition of private payment or charge
   
31.210   Expenses
Human Resources Manager
   
31.220   Establishment of position
   
31.221   Duties
   
31.222   Compensation
   
31.223   Chain of command
Network Administrator
   
31.225   Establishment of position
   
31.226   Duties
   
31.227   Compensation
   
31.228   Chain of command
City Historian
   
31.240   Establishment
   
31.241   Duties of City Historian
   
31.999   Penalty
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
§ 31.001 NONDISCRIMINATION AND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.
   The city will comply with Title VI of the United States Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Pub. Law No. 88-352), as amended (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.), and the city
will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment with the
city because of race, creed, color, age, sex or national origin. The city will
take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that
employees are treated during employment, without regard to their race, creed,
color, age, sex or national origin. That action shall include, but not be
limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer;
recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or
other forms of compensation; and selection for training, including
apprenticeship.
(2000 Code, § 2.22.010)
§ 31.002 INFORMATION REGARDING ELECTIVE OFFICES.
   The following information shall be made available by the City Clerk’s office
to any resident of the city who is running for an elective municipal office
within the city:
   (A)   Photostatic copies of Illinois Compiled Statutes which pertain to
election laws;
   (B)   Certificates of nomination and nomination papers; and
   (C)   A letter signed by the City Clerk informing the resident of the city
of the number of signatures required on nomination papers for each elective
office.
(2000 Code, § 2.22.020)
§ 31.003 MAYOR-NOMINATED APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   A mayoral nominee for appointment failing to receive a majority vote
of all elected aldermen may serve as a temporary appointment for a period of 30
days.
   (B)   At the expiration of this 30-day period, the Mayor may resubmit the
same nominee for appointment. If the nominee again fails to receive a majority
vote of all elected aldermen, the nominee will remain in his or her position
for a second 30-day period.
   (C)   At the expiration of the second 30-day period, the Mayor must submit a
new name for consideration by Council.
   (D)   No temporary appointment of any one person shall be made more than
twice in any one fiscal year.
(2000 Code, § 2.22.030)
§ 31.004 OATH OF OFFICE.
   All elected or appointed officers of the city shall, before entering upon
the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe to the following
oath:
      I _______ do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support, protect and
defend the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, the Codes and Ordinances of the City of Oak Forest, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion, and that I will faithfully discharge
the duties of the office of _______ for the City of Oak Forest according to the
best of my abilities.
(2000 Code, § 2.22.040) (Am. Ord. 2017-04-0643O, passed 4-25-2017)
§ 31.005 BONDS.
   (A)   All official bonds given by the officers of the city shall have two or
more sureties, shall be for such sum as has been, in each case, ordered by the
Mayor and Council and shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the
duties of the officer giving the bond and the payment of all public moneys
received by him or her, according to law, and on compliance with all
ordinances, resolutions and orders of Council. No officer shall be accepted as
a surety on any bond. Each bond shall be in a form and with the such sureties
as have been approved by the Mayor and Council.
   (B)   Before entering upon the duties of an office, all officers of the city
shall post a bond as required in division (A) above. If any officer does not
take the oath required and does not present the bond to the City Clerk within
ten days after notification by the City Clerk of his or her election or
appointment and of the necessity of taking the oath and giving the bond, his or
her office may be declared vacant. The bond, however, if not approved by the
Mayor and Council, shall, when presented to the City Clerk, be received by the
City Clerk subject to the approval thereof by the Mayor and Council. If the
Mayor and Council, at their next regular meeting, do not approve the bond, the
City Clerk shall immediately notify the officer filing the bond of the
disapproval thereof and of the changes required therein. If a new bond is not
filed within ten days after the notification, complying with those
requirements, the office of the principal on the bond may be declared vacant by
the Mayor and Council.
   (C)   No bond shall be required of Council members. The bond of the City
Clerk shall be filed with the City Treasurer. The bonds of all other officers
shall be filed with the City Clerk. Those bonds may provide that the obligation
of the sureties shall not extend to any loss sustained by the insolvency,
failure or closing of any bank organized and operating either under the laws of
the State or of the United States wherein the officer has placed funds in his
or her custody, if the bank has been approved by the corporate authorities as a
depository for those funds.
(2000 Code, § 2.22.050)
§ 31.006 ACCESS TO RECORDS; REPORTS FROM OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Mayor or any member of Council shall, at any time, if desired,
have free access to and the right to examine all books, papers, vouchers,
warrants, entries or accounts of each and every officer.
   (B)   Upon a written resolution adopted by Council, the Mayor may demand
from any officer a written report on any matter designated in the resolution
which is within the scope of the duties of the officer, within the time set
forth in the resolution, or within such further time as may be allowed by the
Mayor.
(2000 Code, § 2.22.060)
§ 31.007 SUCCESSORS IN OFFICE.
   Any city officer whose term of office has expired shall, within five days
after notification and request by the City Clerk, deliver to his or her
successor in office all books, property and effects of every description
belonging to or pertaining to the city or to the office.
(2000 Code, § 2.22.070)
§ 31.008 GENERAL DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   Each officer of the city shall perform such other and further duties,
besides the specific ones set forth in these codified ordinances, that may be
imposed upon him or her by law, and shall be subject to other rules and
regulations as Council may from time to time establish.
(2000 Code, § 2.22.080)
§ 31.009 COMPENSATION.
   Council shall establish the compensation of the various officers and
employees of the city, from time to time, except as may be otherwise provided
by state law.
(2000 Code, § 2.22.090)
§ 31.010 DEFERRED COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The city adopts a deferred compensation plan and appoints the ICMA
Retirement Corporation to serve as administrator thereunder.
   (B)   The city executes the ICMA retirement trust, adopts the trust
agreement, appoints the ICMA Retirement Corporation as trustee thereunder and
directs the corporation, as trustee, to invest all funds held under the
deferred compensation plan through the retirement trust as soon as is
practicable.
   (C)   The City Treasurer shall be the coordinator for this program, shall
receive necessary reports, notices and the like from the corporation as
administrator, and shall cast, on behalf of the city, any required vote under
the program. Administrative duties to carry out the plan may be assigned to
appropriate departments of the city.
(2000 Code, § 2.22.100)
§ 31.011 USE OF SEAT BELTS BY CITY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   While operating or riding in the front seat of a private vehicle on
official business for the city, or a municipal vehicle, all municipal employees
shall use a safety belt restraining system in the manner prescribed by the
manufacturer, in compliance with the Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 12-603.1.
   (B)   This policy shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Persons unable to use the safety belt system for medical or
physical reasons, as evidenced by a physician’s statement;
      (2)   Persons occupying a seating position or a vehicle not equipped with
a safety belt assembly;
      (3)   Persons operating a motor vehicle in reverse; or
      (4)   Persons operating a motor vehicle with a model year prior to 1965.
(2000 Code, § 2.22.110) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed - -1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed - -1999)
§ 31.012 ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND.
   (A)   The Mayor and Council elect that the municipality participate in the
Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, effective January 1, 1962.
   (B)   The Mayor and Council elect to exclude from participation in the fund
all officials and employees in positions normally requiring performance of duty
for less than 1,000 hours per year. This exclusion shall apply only to
officials and employees who first occupy offices or positions under the fund
after adoption of the resolution codified in this section.
   (C)   Employee contributions to the fund shall be paid by the city on behalf
of all of the employees enrolled in the fund. The payment shall be made by
reducing the amount of the gross earnings payable to employees by the amount of
the contributions and making payment of this amount directly to the fund.
(2000 Code, § 2.22.120)
§ 31.013 RETIREMENT INCENTIVE BONUS.
   (A)   Qualifications. Each full- time employee who has qualified for a
pension under the terms of his or her respective service, Police Department or
Fire Department, with at least 20 years of active duty service and has reached
50 years of age, shall be eligible for the retirement incentive bonus program.
   (B)   Date and method of exercise.
      (1)   Any qualified employee shall exercise his or her option to invoke
the retirement incentive bonus program at any time after becoming qualified.
Only one such lifetime election and benefit is available to a qualified
employee.
      (2)   The method of exercise shall be in writing. Three copies shall be
served. One copy shall be delivered to the department head. One copy shall be
delivered to the City Treasurer. One copy shall be delivered to the respective
pension board. Delivery may be done either by personal service or by mailing a
copy to the individuals. The date of posting the mail shall be the operative
date of service.
      (3)   At present the fiscal year of the city is May 1 through April 30.
This may be changed by the City Council as otherwise allowed by law.
   (C)   Date of retirement. Any full-time employee may retire at any time
following the exercise of the option to retire.
   (D)   Date of receipt of incentive.
      (1)   Any full-time employee who is eligible for and has exercised his or
her option to retire shall receive his or her incentive payment minus all legal
deductions within 60 days of the date of his or her respective retirement.
      (2)   As an alternative method of payment, the employee may request the
incentive bonus to be paid over a period of 12 months in equal installments.
      (3)   This election must be made at the date of the exercise of the
options to retire.
   (E)   Incentive amount.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   Any full-time Police Department employee will be entitled to an
incentive amount in the amount equal to 55% of an officer's annual salary and
58% of a sergeant's or higher ranking officer's annual salary. Any full-time
Fire Department employee will be entitled to an incentive amount in the amount
equal to 59% of a firefighter's annual salary, 60% of an engineer's annual
salary and 63% of a lieutenant's or higher ranking firefighter's annual salary.
         (b)   The employee will be entitled to the following percentages of
the above-calculated amount, depending on the year following eligibility in
which retirement actually occurs:
Percentage Year of Eligibility
Percentage Year of Eligibility
100        First
90         Second
80         Third
70         Fourth
60         Fifth
50         Sixth
40         Seventh
30         Eighth
20         Ninth
10         Tenth
 
      (2)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         ANNUAL SALARY. The salary of the employee as reflected in last year's
budget. In the event there are any retroactive salary raises allowed, these
amounts shall be included in setting the annual salary. It expressly does not
include incentive overtime pay, worker's compensation permanent partial
disability benefits or other extraordinary payments.
   (F)   Pension rights. No additional pension rights are herein created.
(2000 Code, § 2.22.130) (Am. Ord. 2011-08- 0351O, passed 8-23-2011; Am. Ord.
2020-06- 0795O, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2025-04-1078O, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 31.014 SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY.
   (A)   Intent; sexual harassment defined; findings.
      (1)   The city is committed to maintaining a work environment that
encourages and fosters appropriate conduct among employees and respect for
individual values and sensibilities. Accordingly, the city intends to enforce
this sexual harassment policy at all levels within the work place in order to
create an environment free from discrimination of any kind, including sexual
harassment.
      (2)   Sexual harassment, according to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission and the State Department of Human Rights, and for the purposes of
this policy, consists of unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors
or other verbal, nonverbal or physical acts of a sexual or sex-based nature,
where:
         (a)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of an individual’s employment;
         (b)   An employment decision affecting an employee is based on that
individual’s acceptance or rejection of the conduct; or
         (c)   The conduct interferes with an individual’s work performance or
creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment.
      (3)   Sexual harassment can occur between men and women or members of the
same gender. This behavior is unacceptable in the work place itself and in
other work-related settings, such as business trips, court appearances and
business-related social events.
      (4)   Sexual harassment affects the victim and other employees as well.
Each incident of harassment contributes to a general atmosphere in which
everyone suffers the consequences. Sexually-oriented acts or sex-based conduct
has no legitimate business purpose. Where the conduct is directed by a
supervisor (or someone in a management position) toward a subordinate, the
former will be held to a higher standard of accountability because of the
degree of control and influence he or she has or is perceived to have over the
employment conditions and benefits of the subordinate.
   (B)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   Prohibited acts of sexual harassment can take a variety of forms,
ranging from subtle pressure for sexual activity or contact to physical
contact. At times the offender may be unaware that his or her conduct is
offensive or harassing to others. Examples of conduct that could be considered
sexual harassment include:
         (a)   Persistent or repeated unwelcome flirting, pressure for dates,
sexual comments or touching;
         (b)   Sexually suggestive jokes, gestures or sounds directed toward
another, or sexually oriented or degrading comments about another;
         (c)   Preferential treatment of an employee, or a promise of
preferential treatment to an employee, in exchange for dates or sexual conduct,
or the denial or threat of denial of employment, benefits or advancement for
refusal to consent to sexual advances;
         (d)   The open display of sexually-oriented pictures, posters or other
material offensive to others; and
         (e)   Retaliation against an individual for reporting or complaining
about sexually harassing conduct.
      (2)   It is unlawful to retaliate in any way against anyone who has
complained about sexual harassment or discrimination, whether that concern
relates to the harassment of or discrimination against the individual raising
the concern or against another individual.
   (C)   Application of policy; reports. This policy covers all employees and
officers of the city. The city will not tolerate, condone or allow sexual
harassment, whether engaged in by fellow employees, supervisors, associates or
partners, or by outside clients or other nonemployees who conduct business with
the city. The city supports and encourages the reporting of all incidents of
sexual harassment, regardless of who the offender may be, and will promptly
investigate all reported incidents. Where the alleged offender is not an
employee or officer of the city, the city administration, in consultation with
the complainant, will review the complaint and make every effort to identify a
reasonable remedy if sexual harassment has been confirmed.
   (D)   Complaint process. Though the city encourages individuals who believe
that they are being harassed to firmly and promptly notify the offender that
his or her behavior is unwelcome, the city also recognizes that power and
status disparities between an alleged harasser and a target may make a
confrontation impossible. In the event that the informal, direct communication
between individuals is either ineffective or impossible, or even when the
communication has occurred, the following steps shall be taken to report a
sexual harassment complaint:
      (1)   Reporting of incidents. All employees are urged to report any
suspected sexual harassment to their department head, except if that person is
the individual accused of harassment. In that case, the complaint shall be
reported to the Mayor or an alderman. If the victim prefers to report the
suspected harassment to someone of the opposite gender from that of the
suspected harasser, the complaint can be reported to any other elected or
appointed individual in a position of authority. The report may be made
initially either orally or in writing, but reports made orally must be reduced
to writing before an investigation can be initiated and a resolution achieved.
      (2)   Investigation of complaints. When a complaint has been reduced to
writing, the individual informed pursuant to division (D)(1) above will
initiate an investigation of the suspected sexual harassment within five
working days of notification. The city representative receiving the complaint
shall designate another official or employee to assist him or her in the
investigation. If any of those individuals is the subject of the investigation,
the investigation will be conducted by the Mayor. The investigation will
include an interview with the employee who made the initial report, the person
towards whom the suspected harassment was directed and the individual accused
of the harassment. Any other person who may have information regarding the
alleged sexual harassment may also be interviewed.
      (3)   Reports. The person responsible for investigating the complaint
shall prepare a written report within ten working days of his or her
notification of the suspected harassment, unless extenuating circumstances
prevent him or her from doing so. The report shall include a finding that
sexual harassment occurred, that sexual harassment did not occur or that there
is inconclusive evidence as to whether or not sexual harassment occurred. A
copy of the report will be given to the employee who made the initial report,
the employee to whom the suspected harassment was directed and the individual
accused of the harassment.
      (4)   Records: confidentiality. Employees who report incidents of sexual
harassment are encouraged to keep written notes in order to accurately record
the offensive conduct. Every effort shall be made to keep all matters related
to the investigation and various reports confidential. In the event of a
lawsuit, however, the city advises that records that it maintains and that the
complainant maintains may not be considered privileged from disclosure. Written
records will be maintained for a period of time as required by the Local
Records Act.
      (5)   Time frame for reporting of complaints. The city encourages a
prompt reporting of complaints so that rapid response and appropriate action
may be taken. However, because of the sensitivity of these problems and because
of the emotional toll the misconduct may have on the individual, no limited
time frame will be instituted for reporting sexual harassment complaints.
Delayed reporting of complaints will not in and of itself preclude the city
from taking remedial action.
      (6)   Protection against retaliation. The city will not in any way
retaliate against an individual who makes a report of sexual harassment, nor
permit any officer or employee to do so. Retaliation is a serious violation of
this policy and shall be reported immediately. Any person found to have
retaliated against another individual for reporting sexual harassment will be
subject to the same disciplinary action provided for sexual harassment
offenders.
      (7)   Appeals. If a party directly involved in a sexual harassment
investigation is dissatisfied with the outcome or resolution, that individual
has the right to appeal the decision. The dissatisfied party shall submit his
or her written comments in a timely manner to Council.
   (E)   Disciplinary action.
      (1)   Disciplinary action will be taken against any employee found to
have engaged in the sexual harassment of any other employee. The extent of
sanctions may depend, in part, upon the length and conditions of employment of
the particular employee, the nature of the offense and the limitations of state
law and union contracts. The city has the right to apply any sanction or
combination of sanctions, up to and including termination, to deal with
unreasonable conduct or discrimination.
      (2)   Where a hostile work environment has been found to exist, the city
will take all reasonable steps to eliminate the conduct creating such an
environment. If an investigation results in a finding that the complainant
falsely accused another of sexual harassment, knowingly or in a malicious
manner, the complainant will be subject to appropriate sanctions, including the
possibility of termination.
   (F)   Policy not contractual; amendments. This policy is not intended as a
contractual obligation. The city reserves the right to amend the policy from
time to time.
(2000 Code, § 2.22.140)
§ 31.015 MAYOR AS LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER; REVIEW AND APPEAL.
   (A)   Unless and until otherwise provided by Council, the Mayor shall be the
Liquor Control Commissioner of and for the city.
   (B)   Effective upon the passage of the resolution codified in this section,
all reviews or appeals of the actions or orders of the Liquor Control
Commissioner shall be made by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission on the
official record made before the Liquor Control Commissioner, as provided by
law.
(2000 Code, § 2.22.150)
§ 31.016 MAYORAL AUTHORITY TO DECLARE A STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to render a declaration of a state of
emergency within the City of Oak Forest based on the following findings and
supporting facts:
      (1)   That any type of emergency, natural disaster or catastrophe which
will likely cause damage, injury, losses, hardship or suffering to the
community or its residents, which can be construed broadly to include disease
epidemics and other public health emergencies, is imminent or has occurred.
      (2)   That the emergency is severe enough to require the declaration of
emergency in order to supplement local resources in preventing loss of life or
injury, alleviating damages, loss, hardship or suffering or to necessitate
measures to be taken, including the identification of any applicable
procedures, rules or regulations that will be waived or suspended, during the
emergency.
   (B)   The exercise of these powers shall be based upon a statement, signed
under oath by the Mayor, finding that the standards herein which form the basis
for such a declaration have been met, along with those facts which substantiate
such a finding and declaring that a state of emergency exists.
   (C)   This written declaration shall be filed with the Clerk of the
municipality as soon as practicable.
   (D)   Any state of emergency declared pursuant to this authority shall
expire no later than the adjournment of the first regular meeting of the
corporate authorities after the state of emergency has been declared.
   (E)   A declaration of emergency pursuant to this authority may not suspend
in any way the rights of residents of the City of Oak Forest under the Illinois
or United States Constitutions.
(Ord. 2020-03-0786O, passed 3-26-2020)
Cross-reference:
   Civil Emergencies, see
Ch. 93.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
§ 31.030 ESTABLISHMENT OF POSITION, COMPENSATION, AND BOND.
   (A)   Establishment. There is established in and for the city the position
of City Administrator, which office shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council. He/she shall be chosen on the basis of
their operative and administrative qualifications with special reference to
their actual experience in, or his/her knowledge of, accepted practice to the
duties of their office herein set forth. Such appointment shall be for an
indefinite period as provided by law.
   (B)   Compensation. The City Administrator shall receive compensation as
determined from time to time by the Mayor with the consent of Council. The
compensation shall include, at a minimum, sick pay and vacation pay as per city
policy.
   (C)   Bond. The City Administrator shall furnish a surety bond in such sum
and form as required by Council, the bond to be conditioned on the faithful
performance of his or her duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the
city.
(Ord. 2012-05-0379O, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 31.031 REMOVAL AND SEVERANCE PAY.
   (A)   Removal. The City Administrator may, at any time, be removed from his
or her position by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of Council.
   (B)   Severance. The City Administrator shall be entitled to six months’
severance pay upon removal from the position or as otherwise provided by
contract between the city and the City Administrator.
(2000 Code, § 2.04.020)
§ 31.032 RESIGNATION AND SEVERANCE PAY.
   (A)   Notification. The City Administrator may resign from his or her
position upon 60 days’ prior written notice to the Mayor.
   (B)   Limited severance. The City Administrator shall be entitled to
severance pay as provided by contract in the event of resignation.
(2000 Code, § 2.04.030)
§ 31.033 VACATING OF POSITION.
   (A)   Declaration of vacancy. Immediately upon removal or resignation, or
for any other reason the City Administrator ceases to perform the duties of his
or her position, the Mayor shall declare the position of City Administrator
vacant.
   (B)   Time limitation. Within a six-month period from the declaration of
vacancy, a new City Administrator may be appointed in accordance with this
subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 2.04.040)
§ 31.034 RESPONSIBILITIES, POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The City Administrator shall execute, on behalf of the City Council and at
the direction of the Mayor, its administrative supervision and control of the
affairs of the City in accordance with policy set by the City Council. This
includes the supervision and coordination of all departments of the city, the
assistance of the budget preparation and presentation, representation of the
city in matters concerning the city, and recommendations to the Mayor for
adoption of measures that concern the health, safety and welfare of the
community of administrative service.
(Ord. 2012-05-0379O, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 31.035 CONTINUITY OF PROGRAMS AND POLICIES.
   The City Administrator shall inform succeeding Mayors and Councils of the
general principles of administrative programs and policies of previous
administrations so that a continuity of programs and policies may be possible.
(2000 Code, § 2.04.070) (Am. Ord. 2012-05-0379O, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 31.036 HEARING OFFICER FOR THE PURPOSE OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
ACT.
   The City Administrator shall act as a Hearing Officer under the Public
Safety Employee Benefits Act. The Administrator shall, as Hearing Officer,
conduct hearings and make determinations as to whether or not any employee of
the city, who is subject to the act, is entitled to the benefits provided by
that act. The decision of the Administrator shall be a final administrative
determination of the city and may be appealed to the circuit court under the
administrative review act.
(Ord. 2017-09-0659O, passed 9-12-2017)
§ 31.037 SUPERIOR AUTHORITY OF MAYOR.
   All responsibilities, duties and functions conferred, imposed or delegated
upon the City Administrator shall be subject to the superior right and
authority of the Mayor to supervise and administer the government and affairs
of the city through executive and legislative authority.
(2000 Code, § 2.04.080) (Am. Ord. 2012-05-0379O, passed 5-8-2012; Am. Ord.
2017-09-0659O, passed 9-12-2017)
CITY CLERK
§ 31.050 BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the City Clerk shall
execute and deliver a bond to the city as provided in §
31.005.
(2000 Code, § 2.06.010)
§ 31.051 KEEPER OF CORPORATE SEAL; RECORDS.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall keep the corporate seal and all city papers.
   (B)   He or she shall attend all meetings of Council and shall keep a full
record of the proceedings thereof in the journal.
   (C)   Transcripts from the journal and other records and files of his or her
office, certified by him or her under the corporate seal, shall be evidence in
all courts in a like manner as if the originals were produced.
(2000 Code, § 2.06.020)
§ 31.052 RECORD OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall record, in a book to be kept for that purpose,
all the ordinances passed by Council.
   (B)   At the foot of the record of each ordinance so recorded, the Clerk
shall make a memorandum of the date of the passage and of the publishing or
posting of the ordinance.
   (C)   The record and memoranda, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima
facie evidence of the passage and legal publication or posting of the ordinance
for all purposes.
(2000 Code, § 2.06.030)
§ 31.053 DUTIES.
   The City Clerk shall, in addition to the duties set forth in §§
31.051 and
31.052 above, perform the following duties:
   (A)   Issue notices to members and all officers of Council and other persons
when directed to do so by Council or by the chairperson of any committee of
Council;
   (B)   Attest all licenses granted by the Mayor and Council under the
ordinances of the city;
   (C)   Deliver to the officers of the city and to all committees of Council
all resolutions and communications referred to those officers or committees by
Council;
   (D)   Deliver to the Mayor, without delay, all ordinances or resolutions
under his or her charge which are required to be approved or otherwise acted
upon by the Mayor, with all papers on which the same are founded; and
   (E)   Within five days after the result of any election is declared or
appointment made, notify the person so elected or appointed to any city office
of his or her election or appointment.
(2000 Code, § 2.06.040)
§ 31.054 DEPUTY.
   The City Clerk may appoint a deputy, by and with the consent of Council,
who, in the absence of the City Clerk, because of sickness or otherwise, shall
be authorized to perform all duties of the City Clerk.
(2000 Code, § 2.06.050)
§ 31.055 REGISTER OF DOGS; LICENSE BOOK.
   The City Clerk shall keep a register of dogs and the license book provided
for by the ordinances of the city.
(2000 Code, § 2.06.060)
§ 31.056 FILING AND PRESERVATION OF RECORDS.
   The City Clerk shall file and preserve in a convenient form for reference
and use, according to the date of filing and subject matter, all official
bonds, oaths of office, written reports of officers and committees, vouchers
and all papers and documents filed with him or her or deposited in his or her
care and promptly turn the same over to his or her successor in office upon
receiving a receipt therefor.
(2000 Code, § 2.06.070)
§ 31.057 ACTING CLERK.
   When a vacancy in the office of City Clerk occurs, the Mayor and Council,
voting jointly may appoint an acting clerk, who shall perform the duties of the
City Clerk until the vacancy is filled at an election as provided by law.
(2000 Code, § 2.06.080)
§ 31.058 CLERK AS BUSINESS LICENSE COMMISSIONER.
   Unless and until otherwise provided by Council, the City Clerk shall be the
Business License Commissioner of and for the city.
(2000 Code, § 2.06.090)
CITY TREASURER
§ 31.070 BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the City Treasurer
shall execute and deliver a bond to the city as provided in §
31.005.
(2000 Code, § 2.08.010)
§ 31.071 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The City Treasurer shall hold his or her office for a term of four years and
until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
(2000 Code, § 2.08.020)
§ 31.072 COMPENSATION.
   The compensation of the City Treasurer shall be as provided by ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 2.08.030)
§ 31.073 ACCOUNTS; WARRANTS.
   (A)   The City Treasurer, in addition to the duties prescribed by law, shall
keep a true and accurate account showing all moneys paid into the city
treasury, by whom paid and on what account received. He or she shall pay out
all sums of money as may be ordered by the Mayor and Council, but only on
warrants therefor signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk.
   (B)   In all cases, the warrants shall state upon what particular fund they
are drawn. Any bond or interest coupon issued by the city shall be considered
as a warrant duly authorized for payment by the Treasurer.
(2000 Code, § 2.08.040)
§ 31.074 BOOKS; SEPARATE ACCOUNTS FOR FUNDS AND APPROPRIATIONS.
   (A)   The books kept by the City Treasurer shall, at all times, show the
correct condition of moneys under his or her control, of each account and
appropriation and of all receipts and disbursements.
   (B)   Those books, together with all others in his or her custody and
belonging to the city shall be handed over to his or her successor.
   (C)   He or she shall keep a separate account for each fund or
appropriation, stating at the head of each account the amount so appropriated
and giving the several debits and credits belonging thereto.
(2000 Code, § 2.08.050)
§ 31.075 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall keep an account of each special assessment
under its general description and number, and the account shall show at its
head the amounts assessed for public benefits and special benefits.
   (B)   All moneys received on any special assessment shall be held by the
Treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement for
which the assessment was made, and the money shall be used for no other
purpose, except as may be provided in the ordinance for the improvement.
(2000 Code, § 2.08.060)
§ 31.076 COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIRED BEFORE PAYMENT OR TRANSFER OF MONEY.
   No moneys shall be paid by the City Treasurer upon any warrant, bond or
coupon except from the moneys belonging to the particular fund or appropriation
upon which the warrant has been drawn, and no money shall be transferred by the
Treasurer from one fund to another after it has been received by him or her,
nor shall any money be appropriated to any other purpose than that for which it
has been collected or paid, without the vote of a majority of Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.08.070)
§ 31.077 REPORTS.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall make a report, in writing, to the Mayor and
Council at its first regular meeting in each and every month, showing all
moneys that have been turned over to and received by him or her from any and
all persons, the disbursements, if any, during the next preceding month, the
funds to which those moneys in his or her hands have been distributed, the
separate items of each account of the funds and the balance remaining, if any,
in such funds.
   (B)   He or she shall, further, make an annual report, in writing, to the
Mayor and Council, in the manner provided by state statutes, which report the
City Clerk shall immediately cause to be published as required by law.
(2000 Code, § 2.08.080)
§ 31.078 CANCELLATION OF WARRANTS; DOCUMENTATION OF EXPENDITURES.
   The City Treasurer shall cancel all warrants paid and redeemed by him or her
and, upon the rendering of any monthly report, he or she shall cause the same
to be accompanied by all warrants, duplicate receipts in detail for all moneys
received and such other vouchers as will fully and entirely cover all of his or
her transactions for the month of the report. Upon examination and approval
thereof by the Finance Commission, the City Clerk shall take charge of the
Treasurer’s report, warrants and vouchers and shall keep the same on file in
his or her office.
(2000 Code, § 2.08.090)
§ 31.079 REGISTER OF WARRANTS.
   The City Treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants redeemed and paid,
which register shall describe the warrants and show their dates, their amounts,
their serial numbers, the fund from which they are paid, the name of the person
to whom they are paid and the date of payment.
(2000 Code, § 2.08.100)
§ 31.080 RECORDS.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall keep all books, papers, vouchers, warrants,
documents and other written instruments pertaining to his or her office at the
city building, which books and documents shall be open to the inspection of the
Mayor, Council and the City Clerk.
   (B)   The Treasurer shall keep, in addition to the books of accounts
provided for in this subchapter, such additional books of accounts as the Mayor
and Council from time to time direct.
(2000 Code, § 2.08.110)
§ 31.081 BALANCING OF ACCOUNTS.
   The City Treasurer’s books of accounts shall be properly balanced at least
once in each month in a manner that the same, when so balanced, shall show the
true status and condition of each and every account entered therein.
(2000 Code, § 2.08.120)
§ 31.082 DEPOSITORY BANKS.
   The City Treasurer shall keep all moneys belonging to the city that are in
his or her hands in regularly organized bank or banks as may, from time to
time, be designated by resolution or ordinance of Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.08.130)
§ 31.083 RESPONSIBILITIES UPON EXPIRATION OF TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Whenever the City Treasurer’s term of office expires, whether by
resignation, removal from the city, removal from office or otherwise, the
Treasurer shall at once deliver to his or her successor in office, or to such
other person as may be specifically designated by resolution of Council, all
moneys, property, books and effects of every description in his or her
possession belonging to the city or pertaining to his or her office.
   (B)   He or she shall also, at once, account for and pay over to such
successor or other person so designated all moneys that he or she is
accountable for and owes to the city in his or her capacity as Treasurer.
   (C)   Any person who, having acted as Treasurer, on the expiration of his or
her term of office, violates this section, shall be liable for all damage
caused thereby, in addition to the penalty provided in §
10.99.
(2000 Code, § 2.08.140)
§ 31.084 MISUSE OF FUNDS; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall keep all moneys belonging to the city that
are in his or her hands, separate and distinct from his or her own moneys, and
he or she is expressly prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly,
any city moneys or warrants in his or her custody and keeping for his or her
own use and benefit or for the use and benefit of any other person.
   (B)   Any violation of this section shall subject the Treasurer to immediate
removal from office by the Mayor and Council.
   (C)   In the case of his or her removal, the Mayor and Council, voting
jointly, shall appoint a successor, who shall hold office for the remainder of
the unexpired term.
(2000 Code, § 2.08.150)
FINANCE DIRECTOR
§ 31.095 ESTABLISHMENT OF POSITION; APPOINTMENT, STATUS AND COMPENSATION.
   There is established the position of Finance Director. The Finance Director
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council. The
position of Finance Director shall be exempt from the classified civil service.
The Finance Director shall be an employee of the city and shall earn a salary
determined from time to time by ordinance or resolution of Council.
(Ord. 2008-05-0184O, passed 5-27-2008)
§ 31.096 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Finance Director shall:
      (1)   Work closely with and assist the City Treasurer in the execution of
the City Treasurer’s duties;
      (2)   Be responsible for all day-to-day fiscal activities of the city;
      (3)   Direct, coordinate and be responsible for the collection,
investment and disbursement of city funds;
      (4)   Apply for and secure financial grants for the city;
      (5)   Advise the Mayor, the City Administrator and Council on all matters
relating to municipal finance;
      (6)   Assign and supervise the work of clerical employees of the City
Clerk’s office in the recording, receipting and posting to proper accounts of
revenue received;
      (7)   File, record and be familiar with all contracts involving the city;
      (8)   Receive all invoices from suppliers and check with department heads
to see that all items on purchase orders have been delivered to the city before
preparing vouchers for payment of the invoices;
      (9)   Keep a bond register showing all outstanding bonds of the city; the
number and the date of issuance and expiration of the bonds; the rate of
interest and the date of each interest payment on the bonds; the name and
address of persons to whom the bonds are issued; the identity of the fund out
of which the bonds are payable, and, if payable out of a special assessment
fund, the installment number to which the bonds belong; and any city bonds that
are purchased, paid or cancelled;
      (10)   The Finance Director shall prepare an annual report describing the
bonds sold or paid during the year and the terms of the sales or the amount
paid, with each and every item of expense thereof;
      (11)   Exercise general supervision over all the officers of the city
charged in any manner with the receipt, collection or disbursement of city
revenue, with the collection and return of city revenue or with the collection
and return of municipal revenue into the city treasury;
      (12)   Submit to the corporate authorities a report of his or her
estimate, as nearly as possible, of the money necessary to defray the expenses
of the city during the current fiscal year. For the purpose of making this
report, the Finance Director is authorized to require all officers to submit
statements of the condition and expenses of their respective offices or
departments, with any proposed city improvements and the probable expense
thereof, all unperformed contracts and the amount of all unexpended
appropriations of the preceding year. In this report the Finance Director
shall:
         (a)   Classify the different objects and purposes of expenditure,
giving, as nearly as possible, the amount required for each;
         (b)   Show the aggregate income of the preceding fiscal year from all
sources;
         (c)   Show the amount of liabilities upon which interest is to be
paid;
         (d)   Show the bonds and debts payable during the year, when due and
payable; and
         (e)   Give such other information to the corporate authorities as is
necessary so that the Mayor and City Council may fully understand the demands
upon the city for the current fiscal year.
(Ord. 2008-05-0184O, passed 5-27-2008)
§ 31.097 CHAIN OF COMMAND.
   The Finance Director shall report immediately to the City Administrator and
then to the Mayor, and shall coordinate with the City Treasurer on all fiscal
matters.
(Ord. 2008-05-0184O, passed 5-27-2008)
CITY COLLECTOR
§ 31.110 ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE.
   There is established in and for the city the office of City Collector.
(2000 Code, § 2.12.010)
§ 31.111 DUTIES.
   The City Collector shall receive municipal revenues from sources other than
taxes and shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by state law or
assigned from time to time by the City Administrator and Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.12.020) (Ord. 2943, § 2, passed --2005)
§ 31.112 CITY CLERK TO BE CITY COLLECTOR.
   The City Clerk shall serve as the City Collector until the city’s officers
elected at the April, 2017 consolidated election are installed in office in
May, 2017.
(Ord. 2013-05-0442O, § 1, passed 5-14-2013)
§ 31.113 COMPENSATION.
   The person appointed to the office of City Collector shall receive
compensation as established from time to time by the Mayor and City Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.12.040) (Ord. 2943, § 5, passed --2005)
CITY ATTORNEY
§ 31.125 APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL.
   (A)   The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
Council, and shall hold his or her office for a term of one year and until his
or her successor is appointed and qualified.
   (B)   The City Attorney shall be subject to removal for cause by the Mayor
and Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.14.010)
§ 31.126 COMPENSATION; DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Attorney’s compensation shall be as fixed by ordinance. For
such compensation he or she shall perform the following services:
      (1)   Draft all ordinances, specifications, contracts (except special
assessments or special taxation), deeds, leases and other legal papers or
documents pertaining to the business of the city, as may be required of him or
her by the ordinances thereof or by the Mayor and Council or by any committee
thereof;
      (2)   Prepare and submit oral and written opinions upon any legal
question relating to the business of the city, as may be required of him or her
by the Mayor and Council;
      (3)   Give legal advice to the Mayor and Council, and to any committee or
member thereof and to any officer of the city, upon any question or matter
pertaining to the business of the city;
      (4)   Attend all regular and special meetings of the Mayor and Council,
when previously requested by them in writing; and
      (5)   Prepare and submit such annual or other reports in regard to the
legal business of the city as is required of him or her by ordinance.
   (B)   The City Attorney shall also be paid out of the city treasury such
costs and expenses as may be necessary in the performance of his or her duties
as City Attorney.
(2000 Code, § 2.14.020)
§ 31.127 SPECIAL COUNSEL.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as prohibiting Council from
employing special counsel to represent the city from time to time, or from
paying such compensation to the special counsel as Council may, from time to
time, determine.
(2000 Code, § 2.14.030)
CITY HEALTH INSPECTOR
§ 31.140 POSITION OF HEALTH INSPECTOR CREATED.
   (A)   There is hereby created the position of City Health Inspector.
   (B)   The City Health Inspector(s) shall be part of the Oak Forest Building
Department.
   (C)   The city shall have full-time or part-time Health Inspectors as deemed
necessary by the Mayor and City Council from time to time.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.141 APPOINTMENT OF CITY HEALTH INSPECTORS.
   The City Health Inspectors shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the City Council. City Health Inspectors may be City employees
or contracted out as determined by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.142 GENERAL DUTIES OF HEALTH INSPECTORS.
   City Health Inspectors shall enforce all regulations containing provisions
for the protection of the public health; other duties and functions as may be
required by this code, statutes or ordinances; and additional duties as may be
assigned him or her, from time to time, by the corporate authorities of the
city.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.143 REGULATION; ADOPTION OF CODE.
   (A)   Regulation. The issuance, suspension and revocation of the permits,
licenses or certificates to operate retail food establishments; the prohibiting
of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or drink; and the enforcement shall
be governed by this subchapter.
   (B)   Inspections; codes adopted.
      (1)   The inspection of food service establishments shall be regulated in
accordance with the 1998 and all subsequent editions of, or amendments to, the
Illinois Department of Public Health’s publication currently titled, “Food
Service Sanitation Code,” on file with the Secretary of State.
      (2)   The inspection of retail food stores shall be regulated in
accordance with the 1992 and all subsequent editions of, or amendments to, the
Illinois Department of Public Health’s publication currently titled, “Retail
Food Store Sanitation Code,” on file with the Secretary of State.
      (3)   Three copies of each of the Illinois Department of Public Health’s
publication currently titled, “Food Service Sanitation Code” and “Retail Food
Store Sanitation Code” shall be on file at the City Clerk’s office.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.144 COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a food establishment who does not have a valid
permit, license or certificate issued to them by the city. Only a person who
complies with the requirements of this subchapter shall be entitled to receive
or retain a permit, license or certificate.
   (B)   Permits, licenses or certificates are not transferable. A valid
permit, license or certificate shall be posted in every food establishment.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.145 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any food dealer to engage in or do business
in the city without first having secured a license.
   (B)   Applications for the licenses shall be made in compliance with the
general provisions of this code relating thereto and shall state the kind of
food intended to be sold or handled.
   (C)   Applications shall be made in writing to the City Clerk’s Office.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006) Penalty, see §
31.999
§ 31.146 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for food dealer’s licenses shall be established by the City
Council.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.147 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to operate a food establishment or seeking to be a
food dealer shall make written application for a permit, license or certificate
on forms provided by the City Clerk. The application shall include the name and
address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food
establishment, and signature of each applicant.
   (B)   Prior to approval of an application for a permit, license or
certificate, the city shall inspect the proposed food establishment to
determine compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.
   (C)   The city shall issue a permit, license or certificate to the applicant
if its inspection reveals that the proposed food establishment complies with
the requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.148 SUSPENSION OR DENIAL OF PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   (1)   The City Health Inspectors may, without warning, notice or
hearing, suspend any permit, license or certificate to operate a food
establishment if the holder of the permit, license or certificate does not
comply with the requirements of this subchapter, or if the operation of the
establishment does not comply with the requirements of this subchapter, or if
the operation of the food establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial
hazard to public health.
      (2)   When a permit, license or certificate is suspended, food operations
shall immediately cease. Within seven days of a suspension, the Health
Inspector shall call a hearing for the purposes of determining whether the
license should be revoked.
   (B)   Whenever a permit, license or certificate is suspended or denied, the
holder of the permit, license or certificate, or the person in charge shall be
notified in writing that the permit, license or certificate is, upon service of
the notice, immediately suspended or denied and that an opportunity for hearing
will be provided if a written request for hearing is filed with the city by the
holder of the permit, license or certificate within ten days. If no written
request for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension or denial is
sustained. The city may end the suspension or permit denial at any time if
reasons for the suspension or denial no longer exist.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.149 REVOCATION OF PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The city may, after providing opportunity for hearing, revoke the
permit, license or certificate for serious or repeated violations of any of the
requirements of this subchapter or for the interference with the city in the
performance of duty.
   (B)   (1)   Prior to revocation, the city shall notify, in writing, the
holder of the permit, license or certificate, or the person in charge, of those
specific reasons for which the permit, license or certificate is to be revoked
and that the permit, license or certificate shall be revoked at the end of the
ten days following service of the notice unless a written request for hearing
is filed with the city by the holder of the permit, license or certificate
within the ten-day period.
      (2)   If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the
revocation of the permit, license or certificate becomes final.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.150 SERVICE OF NOTICES.
   A notice provided for in this subchapter is properly served when it is
delivered to the holder of permit, license or certificate, or person in charge,
or when it is sent registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the last known address of the holder of the permit, license or certificate. A
copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the city.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.151 HEARINGS.
   (A)   The hearings provided for in this subchapter shall be conducted by the
Hearing Officer.
   (B)   Any oral testimony given at a hearing shall be reported verbatim, and
the presiding officer shall make provision for sufficient copies of the
transcript.
   (C)   The Hearing Officer shall make a final finding based upon the complete
hearing record and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order
considered in the hearing.
   (D)   A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the
holder of the permit, license or certificate by the city.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.152 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Hearing Officer shall have
the right to appeal to the corporate authorities.
   (B)   The appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk, within ten
days after notice of a denial of an application or a revocation of a license, a
written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal.
   (C)   The corporate authorities shall thereupon set the time and place for a
hearing on the appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be given to the
applicant or licensee. The appeal shall be final.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.153 INSPECTION FREQUENCY.
   (A)   An inspection of a food establishment shall be performed at a
frequency prescribed by the city.
   (B)   Additional inspections of food establishment shall be performed as
often as necessary for enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.154 ACCESS.
   (A)   Duly authorized representatives of the city shall be permitted to
enter any food establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of the
making inspections to determine compliance with this subchapter.
   (B)   The representatives shall be permitted to examine the records of the
establishment to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchase,
received or used.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.155 REPORT OF INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Whenever an inspection of a food establishment is made, the findings
shall be recorded on the inspection report form. The inspection report form
shall summarize the requirements of this subchapter and shall set forth a
weighted point value for each requirement.
   (B)   Inspectional remarks should be written to reference, by item number,
the item violated and should state the correction to be made.
   (C)   The rating score of the establishment shall be the total of the
weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from 100. A copy of the
completed inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of
the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection.
   (D)   The completed inspection report form is a public document that shall
be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according
to law.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.156 CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period
of time for the correction of the violations found; and correction of the
violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance
with the following provisions.
      (1)   If an imminent health hazard exists, such as lack of refrigeration
or sewage backup into the establishment, the establishment shall immediately
cease food operations. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the
Health Inspector.
      (2)   All violations of four- or five-point weighted items shall be
corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within ten days following
inspection. A follow-up inspection to confirm correction may be conducted at
the discretion of the Health Inspector.
      (3)   All one- or two-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as
possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection.
      (4)   When the rating score of the establishment is less than 60, the
establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations
within 48 hours. One or more reinspections may be conducted at reasonable time
intervals to assure correction.
      (5)   In the case of temporary food establishments, all violations shall
be corrected within 24 hours. If violations are not corrected within 24 hours,
the establishment shall immediately cease food operations until authorized to
resume by the Health Inspector.
   (B)   The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time
limits for corrections may result in cessation of food operations. An
opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time limitations or
both will be provided if a written request is filed with the city within 10
days following cessation of operations. If a request for hearing is received, a
hearing shall be held within 20 days of receipt of the request.
   (C)   Whenever a food establishment is required to cease operations, it
shall not resume operations until it is shown on reinspection that conditions
responsible for the order to cease operation no longer exist. Opportunity for
reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable time.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.157 EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD.
   (A)   Food may be examined or sampled by the Health Inspectors as often as
necessary for enforcement of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Health Inspector may, upon written notice to the owner or person
in charge, specifying with particularity the reasons therefor, place a hold
order on any food which it believes is in violation of §§ 750.100, 750.110,
760.100 or 760.110 of the Illinois Department of Public Health’s “Food Service
Sanitation Code,” or the “Retail Food Store Sanitation Code,” respectively, or
any other section of this subchapter.
      (1)   The Health Inspector shall tag, label or otherwise identify any
food subject to hold order.
      (2)   No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served or moved from
the establishment.
      (3)   A Health Inspector shall permit storage of the food under
conditions specified in a hold order, unless storage is not possible without
risks to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be
ordered and accomplished.
      (4)   The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed
within ten days and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be
destroyed. If a request for hearing is received, the hearing shall be held
within 20 days after receipt of the request. On the basis of evidence produced
at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or the owner or person in
charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy the
food or to bring it into compliance with provisions of the subchapter.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.158 SUBMISSION OF PLANS.
   (A)   Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled
and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment,
properly prepared plans and specifications for the construction, remodeling or
conversion shall be submitted to a City Health Inspector for review and
approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is begun.
   (B)   The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout,
arrangement, mechanical plans and construction materials of work areas, and the
type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities.
   (C)   The city shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the
requirements of this subchapter.
   (D)   No food establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled or
converted except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by a City
Health Inspector.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.159 PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION IS SUSPECTED.
   (A)   When the city or Cook County Department of Public Health has
reasonable cause to suspect possible disease transmission by an employee of a
food establishment, it may secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee
or make any other investigation as indicated and shall take appropriate action.
   (B)   The Cook County Department of the Public Health may require any or all
of the following measures:
      (1)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in food
establishments;
      (2)   The immediate closing of the food establishment concerned until, in
the opinion of the County Department of Public Health, no further danger of
disease outbreaks exist;
      (3)   Restriction of the employee’s services to some area of the
establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease; and
      (4)   Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee and of
other employees and of his or her body and their body discharges.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.160 REINSPECTION COSTS.
   In the event a reinspection is deemed necessary by the inspector, the cost
of any and all subsequent inspections shall be borne by the holder of the
permit, license or certificate.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 31.161 CONDITIONAL PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   When structural, plumbing, electrical, ventilation or similar defects
exist in an established food facility that may require significant expenditures
to correct, but are not considered to be imminent health hazards, a conditional
permit, license or certificate may be granted at the discretion of the city.
   (B)   Under no circumstances will a conditional permit, license or
certificate be issued for more than two consecutive 12-month periods.
   (C)   The purpose of the conditional license or permit is to allow a
reasonable period of time for correction of existing defects.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
TAXPAYER ADVOCATE
§ 31.205 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is created the office of City of Oak Forest Taxpayer Advocate.
(2000 Code, § 2.20.010) (Ord. 2353, § 1, passed --1998)
§ 31.206 QUALIFICATIONS FOR OFFICE.
   (A)   The office shall be elected on a citywide basis. The times of
elections shall be as scheduled in ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, § 2A-1.2 entitled
“Consolidated Schedule of Elections — Offices Designated.”
   (B)   The qualifications of minimum age and residency shall be as designated
as ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3-14-1.
   (C)   The required number of signatures shall be as listed in ILCS Ch. 10,
Act 5, § 10-3 entitled “Independent Candidates; Nominating Papers.” The
nominating papers shall include the following papers:
      (1)   Statement of candidacy;
      (2)   Petition for election;
      (3)   Loyalty oath, at the option of the candidate; and
      (4)   Statement of economic interest.
   (D)   (1)   The place and times of filing shall be identical to those of
other citywide municipal offices.
      (2)   The election to the office shall also be subject to State Board of
Election procedures.
(2000 Code, § 2.20.020) (Ord. 2353, § 2, passed --1998)
Statutory reference
   The statute cited in division (B) of this section has been repealed.
Qualifications for elective municipal offices are currently set forth in ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-5.
§ 31.207 NONPARTISAN OFFICE.
   (A)   The Taxpayer Advocate is created as a nonpartisan office. The officer
in the performance of the duties of taxpayer advocate shall not take any
partisan or political position or advocate any partisan or political goal.
   (B)   Nothing in this provision is intended to nor shall limit any
individual’s right to maintain their individual or personal beliefs.
(2000 Code, § 2.20.030) (Ord. 2353, § 3, passed --1998)
§ 31.208 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Taxpayer Advocate shall perform the following advisory duties:
   (A)   Assist individual city taxpayers in their preparation of real estate
tax appeals;
   (B)   Publicize real estate tax relief programs;
   (C)   Advocate for legislation to secure state and countywide real estate
tax relief;
   (D)   Organize taxpayer education programs and workshops; and
   (E)   Act as a liaison between the taxpayers of the city and taxing bodies
located within the city limits to promote efficiency in government and
eliminate waste.
(2000 Code, § 2.20.040) (Ord. 2353, § 4, passed --1998)
§ 31.209 PROHIBITION OF PRIVATE PAYMENT OR CHARGE.
   The Taxpayer Advocate shall not directly or indirectly solicit nor receive
any payment, stipend, bonus or any remuneration from any individualtaxpayer for
services performed as Taxpayer Advocate.
(2000 Code, § 2.20.050) (Ord. 2353, § 5, passed --1998)
§ 31.210 EXPENSES.
   The Taxpayer Advocate may be entitled to the reimbursement of reasonable and
necessary expenses as allowed by City Council approval.
(2000 Code, § 2.20.060) (Ord. 2353, § 6, passed --1998)
HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGER
§ 31.220 ESTABLISHMENT OF POSITION.
   (A)   There is an established position for the Human Resources Manager of
the City of Oak Forest.
   (B)   The Human Resources Manager shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council.
(Ord. 2016-08-0617O, passed - -2016)
§ 31.221 DUTIES.
   The Human Resources Manager position shall include the prompt and efficient
performance of all of the following functions:
   (A)   Manage the implementation and administration of various employee
benefit programs;
   (B)   Assist City Administrator and Finance Director with risk management
decisions;
   (C)   Conduct salary and fringe benefit surveys, staffing, and other
organizational studies;
   (D)   Receive, process and track workers compensation claims to resolution
with insurance carriers, forward wage reports when necessary, maintain files
involving employee inquiries, and work with insurance claims adjusters and
attorneys to ensure proper claim processing; formulate programs and strategies
to reduce workers compensation, liability and property damage claims;
   (E)   Create and implement city-wide training programs encouraging
professional development;
   (F)   Participate in the preparation and negotiation of collective
bargaining agreements;
   (G)   Maintain personnel policy manual and employee safety manual to insure
documents are current and relevant;
   (H)   Manage and monitor the city loss prevention and safety programs;
   (I)   Assist departments with implementation of safety related initiatives;
   (J)   Serve as staff liaison to the employee safety committee;
   (K)   Research and recommend action on personnel and employment related
questions and resolve employee questions and complaints;
   (L)   Perform special projects for the City Administrator and department
heads;
   (M)   Perform other duties as may be assigned.
(Ord. 2016-08-0617O, passed - -2016)
§ 31.222 COMPENSATION.
   The Human Resources Manager shall be an employee of the city and earn a
salary determined from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the City
Council.
(Ord. 2016-08-0617O, passed - -2016)
§ 31.223 CHAIN OF COMMAND.
   The Human Resources Manager shall report to the City Administrator and then
to the Mayor.
(Ord. 2016-08-0617O, passed - -2016)
NETWORK ADMINISTRATOR
§ 31.225 ESTABLISHMENT OF POSITION.
   (A)   There is established the position of Network Administrator of the City
of Oak Forest.
   (B)   The Network Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.21.010) (Ord. 2846, § 2 (part), passed --2004)
§ 31.226 DUTIES.
   The Network Administrator position shall include the prompt and efficient
performance of each of the following functions:
   (A)   Identify, install and maintain networking solutions for all
departments;
   (B)   Perform daily tasks including tape backups, virus definitions and
critical patches;
   (C)   Provide a safe and secure network system;
   (D)   Install personal computers, printers, servers and related peripherals;
   (E)   Upgrade hardware and software as needed;
   (F)   Provide a backup solution and/or problem resolution for all network
components in a timely manner;
   (G)   Train and assist network users;
   (H)   Monitor, update and improve the City of Oak Forest’s website;
   (I)   Develop yearly technology budget;
   (J)   Communicate with all city departments to identify technology needs;
   (K)   Understand users’ daily processes to develop automated solutions;
   (L)   Research and make recommendations regarding upgrades and replacement
of information technology;
   (M)   Keep current with technological advances related to the City of Oak
Forest operations; and
   (N)   Provide other computer related services as may be directed by the
Mayor and City Administrator.
(2000 Code, § 2.21.020) (Ord. 2846, § 2 (part), passed --2004)
§ 31.227 COMPENSATION.
   The Network Administrator shall be an employee of the City of Oak Forest and
earn a salary determined from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the
City Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.21.030) (Ord. 2846, § 2 (part), passed --2004)
§ 31.228 CHAIN OF COMMAND.
   The Network Administrator shall report to the City Administrator and then to
the Mayor.
(2000 Code, § 2.21.040) (Ord. 2846, § 2 (part), passed --2004)
CITY HISTORIAN
§ 31.240 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   There is established a volunteer position of City Historian.
   (B)   The City Historian shall be appointed by the Mayor, with advice and
consent of the City Council.
(Ord. 2007-06-0109O, passed 6-12-2007)
§ 31.241 DUTIES OF CITY HISTORIAN.
   The Historian shall:
   (A)   Keep records of the history of the city, in both written and digital
form;
   (B)   Gather and solicit local historical resources for purposes of research
and preservation;
   (C)   Conduct meetings, training, presentations and other opportunities to
discuss Oak Forest historical resources;
   (D)   Investigate and apply for appropriate funding sources for historic
preservation;
   (E)   Coordinate efforts of any volunteers seeking to assist historic
preservation in Oak Forest; and
   (F)   Submit an annual report to the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 2007-06-0109O, passed 6-12-2007)
§ 31.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
31.140 through
31.161 shall be fined not more than $750 for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
continues.
      (2)   The city shall have the right to enjoin any person or establishment
in the event violations occur on a continuing basis.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
CHAPTER 32: CITY ORGANIZATIONS AND PROGRAMS
Section
Departments; Code Hearing Department; System of Administrative Adjudication
   
32.001   Purpose
   
32.002   Definitions
   
32.003   Non-exclusivity
   
32.004   Code Hearing Department; establishment; jurisdiction
   
32.005   Code Hearing Department; organization
   
32.006   Compensation of code hearing personnel
Hearings
   
32.020   Commencement of hearings
   
32.021   Hearing procedures
   
32.022   Non-resident hearing procedures
   
32.023   Enforcement of judgment; penalties
Rules Applicable to Motor Vehicle Citations
   
32.035   Enforcement of motor vehicle violations; citations
   
32.036   Determination of liability; motor vehicle citations
   
32.037   Lessor of vehicle; liability
   
32.038   Immobilization program
   
32.039   Driver’s license suspension
Police Department
   
32.050   Establishment of offices, organization, function of offices and chain
of command
   
32.051   Appointments and dismissals
   
32.052   Authority of Civil Service Commission regarding radio operators and
community relations personnel
   
32.053   Training program
   
32.054   Rules and regulations; review by Chief of Police
   
32.055   Auxiliary police
   
32.056   School crossing guards
   
32.057   Police pension fund
   
32.058   Deputy Chief(s) of Police
   
32.059   Police liaison and counselor
   
32.060   Part-time police officers; certification and hiring standards
   
32.061   Fee for processing administration
Fire Department
   
32.070   Establishment; composition
   
32.071   (Reserved)
   
32.072   (Reserved)
   
32.073   Establishment of offices, organization, function of offices and chain
of command
   
32.074   Appointments
   
32.075   Fire Chief
   
32.076   Deputy Chief
   
32.077   (Reserved)
   
32.078   Lieutenant
   
32.079   (Reserved)
   
32.080   Firefighters
   
32.081   Compensation
   
32.082   Bureau of Fire Prevention
   
32.083   Assistance of Police Department
   
32.084   Participation in state training course
   
32.085   Command of department; rules and regulations
   
32.086   Reports to State Fire Marshal; investigations; enforcement of state
law
   
32.087   Suspension of firefighters
   
32.088   Having or making keys to engine house or fire alarm boxes
   
32.089   Approval of building plans
   
32.090   Inspections
   
32.091   Investigations
   
32.092   Records
   
32.093   Overcrowding
   
32.094   Control and extinguishment of fires
   
32.095   Repairs to equipment; bidding required
   
32.096   Salvage from fires; proof of ownership
   
32.097   Uniforms
   
32.098   Compensation of injured firefighters
   
32.099   Service outside city; fees
   
32.100   Delivery of books and equipment to Fire Chief’s successor
   
32.101   Firefighter’s pension fund
   
32.102   Fire Department cost recovery program
Department of Public Works
   
32.115   Establishment; composition
   
32.116   Assistant Director and Street Superintendent
   
32.117   Disqualification of applicants for certain offenses
Community/Commercial Economic Development Department
   
32.130   Establishment of department
   
32.131   Position of Director
   
32.132   Duties of department
   
32.133   Organization of department
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
   
32.145   Establishment and composition; terms of office
   
32.146   Oath and bond; requirements of members
   
32.147   Appointments to Police and Fire Departments
   
32.148   Rules; powers and duties
   
32.149   Secretary
Board of Trustees of Police Pension Fund
   
32.160   Establishment
   
32.161   Composition
   
32.162   Terms of office
   
32.163   Powers and duties
Board of Local Improvements
   
32.175   Establishment; composition
   
32.176   Powers and duties
   
32.177   Meetings
   
32.178   Secretary
   
32.179   Expenditures
Emergency Telephone System Board
   
32.190   Establishment
   
32.191   Purpose
   
32.192   Composition
   
32.193   (Reserved)
   
32.194   Powers and duties
   
32.195   Emergency telephone system fund
Emergency Telephone System Advisory Board
   
32.210   Establishment
   
32.211   Purpose
   
32.212   Composition; appointments
   
32.213   Terms of office; compensation
   
32.214   Powers and duties
Foreign Fire Insurance Board
   
32.225   Establishment
   
32.226   Composition
   
32.227   Election of officers; terms
   
32.228   Firefighter employment status required
   
32.229   Duties and powers of officers
   
32.230   Terms of office of officers
   
32.231   Rules and regulations
   
32.232   Payment of funds
   
32.233   Budget
   
32.234   Annual audit
Citizens Advisory Commission
   
32.245   Establishment
   
32.246   Membership
   
32.247   Powers and duties
Civil Service Commission
   
32.260   Composition
   
32.261   Classification of employees
   
32.262   Rules
   
32.263   Organization
   
32.264   Expiration of candidate lists
Consumer Protection Commission
   
32.275   Establishment and composition; terms of office
   
32.276   Powers and duties
   
32.277   Existing rights and remedies
Crime Prevention Commission
   
32.290   Recitals
   
32.291   Creation of the Crime Prevention Commission
   
32.292   Objective
   
32.293   Qualifications
   
32.294   Duties and responsibilities
Finance Commission
   
32.320   Establishment; composition
   
32.321   Powers and duties
   
32.322   Annual budget in lieu of appropriation ordinance
   
32.323   Adoption of annual budget
   
32.324   Capital improvement, repair or replacement fund
   
32.325   Revision of annual budget
   
32.326   Moneys for contingencies
   
32.327   Public inspection of budget
   
32.328   Application of state statutes
   
32.329   Meetings
Planning and Zoning Commission
   
32.340   Created
   
32.341   Purpose
   
32.342   Composition; appointments
   
32.343   Term of office
   
32.344   Chairperson
   
32.345   Meetings
   
32.346   Duty of chairperson; applications
   
32.347   Rules of procedure
   
32.348   Minutes of proceedings
   
32.349   Removal from office
Senior Citizen Commission
   
32.360   Establishment
   
32.361   Membership
   
32.362   Reserved
   
32.363   Powers
Youth Commission
   
32.375   Establishment; composition
   
32.376   Appointment; terms of office
   
32.377   Residency requirement
   
32.378   Duties
   
32.379   Election of Secretary; meetings
   
32.380   Reimbursement of expenses; establishment of line item in city’s budget
Community Pool Commission
   
32.382   Establishment
   
32.383   Duties
   
32.384   Election of positions; meetings
   
32.385   Reimbursement of expenses; establishment of line item in city’s budget
Emergency Management Agency
   
32.395   Establishment; composition
   
32.396   Director
   
32.397   Interpretation of chapter
   
32.398   Functions and duties
   
32.399   Mobile support team
   
32.400   Mutual aid agreements
   
32.401   Emergency action
   
32.402   Compensation
   
32.403   Reimbursement by state
   
32.404   Volunteers
   
32.405   Integration of city officers and employees
   
32.406   Purchases and expenditures
   
32.407   Oath
   
32.408   Office space
   
32.409   Appropriations; levy of taxes
   
32.410   Credentials of authority
   
32.411   Violations
Bureau of Fire Investigation
   
32.425   Preambles
   
32.426   Establishment
   
32.427   Control and authority; liaison
   
32.428   Purposes and duties
   
32.429   Jurisdiction
   
32.430   Fire investigator qualifications
Economic Advisory Council
   
32.445   Establishment; purpose
   
32.446   Composition; terms of office
   
32.447   Volunteers
   
32.448   Expenditures
   
32.449   Facade Improvement Grant Program
Safety Committee
   
32.460   Introduction
   
32.461   Mission statement
   
32.462   Executive Safety Committee
   
32.463   Departmental Safety Committee
   
32.464   Responsibilities
   
32.465   Sample Safety Committee agenda
Streetscape Advisory Council
   
32.480   Establishment; purpose
   
32.481   Composition; terms of office
   
32.482   Volunteers
   
32.483   Expenditures
Gazebo Committee
   
32.495   Establishment
   
32.496   Membership
   
32.497   Officers of the Gazebo Committee
   
32.498   Duties of the chair
   
32.499   Gazebo Committee meetings
   
32.500   Powers and duties
Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee
   
32.515   Establishment
   
32.516   Membership
   
32.517   Officers of the Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee
   
32.518   Duties of the chair
   
32.519   Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee meetings
   
32.520   Powers and duties
Youthful Fire Danger Awareness Program
   
32.535   Establishment
   
32.536   Purposes
   
32.537   Personnel
Medicare-Only Coverage
   
32.560   Establishment; purpose
   
32.561   Coverage of eligible employees; authorization
   
32.562   Withholdings from salaries and wages
   
32.563   Employer contributions
   
32.564   Records and reports; required
Veterans Commission
   
32.575   Creation
   
32.576   Composition
   
32.577   Terms of office
   
32.578   Goals and charges
Building Department
   
32.590   Establishment of Department
   
32.591   Position of Building Commissioner
   
32.592   Duties of Department
   
32.593   Organization of Department
Green Steps Commission
   
32.605   Establishment
   
32.606   Membership
   
32.607   Duties and responsibilities
DEPARTMENTS; CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT; SYSTEM OF ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
§ 32.001 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for a fair and efficient system
of enforcement of city ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by
ordinance, through the administrative adjudication of violations of the city
ordinances and by establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority
and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.
(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)
§ 32.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE. Any municipal ordinance, law, rule, regulation or code, inclusive,
except ordinances for which the potential penalty described therein includes a
period of incarceration.
   HEARING OFFICER. A person recommended by the Police Chief and then appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council to preside over
administrative hearings as set forth in this subchapter.
   OWNER.
      (1)   For the purpose of a violation relating to real property, the
person to whom the County Collector sent the last ascertainable tax bill; and
      (2)   For the purpose of a violation relating to motor vehicles, the
person to whom the motor vehicle is registered, as provided by the records of
the Secretary of State of Illinois. Any person so described herein may present
evidence to overcome the presumption that the person is the OWNER of the
property and/or motor vehicle for which the person received a notice of
violation. Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter or as circumstances
reasonably dictate, all notices described in this subchapter shall be sent to
the owner at the following address:
         (a)   For the purpose of a violation relating to real property, the
address to where the County Collector sent the last tax bill; and
         (b)   For the purpose of a violation relating to motor vehicles, the
address to where the motor vehicle is registered, as provided by the records of
the Secretary of State of Illinois.
(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007; Am. Ord. 2011-11-0357O, passed 11-8-
2011)
§ 32.003 NON-EXCLUSIVITY.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not preclude the city from using
other methods or proceedings to enforce the city code, including, but not
limited to, the institution of any action in the Circuit Court of Cook County,
Illinois, or any administrative proceeding; provided, for any person who has
received 20 or more standing and/or parking violations the city shall enforce
the citations only via the Circuit Court of Cook County.
(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)
§ 32.004 CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT; ESTABLISHMENT; JURISDICTION.
   There is hereby created within the City of Oak Forest a Code Hearing
Department, which is authorized to provide for and operate a system of
administrative adjudication, as more fully described herein, which shall have
jurisdiction over the adjudication and enforcement of any violation of the city
code.
(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)
§ 32.005 CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT; ORGANIZATION.
   The Code Hearing Department shall be comprised of a Hearing Officer, an
Adjudication Hearing Administrator, the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, and any other duly appointed person or persons deemed necessary for
the efficient administration of the Code Hearing Department, with the following
powers and authority.
   (A)   Hearing Officer. All adjudicatory hearings shall be presided over by a
Hearing Officer. Prior to conducting administrative adjudication hearings, the
Hearing Officers shall have successfully completed a formal training program
which includes the following:
      (1)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative
adjudication hearings that they will conduct and preside over;
      (2)   Orientation to each subject area of the code for which they may
adjudicate a violation;
      (3)   Observation of administrative adjudication hearings;
      (4)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence
and issuing final orders; and
      (5)   In addition, a Hearing Officer must be an attorney licensed to
practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three years. A Hearing
Officer may not be an inspector or law enforcement officer employed by the
city. Hearing Officers are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to:
         (a)   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the
existence of an ordinance violation;
         (b)   Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant
testimony or tangible items at an administrative adjudication hearing, upon the
request of the parties or their representatives;
         (c)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the administrative
adjudication hearings, including all exhibits and evidence introduced at the
hearing;
         (d)   Issue a determination, based on the evidence presented at the
administrative adjudication hearing, of whether a code violation occurred or
exists. The Hearing Officer’s determination shall be in writing and shall
include written findings of fact and law, a decision, and an order including
the fine, penalty or other action with which the respondent must comply; and
         (e)   Impose penalties consistent with the applicable code and assess
costs upon finding a party liable for the alleged violation, except, however,
that in no event shall the Hearing Officer have authority to impose a penalty
of incarceration, or impose a fine in excess of $50,000. The maximum monetary
fine under this division (A)(5)(e) shall be exclusive of costs of enforcement
or costs incurred by the city to secure compliance with the code and shall not
be applicable to cases to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and
collected by the city.
   (B)   Adjudication Hearing Administrator. The Adjudication Hearing
Administrator shall either be an employee of the City of Oak Forest appointed
by the Police Chief with the consent of the City Administrator, an independent
contractor or agency contracted by the city to perform such duties as
enumerated herein. The Adjudication Hearing Administrator is hereby authorized,
empowered and directed to:
      (1)   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of all
code violations as may be permitted by law and directed by ordinance;
      (2)   Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under
this subchapter or as may reasonably be required to carry out the purpose of
this subchapter;
      (3)   Collect moneys paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a
final determination of liability;
      (4)   Certify copies of final determinations of all code violations
adjudicated pursuant to this subchapter, and any factual reports verifying the
final determination of any violation liability which were issued in accordance
with this subchapter or the laws of the State of Illinois, including ILCS Ch.
625, Act5, § 11-208.3, as from time to time amended;
      (5)   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation of
suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter and those of the laws of the State of Illinois;
      (6)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably necessary for the
efficient operation and maintenance of the system of administrative
adjudication hereby established; and
      (7)   Collect unpaid fines and penalties either directly or through
private collection agencies that may be retained by the city or by requesting
the City Prosecutor to act on behalf of the city in filing complaints in the
Cook County Circuit Court, seeking judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and
pursuing all post-judgment remedies available under current law.
   (C)   Automation. The Adjudication Hearing Administrator is hereby further
authorized, empowered and directed to operate and maintain a computer program
for the system of administrative adjudication hereby established, on a day-to-
day basis, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Inputting of violation notice information;
      (2)   Establishing hearing dates and notice dates;
      (3)   Recording fine and penalty assessment and payments;
      (4)   Issuing payment receipts;
      (5)   Issuing succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final
determinations of liability, issuing notices of impending immobilization,
issuing notices of impending impoundment, and issuing notices of impending
driver’s license suspension as may be required, in accordance with the Illinois
Vehicle Code. Nothing in this section is intended to preclude the Adjudication
Hearing Administrator from including one or more of the above notices in the
same notice report; and
      (6)   Keeping accurate records of appearances and non-appearances at
administrative adjudication hearing, pleas entered and fines and other
penalties assessed and paid.
   (D)   Police personnel. The Chief of Police shall appoint and/or designate a
police officer to provide security for the administrative adjudication
hearings, and the officers are hereby authorized and directed to:
      (1)   Maintain hearing room decorum;
      (2)   Execute authority as granted to courtroom deputies of the Circuit
Court; and
      (3)   Perform other duties or acts as may be reasonably required and as
directed by the Hearing Officer or the Adjudication Hearing Administrator.
(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)
§ 32.006 COMPENSATION OF CODE HEARING PERSONNEL.
   (A)   Authorization for compensation for each of the above-stated positions
shall be made by the City Council through the annual budget or appropriation
process.
   (B)   Compensation shall be determined by the City Administrator within
approved budget or appropriation limitations.
(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)
HEARINGS
§ 32.020 COMMENCEMENT OF HEARINGS.
   (A)   (1)   A proceeding before a Hearing Officer shall be instituted upon
the filing with the Adjudication Hearing Administrator of a written sworn
pleading, complaint or citation by any authorized official of the city,
including police officers, code enforcement officers, and such other employees
as authorized.
      (2)   In the event a complaint causing the initiation of a hearing is
filed by a tenant or occupant of a dwelling who is not also the owner thereof,
no action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or
other similar proceeding, whether it be civil or criminal, shall be threatened
or instituted against the tenant or occupant solely because the tenant or
occupant files the complaint or agrees to testify or present tangible evidence
at an administrative adjudication hearing. The foregoing sentence shall not
apply if the owner proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the tenant or
occupant is the proximate cause of the violation for which the hearing is
commenced.
   (B)   Respondents shall be served with a copy of the written sworn pleading,
complaint or citation along with a notice of hearing in a manner reasonably
calculated to give them actual notice of the proceeding instituted against
them, by one or more of the following means:
      (1)   Personal service upon a party or its authorized agent;
      (2)   Service by certified mail, return receipt requested;
      (3)   Service by first class mail, postage prepaid; or
      (4)   If the applicable violation relates to the condition, operation or
location of a motor vehicle, by posting a copy of the sworn pleading, complaint
or citation in a conspicuous place upon the property or motor vehicle where the
violation is found.
      (5)   Any notice presented by first class or certified mail, or by
posting, shall be deemed served three days after the deposit of the notice in
the U.S. mail or the posting of the notice.
   (C)   Notices of hearing shall include:
      (1)   The type and nature of the ordinance violation to be adjudicated,
including a citation to the appropriate section of the code;
      (2)   The date and time of the administrative adjudication hearing;
      (3)   The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to
be held;
      (4)   The applicable fines, late payment fees and penalties for failure
to appear at the hearing;
      (5)   Any witnesses or complainants who may be called to testify for the
city who are not employees or officers thereof; and
      (6)   An explanation that payment of the indicated fine, and of any
applicable penalty for late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of
the violation.
   (D)   Administrative adjudication hearings shall be scheduled and docketed
by the Adjudication Hearing Administrator not less than 15 nor more than 30
days after the notice of hearing is served on the respondent.
(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)
§ 32.021 HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Opportunity. Parties shall be provided with an opportunity for a
hearing before or during which they may exercise any or all of the following
rights:
      (1)   Be represented by counsel, although respondents shall not be
entitled to have an attorney appointed to represent them;
      (2)   Present and cross-examine witnesses; and
      (3)   Request the Hearing Officer to issue subpoenas to direct the
attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant
tangible evidence.
   (B)   Rules of evidence shall not govern. The formal and technical rules of
evidence shall not apply in an administrative adjudication hearing authorized
under this subchapter. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it
is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct
of their affairs.
   (C)   Standard of proof. Administrative adjudication hearings are civil in
nature. The city shall bear the standard of proof to prove by a preponderance
of the evidence the occurrence or existence of a violation of the code. A
sworn, written pleading, complaint or citation, or a copy thereof, containing
information to support all the elements of the alleged violation shall
constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.
   (D)   Defenses. It shall be a defense to a code violation charged under this
subchapter if the owner, his or her attorney, or any other agent or
representative proves to the Hearing Officer’s satisfaction that:
      (1)   The code violation alleged in the notice did not in fact exist at
the time of the citation, pleading or complaint;
      (2)   The code violation has been caused by the current property
occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the
dwelling free of the violations, the current occupants continue to cause the
violations; or
      (3)   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the
owner or his or her agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of
correcting the code violation(s).
      (4)   The code violation alleged in the notice occurred when the
respondent was not the owner or lessee of the subject real or personal
property. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, any existing order to correct
a code violation and/or sanctions imposed by the city as a result of a finding
of a code violation under this subchapter shall attach to the property as well
as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a code violation against
one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the property to
another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of the property takes the
same subject to the findings, decision and order of a Hearing Officer under
this subchapter.
   (E)   Continuances. No continuances shall be authorized by a Hearing Officer
for any administrative adjudication hearing commenced under this subchapter
except in cases where a continuance is necessary to protect the rights of the
respondent or owner. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a
continuance. Any continuance authorized by a Hearing Officer shall not exceed
28 days.
   (F)   Judicial review. Any final decision by a Hearing Officer that a code
violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final determination for
purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to review under the Illinois
Administrative Review Law, ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq., or as
hereinafter amended. Any person filing for judicial review under the
Administrative Review Law shall be subject to the assessment of costs for the
preparation and certification of the record of proceedings before the Hearing
Officer. The cost shall be assessed as $100 for the first page of the
transcript and $25 for each page thereafter. Any failure to pay the fee shall
subject the party seeking review to the provisions of ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, § 3-
109, including dismissal of the complaint on motion of the city.
(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)
§ 32.022 NON-RESIDENT HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Persons who are not residents of the city may contest the merits of
the alleged violation without attending a hearing as provided in §
32.021 above by submitting a waiver of hearing and a notarized statement of
facts specifying grounds for challenging the notice of violation.
   (B)   The Hearing Officer shall issue to the Adjudication Hearing
Administrator a finding and order based on the citation and notarized statement
of facts.
   (C)   The Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall notify the respondent on
the Hearing Officer’s finding and order at the address provided by the non-
resident.
   (D)   In all other respects, the procedures and rules set forth in this
subchapter shall apply to non-residents.
(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)
§ 32.023 ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT; PENALTIES.
   (A)   The owner or responsible party charged with any violation of the code,
upon a finding of liability, shall be fined an amount set forth in the Fine
Schedule attached to Ord. 2007-03-00900, passed 3-27-2007 as Table A. For each
violation not expressly described in the Fine Schedule, the applicable penalty
set forth in the code shall apply, provided that where no specific penalty is
described the general penalty provisions of the code shall apply. Separate
fines shall be imposed against a person for each and every finding of liability
of each and every violation of the code.
   (B)   Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction or cost imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois Administrative
Review Law are a debt due and owing the City of Oak Forest and may be collected
in accordance with applicable law.
   (C)   Failure of the respondent to pay such fine or penalty after the
exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law may result in, if applicable:
      (1)   The immobilization of the person’s vehicle for failure to pay fines
or penalties for five or more parking violations; and
      (2)   The suspension of the person’s driver’s license for failure to pay
fines or penalties for ten or more parking violations.
   (D)   After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of
an ordinance violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
findings, decision and order of the Hearing Officer may be enforced in the same
manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   In any case in which a respondent has failed to comply with a judgment
ordering that respondent to correct an ordinance violation or imposing any fine
or other sanction as a result of an ordinance violation, any expenses incurred
by the city to enforce the judgment entered against that respondent, including,
but not limited to, attorney’s fees, court costs and costs related to property
demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of competent
jurisdiction or a Hearing Officer, shall be a debt due and owing the city and
may be collected in accordance with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being
fixed by the Hearing Officer pursuant to this division (E), the Adjudication
Hearing Administrator shall serve a notice to the respondent that states that
respondent shall appear at a hearing before the Hearing Officer to determine
whether the respondent has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall
set forth the date for the hearing, which shall not be less than seven days
from the date service is effective, as provided in §
32.020 above.
   (F)   Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article XII of the
Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq.), or
by the Uniform Commercial Code (ILCS Ch. 810, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.), a lien
shall be imposed on the real estate or personal property, or both, of the
respondent in the amount of any debt due and owing the city under this
subchapter. The lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien
pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (G)   (1)   The Hearing Officer may set aside any judgment entered by
default and set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed by the respondent
within 15 days after the issuance of the order of default, if the Hearing
Officer determines that the respondent’s failure to appear at the hearing was
for good cause, or at any time if the respondent establishes, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the city did not provide proper service of
process.
      (2)   In addition, for the purpose of motor vehicle violations, the
grounds for the petition may include:
         (a)   The person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited
vehicle on the date the parking violation notice was first issued; or
         (b)   The person having already paid the fine or penalty for the
parking violation in question.
      (3)   If any judgment is set aside pursuant to this division, the Hearing
Officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien which has
been recorded for any debt due and owing the city as a result of the vacated
default judgment.
      (4)   The petitioner shall appear with appropriate evidence, so that if
the petition is granted, he or she is prepared to proceed immediately with a
hearing on the merits.
(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)
RULES APPLICABLE TO MOTOR VEHICLECITATIONS
§ 32.035 ENFORCEMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLE VIOLATIONS; CITATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the
code prohibiting or restricting vehicular parking or standing, the owner shall
be prima facie responsible for the violation and subject to the penalty
therefor.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the
code prohibiting or restricting vehicular parking or standing, any police
officer, traffic control aide, other designated member of the Police
Department, parking enforcement aide or other person designated by the
Adjudication Hearing Administrator observing the violation may issue a parking
violation notice, and serve the notice on the owner of the vehicle by handing
it to the operator of the vehicle, if he or she is present, or by affixing it
to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. The issuer of the notice shall specify
on the notice his or her identification number, the particular parking
regulation allegedly violated, the make and state registration number of the
cited vehicle, and the place, date, time and nature of the alleged violation
and shall certify the correctness of the specified information by signing his
or her name as provided in § 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 11-208.3, as amended.
   (C)   The parking violation notice shall contain the information required
under the previous division. In addition, the notices shall state the
applicable fine as provided herein, the monetary penalty which shall be
automatically assessed for late payment, the vehicle immobilization and
driver’s license suspension that may be imposed if fines and penalties are not
paid in full, that payment of the indicated fine, and of any applicable penalty
for late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of the violation, and
information as to the availability of an administrative adjudication hearing in
which the violation may be contested on its merits and the manner in which the
hearing may be had.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner of the
vehicle or his or her designee, to remove from a vehicle a parking violation
notice affixed pursuant to this subchapter.
   (E)   The Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall distribute parking
violation notices to parking enforcement aides, other persons authorized to
issue parking violating notices, and the Department of Police for issuance
pursuant to these provisions. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the
distribution of the notice forms within the Department of Police, shall
maintain a record of each set of notices issued to individual members of the
department and shall retain a receipt for every set so issued.
   (F)   The Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall compile and maintain
complete and accurate records relating to all parking violation notices issued
and the dispositions thereof, whether by payment of the fine or by final
determination of the Hearing Officer. In addition, the traffic compliance
administrator shall make certified reports to the Secretary of State pursuant
to § 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.036 DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY; MOTOR VEHICLE CITATIONS.
   (A)   Any person on whom a parking violation notice has been served pursuant
to this subchapter shall within seven days from the date of the notice: pay the
indicated fine; or request an administrative adjudication hearing as provided
by this subchapter to contest the charged violation. A response by mail shall
be deemed timely if postmarked within seven days of the issuance of the notice
of violation.
   (B)   If the respondent requests an administrative hearing to contest the
cited violation, the Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall notify the owner
in writing of the location and time for a hearing in accordance with provisions
of §
32.020 above.
   (C)   If no response is made in accordance with division (A) of this
section, the Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall set a hearing and cause a
notice of violation to be sent to the respondent in accordance with §
32.020 above. The notice shall specify that the respondent may avoid a hearing
by paying the fine described in the notice prior to the date of the hearing and
that payment of the fine shall constitute a final disposition of the citation.
   (D)   Where a respondent either fails to pay the indicated fine prior to the
hearing or fails to appear at a hearing, a final determination of parking
violation liability shall be entered in the amount of the fine indicated on the
notice of violation. Failure to pay the fine within 21 days of issuance of a
Hearing Officer’s final determination of liability will result in the
imposition of a late payment penalty pursuant to division (E) herein. Upon the
occurrence of a final determination of parking violation liability and after
expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois
Administrative Review Law may be sought any unpaid fine or penalty will
constitute a debt due and owing the city. The notice of violation issued under
divisions (B) or (C) above shall provide the above information.
   (E)   Failure by any respondent to pay or mail payment of the fine for a
parking violation within 21 days of the issuance of the final determination of
liability will automatically subject the respondent to a penalty for late
payment. The penalty for late payment shall be $10.
   (F)   A person charged with a parking violation may contest the charge
through an administrative adjudication hearing limited to one or more of the
following grounds with appropriate evidence to support:
      (1)   That the respondent was not the owner or lessee of the cited
vehicle at the time of the violation;
      (2)   That the cited vehicle or its state registration plates were stolen
at the time the violation occurred;
      (3)   That the relevant signs prohibiting or restricting parking were
missing or obscured:
      (4)   That the relevant parking meter was inoperable or malfunctioned
through no fault of the respondent;
      (5)   That the facts alleged in the parking violation notice are
inconsistent or do not support a finding that the specified regulation was
violated.
(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)
§ 32.037 LESSOR OF VEHICLE; LIABILITY.
   In accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1306, the Illinois Vehicle
Code, no person who is the lessor of a vehicle pursuant to a written lease
agreement shall be liable for a violation of any standing or parking regulation
of this subchapter involving the vehicle during the period of the lease if upon
receipt of a notice of violation he or she shall, within 60 days thereafter,
provide to the Adjudication Hearing Administrator the name and address of the
lessee. Upon receipt of a lessor’s notification of the name and address of his
or her lessee, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-1305 or 11-1306, the
Illinois Vehicle Code, the Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall cause a
notice of violation to be sent to the lessee as provided herein. If the lessor
fails to provide the Adjudication Hearing Administrator with the name and
address of the lessee within 60 days of receiving notice, the lessor shall be
liable for the full amount of the violation and late penalties after being
provided with the opportunity for a hearing.
(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)
§ 32.038 IMMOBILIZATION PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Adjudication Hearing Administrator is hereby authorized to direct
and supervise a program of vehicle immobilization for the purpose of enforcing
the parking regulations of the code. The program of vehicle immobilization
shall provide for immobilizing any eligible vehicle registered to the owner by
immobilizing in place or towing, as defined in division (C) below.
   (B)   If the eligible vehicle is parked or left in violation of any
provision of the Traffic Code for which the vehicle is subject to an immediate
tow, or in any place where it constitutes an obstruction or hazard, or where it
impedes city workers during such operations as snow removal, the vehicle may be
towed to a vehicle pound or relocated to a legal parking place and there
restrained.
   (C)   (1)   When the registered owner of any vehicle has accumulated three
or more final determinations of parking violation or automated traffic law
enforcement system liability for which the fines and penalties, if applicable,
have not been paid in full, the Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall cause
a notice of impending vehicle immobilization to be sent as prescribed in this
subchapter.
      (2)   The notice of impending vehicle immobilization shall state the name
and address of the registered owner, the state registration number of the
vehicle or vehicles registered to the owner, and the serial numbers of parking
violation notices which have resulted in final determination of liability for
which the fines or penalties remain unpaid.
      (3)   Failure to pay the fines and penalties owed within 21 days from the
date of the notice will result in the inclusion of the state registration
number of the vehicle or vehicles of the owner on an immobilization list.
      (4)   A person may challenge the validity of the notice of impending
vehicle immobilization by requesting a hearing and appearing in person to
submit evidence which would conclusively disprove liability. Upon a request for
a hearing, the Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall schedule the hearing
for the next regular hearing date.
      (5)   Documentary evidence which would conclusively disprove liability
shall be based solely on the following grounds:
         (a)   That all fines and penalties for the parking violations cited in
the notice have been paid in full; or
         (b)   That the registered owner has not accumulated three or more
final determinations of parking violation or automated traffic law enforcement
system liability which were unpaid at the time the notice of impending vehicle
immobilization was issued.
      (6)   The hearing on eligibility for impoundment shall not provide a
venue for a collateral attack on the original determinations of liability
except to contest service of process.
   (D)   Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a post immobilization and
towing notice shall be sent to the owner, or if the vehicle is immobilized in
place, affixed to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
      (1)   The affixed notice shall warn that the vehicle is immobilized and
that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its damage. The notice shall
also state that the unauthorized removal of or damage to the immobilizing
restraint is a violation of ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 16-1 and 21-1, the Illinois
Criminal Code, The notice shall also provide information specifying how release
of the immobilizing restraint may be had, and how the registered owner may
obtain a post-immobilization hearing. If the restraint has not been released
within 24 hours of its placement, the restraint shall be released and the
vehicle towed and impounded.
      (2)   A post-towing notice shall be mailed to the registered owner of a
vehicle immobilized by towing. The notice shall contain:
         (a)   The date and time the vehicle was towed;
         (b)   The location from which it was towed;
         (c)   The case number;
         (d)   Reference to the cause of the tow for immobilization;
         (e)   A statement that the vehicle is subject to towing and storage
charges;
         (f)   The name, address, telephone number, and hours of operation of
the storage facility where the vehicle can be claimed upon payment of towing,
storage fees, fines and penalties owed.
   (E)   The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other authorized person may
secure the release of the vehicle by paying the immobilization, towing and
storage fees provided in division (H) herein, and all fines and penalties
remaining due on each final determination of parking violation liability issued
to that person.
   (F)   The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall have the right to a post-
immobilization hearing to determine whether the immobilization or any
subsequent towing and impoundment was erroneous, if the owner files a written
request for a hearing with the Adjudication Heating Administrator within 14
days after immobilization or 14 days of the date of the notice sent pursuant to
division (G) herein, whichever is later. The determination of the Hearing
Officer regarding the validity of the immobilization shall become final for the
purpose of judicial review under the Administrative Review Law of Illinois upon
issuance.
   (G)   Within ten days after a vehicle has been impounded, a notice of
impoundment shall be sent by first class mail, to the address of the registered
owner as listed with the Secretary of State. The notice shall state that the
owner has the right to request a post-immobilization and post-towing hearing as
provided in division (E) herein, and that if the vehicle is not claimed within
30 days from the date of the notice, the vehicle may be sold or otherwise
disposed of in accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-208, the Illinois
Vehicle Code.
   (H)   The fee for immobilization in place shall be $50 and/or a fee for
towing subsequent to the immobilization and a storage fee for every 24-hour
period the vehicle is retained shall be assessed. No fees shall be assessed for
any immobilization or tow which has been determined to be erroneous.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful to relocate or tow any vehicle restrained by an
immobilization device without the approval of the Adjudication Hearing
Administrator or his or her designee. The registered owner of the immobilized
vehicle and any person who relocates an immobilized vehicle in violation of
this division shall each be subject to a penalty of $750 for the violation.
(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007; Am. Ord. 2011-01-0321O, passed 1-11-
2011)
§ 32.039 DRIVER’S LICENSE SUSPENSION.
   (A)   When a person has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing
pursuant to this subchapter on ten or more parking violations or five or more
automated traffic law violations, the Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall
cause a notice of impending driver’s license suspension to be sent in the form
as required by the Secretary of State. The notice shall state that failure to
pay the amount owing within 45 days of the date of the notice will result in
the city’s notifying the Secretary of State that the person is eligible for
initiation of suspension proceedings pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   (B)   If a person sent a notice pursuant to division (A) above fails to pay
the amount owing within the time stated on the notice, the Adjudication Hearing
Administrator may file with the Secretary of State, a certified report, in
accordance with the Illinois Vehicle Code, that the person is eligible for
initiation of suspension proceedings. The Adjudication Hearing Administrator
shall assess a $20 filing fee against the person named in the certified report
to reimburse the city for the expense of preparing and filing the certified
report with the Secretary of State.
   (C)   A person named in a certified report filed pursuant to division (B)
above may, within 21 days of the date of the notice sent by the Secretary of
State pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code, file with the Adjudication Hearing
Administrator a written statement and supporting documentation to challenge the
report; provided, however, the grounds for such challenge shall be limited to:
the person not having been the owner or lessee of the vehicle or vehicles
receiving ten or more parking violations notices on the date or dates the
notices were issued; or the person having already paid the fine and penalty for
the ten or more violations indicated on the report. The Adjudication Hearing
Administrator shall send notice of the decision on the challenge of the report
after receipt thereof. The challenge to the eligibility for suspension
proceedings, and any hearing requested under division (E) below, shall not
provide a venue for a collateral attack on the original determinations of
liability except to contest service of process.
   (D)   If a person named in a certified report, has paid the previously
reported fine or penalty or if the report is determined by the Adjudication
Hearing Administrator to be in error, the Adjudication Hearing Administrator
shall notify the Secretary of State in accordance with the Illinois Vehicle
Code. A certified copy of the notification shall be given, upon request and at
no charge, to the person named therein
   (E)   An administrative hearing to contest an impending suspension or
suspension may be had upon filing a written request with the Secretary of
State, The filing fee for this hearing shall be $20, to be paid at the time the
request is made. The city shall reimburse the Secretary of State for all
reasonable costs incurred by the Secretary as a result of filing a certified
report, including but not limited to the costs of providing the required notice
and the costs incurred by the Secretary in any hearing conducted with respect
to the report and any appeal from a hearing.
(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007; Am. Ord. 2011-01-0321O, passed 1-11-
2011)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.050 ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICES, ORGANIZATION, FUNCTION OF OFFICES AND CHAIN
OF COMMAND.
   There is established the full-time offices of Police Chief, Deputy Police
Chief, Police Lieutenant, Police
Sergeants, Police Patrol Officers and any other special officers and employees
in the Police Department. The Police Department shall be organized and the
offices thereof shall function as provided by the rules and regulations and
shall be subject to the control fo the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
and the Mayor and City Council where in each case, the control is provided by
law. The chain of command shall be in the following order: Police Chief, Deputy
Police Chief, Police Lieutenant, Police Sergeants, Police Patrol Officers and
other special officers and employees and part-time/auxiliary Police Officers
who shall be directly under the command of the Police Chief. In the event that
the Police Chief or Deputy Police Chief is discharged from that position
without cause, he or she shall revert to and be established in whatever rank he
or she held immediately prior to that he or she was removed from, except for
previously appointed positions, and thereafter to all the benefits of that rank
without regard as to whether a vacancy then exists in that rank.
(Ord. 2014-07-0504O, passed 7-22-2014)
§ 32.051 APPOINTMENTS AND DISMISSALS.
   (A)   The Police Chief, Deputy Police Chief and the part-time police
officers shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the advice and consent of
the City Council. The Chief of Police shall have full authority to discipline
or discharge part-time officers, provided any discharge is with the Mayor’s
consent.
   (B)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have the authority to
appoint to the offices of Sergeant and Patrol Officer to the full-time Police
Department, with the approval of Mayor and City Council.
   (C)   Part-time officers shall be subject to the direction and control of
the Chief of Police at all times during the performance of their duties.
   (D)   Part-time Police Officers shall further abide by all rules,
regulations, policies, procedures and orders of the Oak Forest Police
Department.
(Ord. 2014-07-0504O, passed 7-22-2014)
§ 32.052 AUTHORITY OF CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION REGARDING RADIO OPERATORS AND
COMMUNITY RELATIONS PERSONNEL.
   Any radio operator supervisor, radio operator or community relations person
who has been performing his or her duties prior to the effective date of this
section (Ord. 733, passed 11-6-1973), shall become subject to the jurisdiction
of the Civil Service Commission immediately. The appointment of any other radio
operator supervisor and/or radio operator shall be made by the Commission in
accordance with Commission regulations.
(2000 Code, § 2.34.030)
§ 32.053 TRAINING PROGRAM.
   (A)   The city elects to participate in the program provided for in the
Illinois Police Training Act.
   (B)   Before an individual may commence regular employment as a police
officer, he or she shall be certified by the Illinois Local Governmental Law
Enforcement Officers Training Board as having successfully completed an
approved training course as provided in the Act.
   (C)   The basic training must be completed by the trainee within his or her
probationary period of one year.
   (D)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall require that any
person appointed to the department, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-29
and the Act, shall not become a regular member of the Department unless and
until he or she has completed the approved training course within one year of
the date of his or her initial employment.
(2000 Code, § 2.34.040) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed --1999)
§ 32.054 RULES AND REGULATIONS; REVIEW BY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   The rules and regulations of the Police Department, as revised, dated
January 24, 1977, are adopted.
   (B)   The rules and regulations of the Police Department shall be reviewed
on a regular basis, and the Chief of Police is the proper official to recommend
any correction and/or deletion which may become necessary from time to time.
(2000 Code, § 2.34.050)
§ 32.055 AUXILIARY POLICE.
   (A)   Appointment and termination. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of
Council, may appoint auxiliary police officers in such number as the Mayor and
Council from time to time deem necessary. The appointment of any or all
auxiliary police officers may be terminated by the Mayor subject to the advice
and consent of Council.
   (B)   Status in Police Department. Auxiliary police officers shall not be
considered to be members of the regular Police Department and shall not
supplement members of the Department in the performance of their assigned and
normal duties, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter.
   (C)   Qualifications. Prior to appointment, all auxiliary police officers
shall:
      (1)   Be fingerprinted and the fingerprints shall be checked with the
Federal Bureau of Investigation for any possible criminal record;
      (2)   Be 21 to 35 years of age, except that if the applicant is over 35
years of age, the age limit may be extended one year for each year of previous
police experience of the applicant;
      (3)   Be examined and approved as physically fit by a medical doctor
designated by the Mayor and Council;
      (4)   Possess at least a high school diploma;
      (5)   Pass a physical agility test, which test shall be per the
specifications and under the direction of the Chief of Police;
      (6)   Pass a personality test, which test shall be per the specifications
and under the direction of the Chief;
      (7)   Pass a written aptitude test, which test shall be per the
specifications and under the direction of the Chief;
      (8)   Pass background checks as might be requested by the Chief; and
      (9)   Take and pass an oral examination to be given by a board of regular
and auxiliary police officers, which board shall be appointed by and be under
the direction of the Chief.
   (D)   Identification symbols; control by Chief. Identification symbols worn
by auxiliary police officers shall be different and distinct from those used by
the regular Police Department and shall be selected and chosen by the Chief of
Police. Auxiliary police officers shall, at all times during the performance of
their duties, be subject to the direction and control of the Chief.
   (E)   Powers and duties. An auxiliary police officer shall be a conservator
of the peace and shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   To aid or direct traffic within the municipality;
      (2)   To aid in the control of natural or human-made disasters;
      (3)   To aid in cases of civil disorder as directed by the Chief of
Police. In cases which render it impractical for the members of the regular
Police Department to perform normal and regular police duties, the Chief is
authorized to assign auxiliary police officers to perform normal and regular
police duties;
      (4)   To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all
persons who break the peace or are found to be violating any municipal
ordinance or any criminal law of the state;
      (5)   To commit arrested persons for examination;
      (6)   If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody overnight or
Sunday in any safe place or until they can be brought before a proper judicial
officer;
      (7)   To exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace that the
Mayor and Council may prescribe; and
      (8)   To serve and execute all warrants for violations of municipal
ordinances or state criminal laws within the city limits, and for this purpose
to have all the common law and statutory power of sheriffs.
   (F)   Carrying firearms. Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms,
except with the permission of the Chief of Police, and then only when in
uniform and in the performance of their duties.
   (G)   Weapons training.
      (1)   Auxiliary police officers, prior to entering upon any of their
duties, shall receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other
police procedures by the Chief of Police.
      (2)   The course shall be not less than ten hours in duration.
      (3)   Upon completion of the course, the Chief shall file with the City
Clerk a certificate attesting to the auxiliary police officer’s completion of
the course.
   (H)   Compensation. Auxiliary police officers shall be paid for each hour of
service performed, at a rate set by Council, provided that the service is
performed at the direction of the Chief of Police.
(2000 Code, § 2.34.060) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed --1999)
§ 32.056 SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS.
   (A)   The Mayor, with the consent of Council and on the recommendation of
the Chief of Police, is authorized and directed to appoint special officers, to
be known as school crossing guards, in numbers as he or she may deem necessary,
to perform school crossing duties under the direction of the Chief of Police
and in compliance with the rules and regulations as the Chief promulgates.
   (B)   The guards shall wear badges, dress and insignia as the Chief directs
and shall be equipped in a manner which the Chief deems necessary for the
proper discharge of their duties.
   (C)   The Chief shall promulgate rules relating to the qualifications and
duties of the guards. The Mayor, with the consent of Council and on the
recommendation of the Chief, is responsible for the appointment and removal of
the guards. Those persons shall serve with compensation as may be provided for
by the Mayor and Council.
   (D)   No school crossing guard shall exercise his or her authority as a
guard, or wear the uniform or insignia, or display his or her badge in an
attempt to exercise his or her authority, except during the performance of
actual authorized duty.
   (E)   No person not duly appointed and sworn in as a school crossing guard
shall impersonate an officer or wear, carry or display the badge, designated
dress or insignia of a guard.
(2000 Code, § 2.34.070)
§ 32.057 POLICE PENSION FUND.
   There is established a police pension fund in and for the city, as provided
by state law. That fund shall be financed and administered as provided in ILCS
Ch.40, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.
(2000 Code, § 2.34.080) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed --1999)
§ 32.058 DEPUTY CHIEF(S) OF POLICE.
   (A)   (1)   There is established the position(s) of Deputy Chief(s) of
Police and the number of such position(s) shall be set by the Council. The
Deputy Chief position(s) shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council. The term of the appointment(s) shall begin at the start of
the fiscal year, May 1, and expire on April 30, the final date of the fiscal
year.
      (2)   In the event of failure to appoint a Deputy Chief(s), the person or
persons so qualified shall continue the position(s) until a successor or
successors has/have been chosen and approved, until the position(s) has/have
been eliminated or until the Deputy Chief(s) has/have been removed, whichever
comes first.
   (B)   In addition to salary and benefits otherwise paid, the Deputy Chief(s)
shall be paid an amount set by Council each year as compensation for service in
the position of Deputy Chief(s).
   (C)   Any Deputy Chief(s) may be removed from the position during his or her
term by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The grounds for
removal may include job performance, alternate administrative procedures,
efficiency or otherwise. Deputy Chief(s) shall have the right to a hearing
before the City Council regarding the basis for removal.
   (D)   Subject to the direction of the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief(s) shall
be responsible for the management, administration, general supervision and
direction of all personnel of the Police Department and for the coordination of
all staff functions within the Police Department. The Deputy Chief(s) shall
also be responsible for the general good order of the Department and for
attaining and retaining maximum efficiency and effectiveness from the
personnel, equipment and facilities of the Department.
   (E)   In the absence of the Chief of Police, a Deputy Chief shall be
designated by the Chief of Police and serve as the administrative officer of
the Police Department.
(2000 Code, § 2.34.090) (Ord. 2013-07-0454O, § 2, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 32.059 POLICE LIAISON AND COUNSELOR.
   (A)   Creation of the office.
      (1)   There is created the position of police liaison and counselor.
      (2)   Eligible persons for appointment shall be submitted by the Chief of
Police to the Mayor.
      (3)   The police liaison and counselor shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the City Council.
      (4)   The term of appointment shall begin at the start of the fiscal
year, May 1, and expire on April 30, the final date of the fiscal year.
      (5)   In the event that there is a failure to appoint the police liaison
and counselor, the person so qualified shall continue in the position until a
successor has been chosen and approved, until the position has been eliminated
or until the person holding the position has been removed, whichever comes
first.
   (B)   Objectives.
      (1)   The objectives of the program include the creation of a liaison
between students, schools, the Police Department and other law enforcement
agencies.
      (2)   The program is intended to be beneficial to the youth of the
community and their parents who have encounters with the law.
      (3)   The program is created to increase the citizens of Oak Forest
awareness of the law.
      (4)   The police liaison and counselor will serve as a consultant to the
school staff and students.
      (5)   The police liaison and counselor will assist in the development of
programs and give recommendations for those young people who have law-related
problems.
      (6)   In the event of law violations in and about the school or
community, the police liaison and counselor shall refer those violations to the
appropriate Police Department or agency.
   (C)   Qualifications. The Police Chief shall screen any and all persons and
review their qualifications for the position. These qualifications shall
include the following:
      (1)   Masters degree in education or counseling;
      (2)   Police officer with at least five years’ experience as a youth
officer;
      (3)   Minimum of three years as a youth/family counselor with a
recognized agency or equivalent experience; and
      (4)   An interest and understanding of people, as well as a personality
which will command respect. The Police Chief shall have the ability to waive
one or more of the criteria for any applicant.
   (D)   Duties. The police liaison and counselor shall serve at the direction
of the Chief of Police or his or her designee. The police liaison and counselor
shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
      (1)   Serve as liaison between the school and community agencies;
      (2)   Coordinate any necessary police coverage for extra curricular
activities requiring the police at any school within the jurisdiction of Oak
Forest;
      (3)   Keep records and report to the Chief of Police as requested;
      (4)   Conduct scheduled office hours for counseling youth and meeting
with parents at the Police Department or other designated location;
      (5)   Refer any criminal activities which may occur in or about the
school as well as the community to the Police Department;
      (6)   Assist in the development of fire and disaster procedures at local
schools. The police will direct and advise police and fire officials who are
called in to handle emergencies;
      (7)   Use reasonable means to prevent or control any violence in the
school or the community;
      (8)   Serve as liaison officer between the school and the legal
authorities and promote effective communication between the school and the
local Police Department and/or other law enforcement agencies;
      (9)   Work with appropriate school personnel in the general area of crime
prevention on school property; and
      (10)   Participate in counseling youth, processing cases of truancy,
local ordinance or state statute violations, and preventing loitering and
trespassing on school property as well as the community.
   (E)   Compensation. The rate of compensation shall be determined from time
to time by Council and shall be subject to the city budget and appropriations
ordinance in the respective year.
   (F)   Removal. The police liaison and counselor may be removed from the
position during his or her term by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council. The grounds for removal may include job performance, alternate
administrative procedures or efficiencies or otherwise. The police liaison and
counselor shall have the right to a hearing before the City Council regarding
the basis for removal.
   (G)   Position defined. Council declares the position herein created is not
an office as defined in state statute. Nothing herein stated is intended to
prohibit any individual appointed from continuing to serve as a police officer
as described in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1 or the Oak Forest Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners rules and regulations for an auxiliary police officer
as described in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-20.
(2000 Code, § 2.34.100) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed --1999)
§ 32.060 PART-TIME POLICE OFFICERS; CERTIFICATION AND HIRING STANDARDS.
   (A)   All applicants for the position of part-time police officer must
comply with all state laws requiring certification standards and must meet the
following hiring standards of the City of Oak Forest:
      (1)   The applicant must be a currently employed full-time police officer
in good standing with a certificate from the Illinois Law Enforcement Training
and Standards Board.
      (2)   The applicant must have a minimum of three years full-time
experience as a police officer.
      (3)   The applicant must be of good character without a conviction for a
felony or crime involving moral turpitude and pass a thorough background
examination.
      (4)   The applicant must be in good physical condition and pass a
physical examination, drug test and any other exams as directed by the Chief of
Police to determine fitness for duty.
      (5)   The applicant must successfully complete the Field Training and
Evaluation Program.
   (B)   Part-time police officers shall not be assigned under any
circumstances to supervise or direct full-time police officers of the police
department, nor shall part-time police officers be used as permanent
replacements for permanent full-time police officers.
   (C)   Part-time police officers shall not count as "manpower" as defined in
the police officers union contract.
   (D)   Part-time police officers shall not work more than 1,000 hours
annually.
(Ord. 2006-06-0036O, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2007-02-0084O, passed 2-13-
2007)
§ 32.061 FEE FOR PROCESSING ADMINISTRATION.
   The Police Department will charge an administrative fee of $50 for the
processing of an individual in any legal process, civil or criminal, or on any
bookable arrest, including any arrest on a warrant. Any fee not paid within 30
daysof processing, shall be subject to a fee of $200.
(Ord. 2011-01-0324O, passed 1-25-2011; Am. Ord. 2025-04-1080O, passed 4-22-
2025)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.070 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.
   There is established in and for the city a Fire Department. The Department
shall consist of a Fire Chief, a Bureau of Fire Prevention and such other
officers and personnel as may be provided for in this subchapter and from time
to time by Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.010) (Ord. 2008-12-0213O, passed 12-9-2008; Ord. 2009-01-
0217O, passed 1-27-2009)
§ 32.071 (RESERVED).
§ 32.072 (RESERVED)
§ 32.073 ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICES, ORGANIZATION, FUNCTION OF OFFICES AND CHAIN
OF COMMAND.
   There is established the full-time offices of Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief,
Lieutenant and Firefighter in the Fire Department. The Fire Department shall be
organized and the offices thereof shall function as provided by the rules and
regulations an shall be subject to the control of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners and the Mayor and City Council where in each case, the control is
provided by law. The chain of command shall be in the following order: Fire
Chief, Deputy Fire Chief, Lieutenants, Firefighters and part-time firefighters
who shall be directly under the command of the Fire Chief. In the event that
the Fire Chief or Deputy Fire Chief is discharged from that position without
cause, he or she shall revert to and be established in whatever rank he or she
held immediately prior to that he or she was removed from, except for
previously appointed positions, and thereafter be entitled to all the benefits
of that rank without regard as to whether a vacancy then exists in that rank.
(Ord. 2014-07-5003O, passed 7-2-2014)
§ 32.074 APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   The Fire chief and the Deputy Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to the advice and consent of Council.
   (B)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have the authority to
appoint certified mobile intensive care unit technician/certified firefighters
to the full-time Fire Department, with the approval of Mayor and City Council.
   (C)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have the authority to
appoint full-time members of the Department to promotional positions according
to the Fire Department promotional Act (ILCS Ch. 50, Act 742) upon
recommendation of the Fire Chief, with the approval of the Mayor and City
Council.
   (D)   The Mayor, with consultation with the Fire Chief, shall have the
authority to appoint part-time Fire Department positions.
(Ord. 2014-07-5003O, passed 7-2-2014)
§ 32.075 FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   Duties. The Fire Chief shall have the management and control of all
matters and things pertaining to the Fire Department and of all personnel in
the Department. All personnel shall be under the direction and supervision of
the Chief. The Fire Chief shall report immediately to the City Administrator
and then to the Mayor.
   (B)   Investigation of fires. The Chief shall cause all fires to be
investigated, where the causes are undetermined or where the use of
incendiaries is suspected, and shall maintain a record of the investigation and
of the evidence in each case.
   (C)   Annual report. At the end of each calendar year, the Chief shall
prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council a report of all fires that have
taken place during the year, with the causes thereof, if ascertainable, and the
number, a description and the value of all buildings damaged or destroyed.
   (D)   Records. The Chief shall maintain complete records of all business
transactions in the Department and of all property placed in his or her custody
or charge.
   (E)   Apparatus inspection. The Chief shall cause an inspection to be made
at least annually, of all fire apparatus, equipment and houses and shall make
his or her report findings and recommendations to the Mayor and Council in time
for their consideration of the budget.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.060) (Ord. 2008-12-0213O, passed 12-9-2008; Ord. 2009-01-
0217O, passed 1-27-2009)
§ 32.076 DEPUTY CHIEF.
   There is established the position of Deputy Chief. The Deputy Chief shall
perform all duties delegated to him or her in the manner prescribed by law or
ordinance, or by the rules and regulations of the Fire Department. In the
absence of his or her superior officer, the Deputy Chief shall take command of
companies, and the authority, powers, duties and responsibilities of such
superior officer shall be vested in such Deputy Chief.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.070) (Ord. 2008-12-0213O, passed 12-9-2008; Ord. 2009-01-
0217O, passed 1-27-2009)
§ 32.077 (RESERVED)
§ 32.078 LIEUTENANT.
   There is established the position of lieutenant of the Fire Department. In
the absence of his or her immediate superior officer, the lieutenant shall take
command of companies, and the authority, powers, duties and responsibilities of
such superior officer shall be vested in such lieutenant.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.090) (Ord. 2008-12-0213O, passed 12-9-2008; Ord. 2009-01-
0217O, passed 1-27-2009)
§ 32.079 (RESERVED)
§ 32.080 FIREFIGHTERS.
   There is established the position of firefighter in the Fire Department.
Appointments to the full-time and part-time positions shall be made as provided
in §
32.074 above.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.110) (Ord. 2008-12-0213O, passed 12-9-2008; Ord. 2009-01-
0217O, passed 1-27-2009)
§ 32.081 COMPENSATION.
   The Fire Chief and members of the Fire Department shall receive for their
services such salary and compensation as are established by ordinance of the
city.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.120)
§ 32.082 BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION.
   (A)   There is established a Bureau of Fire Prevention. It shall consist of
officers, members, part-time firefighters and employees as are provided for by
ordinance. The Bureau shall be under the direction and supervision of the Fire
Chief and all fire inspection work of the Bureau shall be under his or her
authority.
   (B)   The Chief or his or her subordinates within the Bureau shall interpret
the Fire Prevention Code of the city in harmony with the Building Code of the
city and shall make no requirement inconsistent with or contrary to the Fire
Prevention Code.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.130)
§ 32.083 ASSISTANCE OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The Fire Chief or his or her subordinates may call upon the Police
Department for aid in the enforcement of any fire regulation.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.140)
§ 32.084 PARTICIPATION IN STATE TRAINING COURSE.
   (A)   The city elects to participate in the programs provided for in the
Illinois Fire Protection Training Act.
   (B)   Before an individual may commence regular full-time employment as a
firefighter, he or she must be certified by the State Fire Marshal as a
Firefighter II, as having successfully completed an approved training course as
provided in such act.
   (C)   The Firefighter II training must be completed by the trainee within
his or her probationary period of 12 months, except for volunteers and part-
time and paid on-call personnel.
   (D)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall require that any
person appointed to the Fire Department shall not become a regular member of
the Department unless and until he or she successfully completes, pursuant to
such Act, the approved training course within 12 months of the date of his or
her initial employment.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.150)
§ 32.085 COMMAND OF DEPARTMENT; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall have the sole and absolute control and command
over all persons on duty connected with the Fire Department.
   (B)   He or she shall possess full power and authority over the
organization, government and discipline of the Department and the direction and
control of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
   (C)   To that end, the Chief may, from time to time, prescribe and establish
rules and regulations as he or she deems advisable, subject to the provisions
of the Police and Fire Commissioners Act and the codes and ordinances adopted
by the Mayor and Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.160)
§ 32.086 REPORTS TO STATE FIRE MARSHAL; INVESTIGATIONS; ENFORCEMENT OF STATE
LAW.
   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for keeping records and for making
necessary reports to the State Fire Marshal. He or she shall assist the Fire
Marshal in any investigation the Fire Marshal deems expedient or necessary to
make. The Chief shall further be responsible for the enforcement of state laws
concerning fire protection.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.170)
§ 32.087 SUSPENSION OF FIREFIGHTERS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall have the management and control of all matters
and things pertaining to the Fire Department. He or she may suspend any
firefighter from duty, but he or she shall report the suspension to the Board
of Fire and Police Commissioners at its next regular meeting, and the reasons
for his or her action.
   (B)   When the report is made, the Board shall take such action thereon as
it deems to be just and right. Any firefighter so suspended shall not be
entitled to compensation while so suspended, nor until he or she is returned to
duty by the proper authority.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.180)
§ 32.088 HAVING OR MAKING KEYS TO ENGINE HOUSE OR FIRE ALARM BOXES.
   No person shall have in his or her possession or make or cause to be made
any key to any engine or truck house or fire alarm telegraph box, or use or
cause to be used any such key, without the consent of the proper authority.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.190) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.089 APPROVAL OF BUILDING PLANS.
   The Fire Chief or his or her subordinates shall examine the plans of all
proposed buildings, except single-family dwellings, and shall pass on all
questions relating to the safety of life and property from fire. No permit for
a building shall be issued until plans are approved by the Chief or his or her
subordinate.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.200)
§ 32.090 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief or his or her subordinates are authorized to enter a
building, structure or premises for the purpose of determining whether or not
the building, structure or premises have been or are being constructed and
maintained in accordance with the fire regulations of the city.
   (B)   The Chief or his or her subordinates shall make or cause to be made
frequent regular inspections to secure efficient supervision of all buildings,
structures or places used for either manufacturing or commercial purposes, or
occupied or frequented by large numbers of people, and all school buildings,
public halls, churches, institutional buildings, theaters, multiple dwellings
and places of amusement, recreation or employment for the purpose of:
      (1)   Determining the safety of the occupants in the event of a fire,
panic or accident;
      (2)   Examining the working order and repair of doors, fire escapes and
firefighting appliances; the condition and maintenance of exits, corridors,
stairways and fire escapes and their approaches with respect to obstructions;
the disposition, quantity, arrangement and protection of stock, combustible
material, rubbish, heating devices, ovens, flammable liquids and explosives
with regard to safety from fires; and the protection of hazardous machinery,
appliances and apparatus; and
      (3)   Ascertaining whether or not the fire regulations or the city are
being efficiently complied with.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.210)
§ 32.091 INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall investigate or cause to be investigated all
complaints of violations of the fire regulations of the city.
   (B)   Where it is found that the fire regulations are being violated, or
that any building, structure or premises are in a condition as to be a probable
cause of fire, or are likely to endanger life or safety in case of fire, panic
or other accident, compliance may be attempted to be secured first by informal
action.
   (C)   Where compliance is not obtained by the informal action within a
reasonable time, a complaint for the violation, of the regulations shall be
initiated by the Chief or such subordinate as he or she may designate.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.220)
§ 32.092 RECORDS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall cause to be made and shall maintain, in a proper
manner, records of all inspections made and a summary of violations, together
with memoranda on the disposition of all violations found to exist.
   (B)   The records shall be open for inspection by the City Clerk, the Mayor,
Council, the Chief of Police, the Building Commissioner and building
inspectors.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.230)
§ 32.093 OVERCROWDING.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall not allow more persons to enter any place of
public assembly than the number of persons certified to by the Building
Commissioner, which number of persons appears on the license issued for the
place or for the premises.
   (B)   Any place of public assembly that is in violation of this section
shall be closed until the violation is corrected.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.240)
§ 32.094 CONTROL AND EXTINGUISHMENT OF FIRES.
   (A)   Orders of Chief.
      (1)   All persons in the vicinity of a fire or other emergency shall be
subject to the orders of the Fire Chief or other members of the Fire Department
in charge of the control and extinguishment of the fire.
      (2)   The Chief or other member in charge shall have the power to arrest
any person refusing to obey lawful orders issued in accordance with this
section and no person shall persist in refusing to obey an order.
   (B)   Cordons. The Fire Chief or other member in charge at a fire or other
emergency may prescribe and maintain the limits in the vicinity thereof within
which no person shall enter without the permission of the Chief or other
member.
   (C)   Removal and destruction of property. The Chief or other member in
charge at a fire or other emergency may cause the removal or destruction of any
property whenever, in his or her judgment, it becomes necessary to do so to
prevent the destruction of property by the communication of fire.
   (D)   Power of arrest. The Chief or other member in command at the scene of
a fire or other emergency, or while in charge of fire apparatus or companies,
may, at the time an offense is committed, or at any time thereafter, arrest any
person suspected of arson, incendiarism or malicious mischief or who conducts
himself or herself in a disorderly manner, or who refuses to obey that member
while acting in the discharge of duty, or who illegally gives or transmits
false alarms, or who wilfully, maliciously or negligently causes damage to fire
apparatus or houses.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.250)
§ 32.095 REPAIRS TO EQUIPMENT; BIDDING REQUIRED.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall, whenever any fire engine, hose, cart or other
apparatus or equipment requires immediate emergency repairs to be made, in
order to avoid delay in keeping the equipment ready for immediate service,
cause repairs to be made. The Chief shall immediately report, in writing, to
the Mayor and Council, the facts relating to the defective equipment and the
estimated cost of the repairs.
   (B)   (1)   Except as to the emergency repairs, the Fire Chief shall,
whenever any fire engine, hose, cart, truck or other equipment or apparatus
requires repairs, report that fact to the Mayor and Council, in writing, with
competitive bids, indicating the amount and nature of repairs required to be
made.
      (2)   If authorized by the Mayor and Council, the Fire Chief shall cause
the repairs to be made.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.260)
§ 32.096 SALVAGE FROM FIRES; PROOF OF OWNERSHIP.
   No person shall be entitled to take away any property in the possession of
the Fire Department that was saved from a fire until proof of ownership is
offered to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief or his or her subordinate.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.270) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.097 UNIFORMS.
   The officers and employees of the Fire Department, including the Fire Chief,
shall, at all times when on duty, wear suitable uniforms as the Chief may
prescribe.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.280)
§ 32.098 COMPENSATION OF INJURED FIREFIGHTERS.
   (A)   Any full-time member of the Fire Department sustaining an accidental
injury arising out of and in the course of his or her employment or in the
discharge of his or her duty shall be entitled to his or her usual salary
during the time of temporary disability, not to exceed a period of six months,
less the amount received by the injured firefighter as workers’ compensation
benefits or other income for temporary total disability paid by any insurer of
the city.
   (B)   Any part-time firefighter, authorized by the Fire Chief, the Mayor and
Council, who sustains an accidental injury arising out of and in the course of
his or her service as a part-time firefighter, shall be entitled to and only to
those benefits, rights and privileges set forth in any group accident insurance
policy in force at that time covering the Department.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.290)
§ 32.099 SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY; FEES.
   (A)   Members of the Fire Department are authorized to go outside the
corporate limits of the city for the purpose of rendering aid to other Fire
Departments, cities or municipalities in accordance with written mutual/
automatic aid agreements. However, the Department may not provide service
outside the corporate limits except on orders of the Fire Chief, the Fire
Department officer in charge or the Mayor, unless the city has undertaken, by
contract, to render service to property outside the corporate limits of the
city, in which case the Department may leave the corporate limits in
fulfillment of the contract.
   (B)   Members of the Fire Department are authorized and directed to render
emergency services to owner(s) or occupant(s) of premises outside the corporate
limits of the city, within the area described in division (C) below, on the
terms and conditions set forth in this section.
   (C)   The area covered by this section shall include all the land lying
within the boundaries which have been designated to be in the general
geographical response area as established by the Fire Department .
   (D)   The service shall be rendered to owner(s) of premises who have signed
an agreement to abide by and accept the terms of this section and who have paid
the rates prescribed in division (E) below.
   (E)   The rate for the service shall be $250 per year for single-family
homes. For multi-family dwellings, the rate shall be $300 per year, per unit,
and $500 per year for each business, to cover the use of emergency services of
the Fire Department. All annual fees shall be billed the first of May of each
fiscal year.
   (F)   Members of the Fire Department shall render emergency services to
owner(s) or occupant(s) of premises outside the corporate limits of the city,
within the area described in division (C) above, even though the owners or
occupants have not signed an agreement with the city.
   (G)   The city shall assess the following rates for Fire Department
emergency services to property owner(s) or occupant(s) of property who do not
have a current fire protection contract with the city:
      (1)   Per fire engine per hour: $250.
      (2)   Per truck company per hour: $250.
      (3)   Per ambulance per hour: $250.
      (4)   Per administrative vehicle per hour: $100.
      (5)   Per service vehicle per hour: $100.
      (6)   Per personnel per hour: $70.
      (7)   Five hundred dollars for extrication of person(s) from vehicle
involved in motor vehicle crash.**
      (8)   Five hundred dollars for the extinguishment of a motor vehicle
fire.**
      (9)   Five hundred dollars for debris removal, hazmat removal, fluid
removal, or any mitigation or other operational task performed by the fire
company at the scene.**
      ** These costs shall also include the costs of all materials and
equipment used, expended, depleted, destroyed, or removed from service as a
result of the service provided.
      (10)   A minimum of one hour shall be charged. Subsequent hours shall be
billed at 15-minute increments. These fees shall be paid to the city within 30
days from the date the services were rendered.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.300) (Ord. 2412, § 1, passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 2018-04-
06880, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 32.100 DELIVERY OF BOOKS AND EQUIPMENT TO FIRE CHIEF’S SUCCESSOR.
   Upon the expiration of his or her term of office and failure to be
reappointed, or upon his or her resignation or removal, the Fire Chief shall
deliver to his or her successor in office all books, records, equipment and
property of every description in his or her possession and belonging to the
city or pertaining to his or her office, without delay.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.310)
§ 32.101 FIREFIGHTER’S PENSION FUND.
   (A)   Establishment. There is established a firefighter’s pension fund in
and for the city, as provided by state law.
   (B)   Sources of fund. The fund shall consist of taxes, accumulations,
assessments and deductions as are provided by state statute and shall include
an assessment or deduction of six and three-fourths percent plus one and one-
half percent per month from the salary of each firefighter.
(2000 Code, § 2.36.320) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed --1999)
§ 32.102 FIRE DEPARTMENT COST RECOVERY PROGRAM.
   (A)   Ambulance service cost recovery program.
      (1)   Ambulance service.
         (a)   The Fire Department may provide ambulance and rescue service in
case of emergency requiring the pre-hospital care and transportation of persons
who are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless at the
time of the dispatch of a Fire Department vehicle.
         (b)   The response area shall be limited to the territory within the
corporate limits of the city.
         (c)   Service outside corporate limits shall be limited to:
            1.   Municipal code §
32.099 and circumstances governed by automatic/mutual-aid agreement; and
            2.   Extreme life-saving necessity.
         (d)   Except when personnel or equipment are needed for continued
life-saving support, the Fire Chief shall assure that neither personnel nor
equipment are unduly delayed in:
            1.   Dispatch to, or departure from, the scene;
            2.    Transportation to and from the hospital; or
            3.   Within a hospital.
      (2)   Fees for ambulance service shall be provided as follows:
         (a)   Fees for "Basic Life Support" services (BLS) shall be as
follows:
 
                Resident Non-resident
Basic rate       $800     $900
Mileage per mile $20      $20
 
         (b)   Fees for "Advanced Life Support" services (ALS) shall be as
follows:
 
                Resident Non-resident
Basic rate       $900     $1,050
Mileage per mile $20      $20
 
         (c)   Fees for "Advanced Life Support 2" services (ALS2) shall be as
follows:
 
                Resident Non-resident
Basic rate       $1,100   $1,250
Mileage per mile $20      $20
 
         (d)   Additional fees provided at any level of care shall be as
follows:
 
Immobilization $100
King blades    $50
IO needles     $50
 
         (e)   Fees, other than basic rate, shall be on an as needed/if used
basis. The above rates will automatically increase 3% annually.
   (B)   Cost recovery, other.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         CARELESS. Not taking ordinary or reasonable care, including the
disregard of the safety of others.
         CONTRACT. An oral or written agreement to have work performed by a
contractor.
         CONTRACTOR. Person or entity who has a contract to perform a task or
service.
         EMERGENCY RESPONSE. Any call requiring the Fire Department to respond.
         INCENDIARY ACT. A fire purposely set by a person or persons.
         INCIDENT. Any request, by any person, for the services of the Fire
Department.
         MALICIOUS ACT. A wrongful act intentionally done without legal
justification or excuse, an unlawful act done willfully and purposely.
         NEGLIGENCE. Failure to exercise the standard of care that a reasonably
prudent person would use under similar circumstances, including the doing of
something which a reasonable prudent person would not do.
      (2)   Acts requiring cost reimbursement. The following acts are subject
to the fees enumerated in division (B)(3) of this section:
         (a)    Negligence/careless acts. Any contractor, whose negligence or
careless actions or conduct cause an incident resulting in an emergency
response, shall be required to make restitution, pursuant to division (B)(3) of
this section to the city for the costs of that emergency response.
         (b)   Malicious or incendiary acts. Any person whose malicious or
incendiary act causes an incident resulting in an emergency response, shall be
required to make restitution, pursuant to division (B)(3) of this section, to
the city for costs of that emergency response.
         (c)   Driving under the influence. Every person found guilty,
including an order of supervision or probation of "DUI", who proximately causes
any incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, shall make
restitution pursuant to the fees in division (B)(3) of this section to the city
for the city's costs of that emergency response.
         (d)   Salvage operations. A fee of $300 shall be charged for Fire
Department salvage operations including but not limited to tarping personal
property and smoke or water removal.
         (e)   Fire company standby. When a fire company (engine, truck or
ambulance) is requested or required to stand by for a non-city sponsored event,
the person responsible shall be required to make restitution pursuant to
division (B)(3) of this section to the city for the costs of such fire company
standby. No other fire company standby services can be provided within the city
other than through the city's Fire Department unless the city is unable to
provide such services.
      (3)   Fees.
         (a)   The following fees shall apply to all acts enumerated to
division (B)(2) of this section:
            1.   Per fire engine per hour: $250.
            2.   Per truck company per hour: $250.
            3.   Per ambulance company per hour: $250.
            4.   Per administrative vehicle per hour: $100.
            5.   Per service vehicle per hour: $100.
            6.   Per each personnel per hour: $70.
         (b)   A minimum of one hour shall be charged. Subsequent hours will be
billed at 15-minute increments.
      (4)   Additional fees. The following fees shall apply as indicated:
         (a)   A fee of $500 for the extrication of persons from vehicles
involved in traffic accidents.*
         (b)   A fee of $500 for the extinguishment of a motor vehicle fire.*
         (c)   A fee of $500 for debris removal, hazmat removal, fluid removal,
or any other mitigation or operational tasks performed by the fire company at
the scene.*
         *These costs shall also include the costs of all materials and
equipment used, expended, depleted, destroyed or removed from service as a
result of the service provided.
      (5)   Waiver of fees. The Fire Chief or his/her designee may waive or
reduce fee, upon his or her discretion based on mitigating circumstances.
      (6)   Claims. A claim shall be filed to the responsible party through
their insurance carrier. In some circumstances, the responsible party will be
billed directly.
      (7)   False fire alarms.
         (a)   First and second false fire alarm in a rolling 12-month period;
warning letter (no fine).
         (b)   Each additional false fire alarm in a rolling 12-month period
after two results in a false alarm charge of $50 with each charge increasing by
$50 for each false alarm, not to exceed a fine of $500 per incident.
         (c)   If the false fire alarm is an intentional false alarm, a fine of
$500 will be charged regardless of the number of false alarm occurrences in the
preceding 12-month period.
(Ord. 2018-04-06900, passed 4-24-2018)
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
§ 32.115 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.
   (A)   There is established in and for the city a Department of Public Works.
   (B)   The Department shall consist of a Director of Public Works and other
officers and personnel as determined from time to time by Council.
   (C)   The Directory of Public Works is also referred to as the
Superintendent of Public Works in these codified ordinances.
(Ord. 2006-02-0008O, passed 2-28-2006)
§ 32.116 ASSISTANT DIRECTOR AND STREET SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   There is established the office of Assistant Director of Public Works
and Street Superintendent. These positions shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of Council. The term of the appointment shall begin at the start
of the fiscal year, May 1, and expire on April 30 the final date of the fiscal
year.
   (B)   (1)   The Director, Assistant Director or Street Superintendent may be
removed during the term of the appointment by the Mayor, with the approval of
Council.
      (2)   The grounds for removal may include job performance, alternate
administrative procedures, departmental efficiency or otherwise. The Assistant
Superintendent so removed shall have the right to a hearing before Council
regarding the basis for removal.
   (C)   Subject to the direction of the Director of Public Works, the
Assistant Director and Street Superintendent shall be responsible for the
supervision of the Department of Public Works, as specified within their
respective job descriptions.
(Ord. 2006-02-0008O, passed 2-28-2006)
§ 32.117 DISQUALIFICATION OF APPLICANTS FOR CERTAIN OFFENSES.
   (A)   All applicants for positions in the Department of Public Works of the
City of Oak Forest are required to possess or obtain an Illinois commercial
driver’s license and shall be eligible and qualified to operate city motor
vehicles. Therefore, to protect public health, safety and welfare, no person
shall be eligible to apply and test for, accept, or be employed in any position
within the Department of Public Works, that is subject to the jurisdiction of
the Civil Service Commission, if:
      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of more than two “serious traffic
violation” within three years of the date of application for employment. For
purposes of this section, “a serious traffic violation” is defined as:
         (a)   A violation of section 11-402(a) of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
relating to leaving the scene of an accident involving damage to a vehicle.
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402(a);
         (b)   A violation of section 11-403 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
relating to failure to stop and exchange information after a motor vehicle
collision involving property damage only. ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-403;
         (c)   A violation of section 11-502(a) of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
relating illegal transportation, possession, or carrying of alcoholic liquor
within the passenger area of any vehicle. ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-502(a);
         (d)   A violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
relating to operating a motor vehicle without a valid license or permit. ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101;
         (e)   A violation of Section 11-403 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
relating to failure to stop and exchange information or give aid after a motor
vehicle collision involving personal injury or death. ILCS Ch. 625 Act 5, § 11-
403;
         (f)   A violation related to excessive speeding, involving speeding
over 15 miles per hour over the speed limit;
         (g)   A violation relating to reckless driving;
         (h)   A violation of section 11-707(d) of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
relating to passing in a no passing zone. ILCS Ch. 625 Act 5, § 11-707(d);
         (i)   A violation of section 11-1402(b) of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
relating to limitations on backing upon a controlled access highway. ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 11-1402(b);
         (j)   A violation of section 11-707(b) of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
relating to driving on the left side of a roadway in a non-passing zone. ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707(b);
         (k)   A violation of section 11-1002(e) of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
relating to failure to yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian at an
intersection. ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002(e);
         (l)   A violation of section 11-1008 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
relating to failure to yield to a pedestrian on a sidewalk. ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 11-1008;
         (m)   A violation for failure to reduce speed to avoid an accident;
         (n)   A violation for driving too fast for conditions;
         (o)   A violation of Section 11-605 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
relating to exceeding the speed in a school zone. ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-
605;
         (p)   A violation for improper or erratic traffic lane changes, lane
usage and/or center lane usage;
         (q)   A violation for improper passing on the roadway, including,
without limitation, a violation for passing on the wrong side of the road or a
violation for passing on the shoulder, left or right side;
         (r)   A violation for passing a school bus receiving or discharging
passengers or displaying a warning not to pass;
         (s)   A violation of ILCS Ch. 635, Act 5, § 11-710, for following
another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard
for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the
highway;
         (t)   A violation of section 11-1201, relating to failure to stop for
an approaching railroad train or railroad equipment or signals. ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-1201; or
         (u)   Any other similar violation of a law or local ordinance of any
state relating to motor vehicle traffic control.
      (2)   The applicant’s driver’s license is suspended or revoked at the
time of application for employment.
      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of driving under the influence of
drugs or alcohol, under any state law or local ordinance in the three year
period prior to application for employment.
      (4)   The applicant is unable to obtain an Illinois Commercial Driver’s
License within 90 days of the date of hire.
   (B)   The bases for disqualification provided under this section shall be in
addition to all other bases for disqualification for employment with the city,
under any state or federal law, rules or regulations, or local ordinance, or
Civil Service Commission Rule. Nothing contained in this Section shall be
construed to limit the authority of the Civil Service Commission to disqualify
an applicant from consideration for employment, or discipline an employee up to
and including termination.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall apply to automatically disqualify
only new applicants for positions of employment within the Department of Public
Works and shall not result in any automatic disqualification of any current
employees in the Department of Public Works.
(Ord. 2015-04-059O, passed 4-12-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
COMMUNITY/COMMERCIAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
§ 32.130 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is established the Community/Commercial Economic Development
Department.
   (B)   The Community/Commercial Economic Development Department shall consist
of the position of Director of Community/Commercial Economic Development
Department and other personnel as determined by need.
   (C)   All employment and positions in the department are subject to
budgetary considerations.
(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 32.131 POSITION OF DIRECTOR.
   The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
the Council. The Director shall be an employee of the city and be responsible
for the general supervision of the Department.
(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 32.132 DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT.
   The Community/Commercial Economic Development Department shall be
responsible for activities relating to planning, zoning, economic development,
and other activities which may be assigned.
(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 32.133 ORGANIZATION OF DEPARTMENT.
   The Community/Commercial Economic Development Director shall be subject to
the supervision of, and shall report to the City Administrator, and to the
Mayor.
(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
§ 32.145 ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   There is established in and for the city a Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners consisting of three members who shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the consent of Council and who shall serve respectively for the following
terms: one to serve until the end of the current municipal year, one to serve
until the end of the municipal year next ensuing and the third to serve until
the end of the municipal year second next ensuing. The successor to each member
so appointed shall serve for three years and until his or her respective
successor is appointed and qualified.
(2000 Code, § 2.44.010)
§ 32.146 OATH AND BOND; REQUIREMENTS OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be
considered officers of the municipality and shall file an oath and a fidelity
bond in such manner as may be required by Council.
   (B)   No person holding a lucrative office under the United States, this
state or any political subdivision thereof or a municipality shall be a member
of the Board or the Secretary thereof. The acceptance of any lucrative office
by a member of the Board shall be treated as a resignation of his or her office
as a member of the Board or the Secretary thereof. No person shall be appointed
a member of the Board who is related, either by blood or marriage up to the
degree of first cousin, to any elected official or the municipality. Not more
than two members of the Board shall belong to the same political party existing
in the municipality at the time of appointments and as defined in ILCS Ch. 10,
Act 5, § 10-2, the Election Code. If only one or no political party exists in
the municipality at the time of the appointments, then state or national
political party affiliations shall be considered in making such appointments.
Party affiliation shall be determined by affidavit of the person appointed as a
member of the Board.
(2000 Code, § 2.44.020)
§ 32.147 APPOINTMENTS TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS.
   (A)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall appoint all officers
and members of the Fire Department and the Police Department, except the Chief
of Police and the Fire Chief, which appointments may be made by the Mayor with
the consent of Council.
   (B)   All appointments made by the Board shall be made from the rank next
below that to which the appointment is made, other than that of the lowest
rank.
(2000 Code, § 2.44.030)
§ 32.148 RULES; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall make the rules and
appointments and removals as set forth in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 10-2.1-1 et
seq.
(2000 Code, § 2.44.040) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed --1999)
§ 32.149 SECRETARY.
   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may employ a Secretary or
designate one of its own members to act as Secretary. The Secretary shall keep
the minutes of the Board’s proceedings, shall be custodian of all papers
pertaining to the business of the Board, shall keep a record of all
examinations held and shall perform other duties as the Board prescribes.
(2000 Code, § 2.44.050)
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF POLICE PENSION FUND
§ 32.160 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established in and for the city a Board of Trustees of the Police
Pension Fund.
(2000 Code, § 2.46.010)
§ 32.161 COMPOSITION.
   The Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall consist of five
members, two of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor, two of whom shall be
elected from the regular Police Department and one of whom shall be a
beneficiary under the Police Pension Fund Act, as established by statute.
(2000 Code, § 2.46.020)
§ 32.162 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Of the two members of the Board of Trustees of the police pension fund
appointed by the Mayor, one shall serve for one year beginning May 14, 1963,
and the other shall serve for two years beginning May 14, 1963. The successors
to the trustees shall serve for two years each or until such time as their
successors are appointed and qualified.
   (B)   (1)   The third and fourth members of the Board shall be elected from
the regular Police Department by the active members thereof as provided by
statute.
      (2)   The fifth member shall be elected from the beneficiaries under the
Police Pension Fund Act.
   (C)   Of these three members, all shall serve for two years beginning on May
14, 1963, and all shall be elected as provided by statute.
(2000 Code, § 2.46.030)
§ 32.163 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Trustees of the police pension fund shall exercise and have all
the powers and duties delegated to it by statute.
(2000 Code, § 2.46.040)
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
§ 32.175 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.
   (A)   There is established in and for the city a Board of Local
Improvements, which shall consist of the Mayor and seven members of Council.
   (B)   Those members shall be appointed by the Mayor.
(2000 Code, § 2.50.010)
§ 32.176 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Local Improvements shall have the powers and perform the duties
assigned to it by statute or ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 2.50.020)
§ 32.177 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Board of Local Improvements shall meet upon the call of the Mayor
or any two members, provided that at least 24 hours’ notice of the call is
given each member.
   (B)   However, a meeting may be held when all members are present without
notice.
(2000 Code, § 2.50.030)
§ 32.178 SECRETARY.
   The Secretary of the Board of Local Improvements shall be appointed from one
of the members of the Board.
(2000 Code, § 2.50.040)
§ 32.179 EXPENDITURES.
   The Board of Local Improvements, without Council approval, may expend
budgeted sums not to exceed $2,500 per line item, or $2,500 for any particular
project proposed before the Board.
(2000 Code, § 2.50.050)
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD
§ 32.190 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The city establishes an Emergency Telephone System Board.
(2000 Code, § 2.52.010)
§ 32.191 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Emergency Telephone System Board shall be to coordinate
and supervise the planning and implement action and upgrading of the enhanced
9-1-1 system.
(2000 Code, § 2.52.020)
§ 32.192 COMPOSITION.
   The Emergency Telephone System Board shall consist of the Police Chief, Fire
Chief, Public Works Director, Emergency Management Director, Network
Administrator and the Radio Room Supervisor.
(2000 Code, § 2.52.030) (Am. Ord. 2017-01- 0630O, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 32.193 (RESERVED).
§ 32.194 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Emergency Telephone System Board shall have the following powers and
duties:
   (A)   Planning a 9-1-1 system;
   (B)   Coordinating and supervising the implementation, upgrading and
maintenance of the system, including the establishment of equipment
specifications and coding systems;
   (C)   Receiving moneys from the surcharge imposed under ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5,
§ 15.3, and from any other source, for deposit into the emergency telephone
system fund;
   (D)   Authorizing all disbursements from the fund; and
   (E)   Hiring, on a temporary basis, any staff necessary for the
implementation or upgrade of the system.
(2000 Code, § 2.52.050)
§ 32.195 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM FUND.
   (A)   All moneys received by the Emergency Telephone System Board, pursuant
to a surcharge imposed under Ordinances 1600, passed January 10, 1989; 1631,
passed May 9, 1989; and 2192, passed July 16, 1996, shall be deposited into an
emergency telephone system fund.
   (B)   The Oak Forest City Treasurer shall be custodian of the fund. All
interest accruing on the fund shall remain in the fund.
   (C)   No expenditures may be made from the fund except upon the direction of
the Board by resolution passed by a majority of all members of the Board.
   (D)   Expenditures may be made only to pay for the costs associated with the
following:
      (1)   The design of the emergency telephone system;
      (2)   The coding of an initial master street address guide data base, and
update and maintenance thereof;
      (3)   The repayment of any moneys advanced for the implementation of the
system;
      (4)   The charges for automatic number identification and automatic
location identification equipment, and maintenance, replacement and update
thereof;
      (5)   The nonrecurring charges related to installation of the emergency
telephone system and the ongoing network charges; and
      (6)   Other products and services necessary for the implementation,
upgrade and maintenance of the system. However, the costs shall not include
personnel or facilities, nor shall the costs include equipment which is not
directly associated with the 9-1-1 emergency telephone system.
(2000 Code, § 2.52.060)
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM ADVISORY BOARD
§ 32.210 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The city establishes an Emergency Telephone System Advisory Board.
(2000 Code, § 2.54.010)
§ 32.211 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Emergency Telephone System Advisory Board shall be to
provide input, advice and information to the Emergency Telephone System Board
as to the implementation and upgrading of the 9-1-1 system.
(2000 Code, § 2.54.020)
§ 32.212 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   The Emergency Telephone System Advisory Board shall consist of five
members who are residents of the city.
   (B)   They shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City
Council on the basis of their particular fitness for duty on the Board as well
as prior experience.
(2000 Code, § 2.54.030)
§ 32.213 TERMS OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The members of the Emergency Telephone System Advisory Board shall be
appointed on an annual basis.
   (B)   All members of the Advisory Board shall serve without compensation but
shall be reimbursed for their actual or necessary expenses.
(2000 Code, § 2.54.040)
§ 32.214 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Emergency Telephone System Advisory Board shall have the following
powers and duties:
   (A)   To render advice to the 9-1-1 Board as to the planning of a 9-1-
1 system;
   (B)   To render advice to the 9-1-1 Board regarding coordinating and
supervising the implementation, upgrading and maintenance of the system,
including the establishment of equipment specifications and coding systems;
   (C)   To render advice regarding receiving moneys from the surcharge imposed
under ILCS, Ch. 65, Act 5, § 15.3 and from any other source, for deposit into
the emergency telephone system fund; and
   (D)   To render other duties as may be delegated by the 9-1-1 Emergency
Telephone System Board, with the approval of the City Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.54.050)
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD
§ 32.225 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The city does create and establish a Foreign Fire Insurance Board. The Board
shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities provided for in this
subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 2.56.010)
§ 32.226 COMPOSITION.
   The Foreign Fire Insurance Board, hereinafter referred to as the F.F.I.B.,
shall consist of the Fire Chief and four elected members of the Oak Forest Fire
Department and shall include the following officers:
   (A)   President;
   (B)   Vice-president;
   (C)   Secretary; and
   (D)   Treasurer.
(2000 Code, § 2.56.020)
§ 32.227 ELECTION OF OFFICERS; TERMS.
   (A)   The election of officers of the F.F.I.B. shall take place annually
during the final quarter of each calendar year.
   (B)   Any officer elected after the passage of this subchapter shall serve
up to and including December 31, 1991.
   (C)   The terms of each officer thereafter shall be from January 1 through
December 31 of the same calendar year.
(2000 Code, § 2.56.030)
§ 32.228 FIREFIGHTER EMPLOYMENT STATUS REQUIRED.
   The President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer of the Board shall be
firefighters in the Oak Forest Fire Department at the time of their election
and during the entire time each may serve as an officer.
(2000 Code, § 2.56.040)
§ 32.229 DUTIES AND POWERS OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   President. The President shall preside at all meetings of the
officers. The President shall have other powers as he or she may be given from
time to time by action of the Oak Forest City Council, consistent with the
Illinois Municipal Code.
   (B)   Vice President. The Vice President shall carry out the duties of the
president during the absence or inability of the president to perform such
duties and shall carry out other functions as are assigned from time to time by
the F.F.I.B. President or the Oak Forest City Council.
   (C)   Secretary. The Secretary shall take minutes of any and all meetings of
the officers. The Secretary shall keep these minutes in a manner identical to
the manner in which City Council minutes are kept. The Secretary shall also
perform any other duties and functions as are assigned from time to time by the
Mayor or the Oak Forest City Council.
   (D)   Treasurer. The Treasurer shall:
      (1)   Have charge and custody of and be responsible for all funds
collected by the city from the foreign fire insurance company fees as described
in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-10-1;
      (2)   Deposit all moneys in the name of the City of Oak Forest Fire
Department in banks, savings and loan associations or other depositories as
shall be designated by the Oak Forest City Council;
      (3)   Invest said funds as are not immediately required in such
securities as the Oak Forest City Council shall specifically or generally
select from time to time;
      (4)   Maintain the financial books and records of the F.F.I.B.;
      (5)   In general, perform all duties incident to the office of Treasurer
and other duties as from time to time may be assigned to him or her by the
F.F.I.B. or the Oak Forest City Council;
      (6)   Give a sufficient bond to the city. This bond shall be approved by
the Mayor, conditioned upon the faithful performance by the Treasurer of his or
her duties under this subchapter and the rules and regulations provided for
herein. The bond shall be paid for from the funds collected from the foreign
fire insurance company fees; and
      (7)   Receive the foreign fire insurance company fees so paid and pay out
the money upon the order of the F.F.I.B. for the maintenance, use and benefit
of the Department.
(2000 Code, § 2.56.050) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed --1999)
§ 32.230 TERMS OF OFFICE OF OFFICERS.
   The President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer shall serve for one-
year terms and shall be elected to office by the members of the Oak Forest Fire
Department. The first election for those officers shall take place within 30
days of the passage of the ordinance codified in this subchapter. No officer
shall serve in the same office for more than two consecutive full year terms.
(2000 Code, § 2.56.060)
§ 32.231 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The officers of the F.F.I.B. shall make all needful rules and regulations
with respect to the management of the foreign fire insurance company fees to be
paid to the Treasurer. All rules and regulations promulgated by the F.F.I.B.
must be passed by the affirmative vote of at least three of the four presiding
officers. All rules and regulations promulgated by the F.F.I.B. must be
approved by the Oak Forest City Council in the same manner as a city ordinance
must be passed.
(2000 Code, § 2.56.070)
§ 32.232 PAYMENT OF FUNDS.
   The City Treasurer shall pay the sums received from the insurance company
specified in ILCS Ch.65, Act 5, § 11-10-1 to the Treasurer of the F.F.I.B. of
the city.
(Ord. 2418 (part), 1999; Ord. 2417 (part), 1999)
§ 32.233 BUDGET.
   (A)   Preliminary budget. The F.F.I.B. officers shall approve a preliminary
budget for the expenditure of the foreign fire insurance company fees collected
by March of each year.
   (B)   Final budget.
      (1)   The F.F.I.B. officers shall, by December of each year prior to the
start of each fiscal year, adopt a final budget for the collection and payment
of the foreign fire insurance company fees.
      (2)   The final budget shall be approved by the City Council in the same
fashion as any other regular city ordinance.
   (C)   Budget amendments. The Oak Forest F.F.I.B. budget referred to in
division (A) above may be amended at any time by a majority vote of the
F.F.I.B. and a majority vote of the City Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.56.090)
§ 32.234 ANNUAL AUDIT.
   (A)   The F.F.I.B. shall provide to the Oak Forest City Council an annual
audit of the financial affairs of the Fire Department to be made by a certified
public accountant at the end of each fiscal year in accordance with generally
accepted auditing principals.
   (B)   The annual report shall be delivered to the Mayor, City Treasurer and
City Administrator. The audit shall be paid for from funds collected from the
foreign fire insurance company fees.
(2000 Code, § 2.56.100)
CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMISSION
§ 32.245 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established a Citizens Advisory Commission, which shall be known as
the Oak Forest Citizens Advisory Commission.
(Ord. 2006-11-0067O, passed 11-14-2006)
§ 32.246 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Oak Forest Citizens Advisory Commission shall be composed of nine
commissioners and one ex-officio alderman to serve as liaison between the
commissioners and Council. All commissioners shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Council. The ex-officio alderman shall be
appointed by the Mayor. Commissioners shall serve until retirement or
replacement.
   (B)   The commissioners shall have the right to select their own chairperson
from the members already appointed by the Mayor.
   (C)   Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner in
which the original appointments are required to be made.
(Ord. 2012-07-0390O, passed 7-24-2012)
§ 32.247 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Oak Forest Citizens Advisory Commission shall have the following
powers and duties:
      (1)   To coordinate projects and assignments given to it by the Mayor and
Council and perform duties at the direction of the Mayor and Council;
      (2)   To provide recommendations to the Mayor and Council pertaining to
the effectiveness and format of city-sponsored community events;
      (3)   To provide input and recommendations regarding programs or efforts
to increase citizen involvement in the community;
      (4)   To recommend strategies to establish and maintain effective
communications; and
      (5)   To establish meeting dates and times as well as rules of order for
the operation of the Commission.
   (B)   Nothing in these powers and duties shall in any way be construed to
usurp the duties of the Mayor or Council, which are nondelegable.
(Ord. 2006-11-0067O, passed 11-14-2006)
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
§ 32.260 COMPOSITION.
   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-1, the Mayor shall forthwith appoint
three Civil Service Commissioners, who shall be known as the Civil Service
Commission of the city.
(2000 Code, § 2.66.010) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed --1999)
§ 32.261 CLASSIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES.
   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-3, the Civil Service Commission shall
classify all of the offices and places of employment in the city, except those
offices and places excluded by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-17 and except for
police officers and firefighters, who are subject to the jurisdiction of the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
(2000 Code, § 2.66.020) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed --1999)
§ 32.262 RULES.
   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-5 and ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-6,
the Civil Service Commission shall make and publish rules to carry out the
purposes of the Commission.
(2000 Code, § 2.66.030) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed --1999)
§ 32.263 ORGANIZATION.
   The Civil Service Commission shall be organized and shall function in
accordance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 10-1-1 through 10-1-48, as amended.
(2000 Code, § 2.66.040) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed --1999)
§ 32.264 EXPIRATION OF CANDIDATE LISTS.
   All entry level candidate lists shall expire one year following the final
approval and posting of any list by the Civil Service Commission.
(2000 Code, § 2.66.050) (Ord. 2758, § 2, passed --2003)
CONSUMER PROTECTION COMMISSION
§ 32.275 ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   There is established in and for the city a Commission of Consumer
Protection, the chairperson of which shall be entitled the Commissioner of
Consumer Protection.
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of ten members. All Commissioners will be
appointed by the Mayor of the City of Oak Forest with the advice and consent of
the City Council. The Oak Forest Consumer Protection Commission shall have the
right to select its own chairman from the members already appointed by the
Mayor.
   (C)   Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner in
which the original appointments are required to be made.
   (D)   The members of the Commission shall represent a cross-section of
consumer interests and shall not include local businessmen and business women
who own and/or manage a city business that might be the subject of a Commission
investigation or regulation.
(2000 Code, § 2.68.010) (Ord. 2012-09-0400O, passed 9-25-2012)
§ 32.276 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission and consumer protection shall:
   (A)   Enforce all laws in relation to weights and measures and all laws in
relation to consumer protection;
   (B)   Receive and investigate complaints from all persons affected by
potential or actual violations of any of the provisions of this subchapter, or
initiate its own investigation of frauds and unfair dealings against such
persons;
   (C)   Issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of documents, papers, books, records and other evidence in any
matter over which this subchapter applies; administer oaths or affirmations to
any person whose testimony is required; interrogate witnesses; inspect
premises; require written answers to questionnaires; and require periodic
written reports and the filing of statements;
   (D)   Issue cease and desist orders with respect to consumer practices
declared to be unlawful by the Commission;
   (E)   Report to the appropriate law enforcement officer any information
concerning a violation of any consumer protection law, which reports shall be
at the discretion of the Commission;
   (F)   Represent the interest of consumers before administrative and
regulatory agencies and legislative groups;
   (G)   Assist, advise and cooperate with local, state and federal agencies
and officials to protect and promote the interest of the consumers of the city;
   (H)   Assist, develop and conduct programs of consumer education and
information through publications and other materials prepared for distribution
to the consumers of the city;
   (I)   Undertake activities to encourage local business and industry to
maintain high standards of honesty, fair business practices and public
responsibility in the production, promotion and sale of consumer merchandise
and services and in the extension of credit; and
   (J)   Exercise and perform such other functions, powers and duties as may be
deemed necessary or appropriate to protect and promote the welfare of the
consumers of the city.
(2000 Code, § 2.68.020)
§ 32.277 EXISTING RIGHTS AND REMEDIES.
   No existing right or remedy shall be lost, impaired or affected by reason of
the adoption of the ordinance codified in this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 2.68.030)
CRIME PREVENTION COMMISSION
§ 32.290 RECITALS.
   The City Council finds that all the recitals contained in the preamble to
the ordinance codified in this subchapter are full, true and correct, and
incorporates them into this subchapter by this reference.
(2000 Code, § 2.70.010) (Ord. 2220, § 1, passed --1997)
§ 32.291 CREATION OF THE CRIME PREVENTION COMMISSION.
   (A)   There is created the Crime Prevention Commission of Oak Forest.
   (B)   The Commission volunteers will be comprised of 13 members, with one
serving as Commission Chair, who shall be elected by a majority of the members.
   (C)   Eligible persons for appointment shall be submitted to the Mayor and
their appointment shall be by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.
   (D)   The term of appointment shall begin at the start of the fiscal year
and end with the final date of that year.
   (E)   The Mayor, Chief of Police, and the Executive Director of the Chamber
of Commerce shall be named as ex-officio members of this Commission.
(2000 Code, § 2.70.020) (Ord. 2220, § 2, passed --1997; Ord. 2745, § 1, passed
--2003; Am. Ord. 2009-09-0257O, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 32.292 OBJECTIVE.
   (A)   The objective of the Crime Prevention Commission shall be to help
develop and promote crime prevention planning and programming activities that
benefit citizens and businesses within Oak Forest.
   (B)   The Oak Forest Police Department’s crime prevention officer will serve
as liaison to the commission and will assist the Commission in the development
of its plans and programs.
   (C)   The Crime Prevention Commission will be utilized to help the city
achieve its stated goals for crime prevention and disseminate information of
the public to keep it better informed about crime prevention.
   (D)   Through the establishment of plans and programs initiated in a
coordinated effort with the Police Department, the Crime Prevention Commission
will help effectuate more proactive measures to prevent crime and protect the
public and its property.
(2000 Code, § 2.70.030) (Ord. 2220, § 3, passed --1997)
§ 32.293 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The qualifications for appointment as a member to the Oak Forest Crime
Prevention Commission shall include the following.
   (A)   All Commission members must be at least 21 years of age.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall screen all persons and review their
qualifications.
   (C)   All appointees must profess an interest in and a basic understanding
of the philosophy and practice of crime prevention, and be willing to
participate in training opportunities that may be available.
(2000 Code, § 2.70.040) (Ord. 2220, § 4, passed --1997)
§ 32.294 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Crime Prevention Commission, working in cooperation with the Oak Forest
Police Department, shall have the following duties and responsibilities to
effectuate crime prevention in our community:
   (A)   Act as a liaison to the community, as well as to other entities
relative to law enforcement;
   (B)   Develop and improve crime prevention plans and programs;
   (C)   Promote public awareness of crime prevention activities;
   (D)   Obtain and organize relevant law enforcement information;
   (E)   Assist in the dissemination of materials and hand-outs; and
   (F)   Maintain media relations on crime prevention and law enforcement
activities in Oak Forest.
(2000 Code, § 2.70.050) (Ord. 2220, § 5, passed --1997)
FINANCE COMMISSION
§ 32.320 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.
   There is established in and for the city a Finance Commission, to be
composed of the Mayor and aldermen, the City Treasurer and a Budget Officer.
(Ord. 2006-04-0024O, § 2, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 32.321 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Finance Commission shall:
   (A)   Permit, encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management
procedures in all municipal departments, commissions and boards;
   (B)   Compile an annual budget;
   (C)   Examine all books and records of all municipal departments,
commissions and boards which relate to moneys received by the municipality and
municipal departments, commissions and boards, and paid out by the municipality
and municipal departments, commissions and boards, debts and accounts
receivable and amounts owed by or to the municipality and municipal
departments, commissions and boards;
   (D)   Obtain such additional information from the municipality and municipal
departments, commissions and boards as may be useful to the Budget Officer for
purposes of compiling a municipal budget, the information to be furnished by
the municipality and municipal departments, commissions and boards in the form
required by the Budget Officer. Any department, commission or board which
refuses to make such information as requested of it available to the Budget
Officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget
for the municipality until the municipal department, commission or board
complies in full with the request of the Budget Officer;
   (E)   Establish and maintain such procedures as will ensure that no
expenditures are made by the municipality or municipal departments, commissions
or boards except as authorized by the budget;
   (F)   Compile a budget, such budget to contain estimates of revenue
available to the municipality for the fiscal year for which the budget is
drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the municipality and all
other municipal departments, commissions and boards. Revenue estimates and
expenditure recommendations shall be presented in a manner which is in
conformity with good fiscal management procedures. The budget shall be itemized
in a manner consistent with a chart of accounts as may now or in the future be
approved by the City Treasurer. The budget shall contain actual or estimated
revenue and expenditures for the two years immediately preceding the fiscal
year for which the budget is prepared. So far as is possible, the fiscal date
for the two preceding fiscal years shall be itemized in a manner which is in
conformity with the chart of accounts. Each budget shall show the specific fund
from which each anticipated expenditure shall be made; and
   (G)   Authorize, as necessary, without Council approval, budget adjustments
not to exceed, either positively or negatively, $2,500 per line item.
(2000 Code, § 2.80.020)
§ 32.322 ANNUAL BUDGET IN LIEU OF APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE.
   Passage of the annual budget by Council shall be in lieu of passage of the
appropriation ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 2.80.030)
§ 32.323 ADOPTION OF ANNUAL BUDGET.
   The annual budget shall be adopted by Council before the beginning of the
fiscal year to which it applies.
(2000 Code, § 2.80.040)
§ 32.324 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT FUND.
   In the preparation by the Finance Commission of the annual budget, one-half
of one percent of equalized assessed value of property subject to taxation by
the city may be accumulated in a separate fund for the purposes or specific
capital improvements, repairs and/or replacements of specific types of
municipal equipment or other tangible property, both real and personal, which
fund shall be designated as the capital improvement, repair or replacement
fund. Expenditures from the fund shall be budgeted in the fiscal year in which
the capital improvement, repair or replacement will occur. Upon the completion
or abandonment of any object for which the fund was used, or if surplus moneys
remain after the completion or abandonment of any object for which the fund was
inaugurated, then the funds no longer necessary for capital improvement, repair
or replacement shall be transferred into the general corporate fund of the
municipality on the first day of the fiscal year following the abandonment,
completion or discovery of surplus funds.
(2000 Code, § 2.80.050)
§ 32.325 REVISION OF ANNUAL BUDGET.
   (A)   Council may delegate authority to heads of municipal departments,
boards or commissions to delete, add to, change or create subclasses within
object classes budgeted previously to the department, board or commission,
subject to the limitation or requirement for prior approval by the Budget
Officer or the Mayor as Council, upon a two-thirds vote, may establish.
   (B)   By a vote, the annual budget for the municipality may be revised by
deleting, adding to, changing or creating subclasses within object classes and
object classes themselves. No revision of the budget shall be made increasing
the budget if funds are not available to effectuate the purpose of the
revision.
(2000 Code, § 3.80.060)
§ 32.326 MONEYS FOR CONTINGENCIES.
   The annual budget may contain money set aside for contingency purposes, not
to exceed 10% of the total budget (excluding the amount set aside for
contingency purposes), which money may be expended for contingencies upon a
majority vote of Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.80.070)
§ 32.327 PUBLIC INSPECTION OF BUDGET.
   Council shall make the tentative budget conveniently available to public
inspection for at least ten days prior to the passage of the annual budget.
(2000 Code, § 2.80.080)
§ 32.328 APPLICATION OF STATE STATUTES.
   ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10 shall apply to all procedures
under this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 2.80.090) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed --1999)
§ 32.329 MEETINGS.
   The Finance Commission shall meet once every month or at the call of the
Budget Officer with two days’ notice.
(2000 Code, § 2.80.100)
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 32.340 CREATED.
   There is created a Planning and Zoning Commission, which shall consist of
the nine members of the present Planning Commission. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be deemed to be the “Board of Appeals,” as described in ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-13-1 et seq., and the "Plan Commission," as described in
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-12-1 et seq.
(2000 Code, § 2.86.010) (Ord. 2272, § 1, passed --1997)
§ 32.341 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the purpose and intent of this subchapter to place all of the
responsibilities and powers of the former Zoning Board of Appeals and the
former Planning Commission under the jurisdiction of one commission, to consist
of nine members as provided for in this subchapter, and to be called the
Planning and Zoning Commission of the city.
   (B)   Matters coming before that Commission shall be interpreted and ruled
upon by the Planning and Zoning Commission and in doing so, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall utilize the standards and procedural requirements
contained in the ordinances of the city as the case may be.
   (C)   It is understood that there may be multiple issues to be decided and
ruled upon at the same hearing and that different voting requirements and/or
standards may be necessary to approve certain actions.
(2000 Code, § 2.86.020) (Ord. 2272, § 11 (part), passed --1997)
§ 32.342 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of the present
members of the Planning Commission and any additional appointees necessary to
bring the full membership to nine members.
   (B)   New members shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City
Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.86.030) (Ord. 2272, § 2, passed --1997)
§ 32.343 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of each Commission member of the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be for three years. The Mayor shall fill any vacancies on the Commission,
with confirmation by the City Council, in the same manner those regular
appointments shall be made to the Commission in the future.
(2000 Code, § 2.86.040) (Ord. 2272, § 3, passed --1997)
§ 32.344 CHAIRPERSON.
   The Mayor shall appoint one of the members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission as chairperson and shall hold office until a successor is appointed.
The chairperson or the Mayor may ask another member of the Commission to serve
as acting chairperson in his or her absence.
(2000 Code, § 2.86.050) (Ord. 2272, § 6, passed --1997)
§ 32.345 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be held at the
call of the chairperson and at regular times as the Commission shall determine.
   (B)   All meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be open to
the public and be in compliance with the Open Meetings Act.
(2000 Code, § 2.86.060) (Ord. 2272, § 12 (part), passed --1997)
§ 32.346 DUTY OF CHAIRPERSON; APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the chairperson to evaluate the application(s)
before the Planning and Zoning Commission and to outline to the applicant or
his or her representative and to the members of the Commission the standards
and requirements which must be met in each application.
   (B)   When necessary and appropriate, motions shall be voted on separately.
The applicant and city shall have the same rights and obligations as if said
action(s) were taken by two separate boards or commissions.
(2000 Code, § 2.86.070) (Ord. 2272, § 11 (part), passed --1997)
§ 32.347 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure
and may require submissions to each record, plats and other information
necessary to make its determinations.
(2000 Code, § 2.86.080) (Ord. 2272, § 13, passed --1997)
§ 32.348 MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member present.
   (B)   Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of each case when
required and the reasons for granting or denying the application(s) shall be
specified.
(2000 Code, § 2.86.090) (Ord. 2272, § 12 (part), passed --1997)
§ 32.349 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   Members of the Commission may be removed by the City Council for cause after
written charges have been filed and after a public hearing has been held if
demanded by the member so charged.
(2000 Code, § 2.86.100) (Ord. 2272, § 5, passed --1997)
SENIOR CITIZEN COMMISSION
§ 32.360 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established a Senior Citizen Commission which shall be known as the
Oak Forest Senior Citizen Commission.
(2000 Code, § 2.88.010)
§ 32.361 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Membership in the Commission shall, as nearly as possible, be
representative of interested groups of the community such as church groups,
senior citizen groups, the United Way, park districts, civic clubs, fraternal
organizations, veterans organizations, homeowners, health care organizations,
commerce and educational organizations, the Social Security Administration,
housing, food and recreation organizations, as well as other organizations.
   (B)   The membership of the Commission shall consist of 13 commissioners and
one ex-officio alderman who shall serve as liaison between the commissioners
and Council.
   (C)   All commissioners, as well as the ex-officio alderman, shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council. The
commissioners shall have the right to select their own chairperson from the
members already appointed by the Mayor.
   (D)   Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner in
which the original appointments are required to be made.
(2000 Code, § 2.88.020) (Am. Ord. 2012-08-0391O, passed 8-28-2012)
§ 32.362 RESERVED.
§ 32.363 POWERS.
   The Senior Citizen Commission shall have the power to:
   (A)   Review and evaluate community senior citizen services and facilities;
   (B)   Maximize the use of present facilities by senior citizens;
   (C)   Recommend rules and regulations concerning the rendering or operation
of services and facilities under its direction or supervision;
   (D)   Coordinate with other organizations as to the social, recreational,
educational, cultural, art and health services, special events, needs and
opportunities for senior citizens;
   (E)   Coordinate the rendering of services and the operation of facilities
with other agencies;
   (F)   Review and evaluate the use of the senior bus and recommend rules and
regulations concerning its operation and services. The Commission shall also be
responsible for recommending a budget, to the City Council, for the senior bus
for each fiscal year; and
   (G)   Perform other acts as may be necessary or proper to carry out the
purposes of this subchapter, consistent with the direction of the Mayor and
Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.88.040) (Ord. 2006-04-0015O, passed 4-25-2006)
YOUTH COMMISSION
§ 32.375 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.
   There is established in the city a Youth Commission, to be composed of 13
members, one of whom shall serve as chairperson.
(2000 Code, § 2.94.010) (Ord. 2410, § 1, passed --1999)
§ 32.376 APPOINTMENT; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The members and the chairperson of the Youth Commission shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council. Five
youth, ages 13 to 19 years, shall serve for two years, and five youths, ages 13
to 19 years, shall serve for one year. Four adults shall be appointed and shall
serve for two years, and all appointments and appointments to fill vacancies
shall be made in like manner as in the case of the initial commissioners. A
commissioner having been duly appointed shall continue to serve after the
expiration of his or her term until his or her successor has been appointed.
All terms shall expire on April 30 in the final year of the member’s term.
   (B)   If a vacancy occurs in the Youth Commission, it shall be filled by
appointment by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, upon
recommendation of the chairperson of the Youth Commission, for the unexpired
term of the Youth Commission seat vacated.
(2000 Code, § 2.94.020) (Ord. 2410, § 2, passed --1999)
§ 32.377 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.
   Each member of the Youth Commission shall reside in the City of Oak Forest.
A nonresident may serve as an advisor to the Youth Commission, at the request
of the Youth Commission, and shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the City Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.94.030)
§ 32.378 DUTIES.
   (A)   The purpose of the Youth Commission shall be to study the concerns of
the youth of the community, to make recommendations regarding areas of youth
activities to the Mayor and the City Council and to assist in the
implementation of solutions as directed by the Mayor and the City Council. The
Youth Commission shall have the primary responsibility of identifying the goals
and progress needed by the city to provide a positive and meaningful
environment for the healthy growth of its youth. It shall recommend and
implement programs that recognize the age differences of teenage youth, as well
as the need to restrict such programs to certain age groups.
   (B)   The Youth Commission shall recommend to the Mayor and the City Council
such policies, and it shall implement the services and programs, as are
established by the Mayor and City Council.
   (C)   The Youth Commission will mobilize community resources and actively
encourage ongoing programs, or assist in initiating new services or programs,
with several private and public agencies of the city engaged in youth areas,
which support the goals of the Youth Commission as they are defined. The Youth
Commission shall help to educate the citizenry as to present youth services
available and shall assume additional responsibilities in youth-related areas
as the Mayor and City Council from time to time may direct.
   (D)   Initially, and from time to time, as necessary, the Youth Commission
shall plan a forum in order to bring city youth together to express their ideas
and concerns.
(2000 Code, § 2.94.040)
§ 32.379 ELECTION OF SECRETARY; MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Youth Commission shall meet and elect a Secretary from its members
as soon as possible after its establishment.
   (B)   The Youth Commission shall hold meetings as may be necessary, and the
meetings shall be held in City Hall or in some other suitable place.
   (C)   Meetings will be held on a regular basis at the discretion of the
Commission.
(2000 Code, § 2.94.050)
§ 32.380 REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES; ESTABLISHMENT OF LINE ITEM IN CITY’S
BUDGET.
   (A)   Members of the Youth Commission, under the direction of the
chairperson, shall be financially reimbursed for any expenses incurred in the
normal function of their duties.
   (B)   A budget line item shall be established for the Youth Commission, in
each fiscal year budget, and shall be approved by the City Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.94.060)
COMMUNITY POOL COMMISSION
§ 32.382 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is an establishment in the city, the Community Pool Commission to be
composed of four members, one of whom shall serve as Chairperson appointed by
the Mayor and another who will be a representative of the Park District.
(Ord. 2017-11-0667, passed 11-14-2017)
§ 32.383 DUTIES.
   (A)   The purpose of the Community Pool Commission shall be the oversight of
the Oak Forest Community Pool. The Commission will identify goals and progress
needed to provide a safe and enjoyable environment of current facilities and
explore the possibilities of future facilities for the residents of the
community.
   (B)   The Commission shall have the responsibility of tracking and reporting
of the expenses and revenues of the pool, and to work with the City
Administrator to create a budget each year.
   (C)   The Commission shall mobilize community resources, and assist in the
planning of events to support the economic sustainability of the pool.
(Ord. 2017-11-0667, passed 11-14-2017)
§ 32.384 ELECTION OF POSITIONS; MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Community Pool Commission shall meet and elect a Secretary and a
Treasurer from its members as soon as possible after its establishment.
   (B)   Meetings will be held on a regular basis at the discretion of the
Commission.
(Ord. 2017-11-0667, passed 11-14-2017)
§ 32.385 REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES; ESTABLISHMENT OF LINE ITEM IN CITY'S
BUDGET.
   (A)   Members of the Community Pool Commission, under the direction of the
Chairperson, shall be financially reimbursed for any expenses incurred in the
normal function of their duties.
   (B)   A budget line item for revenues and expenses shall be established for
the Community Pool Commission, in each fiscal year budget, and shall be
approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 2017-11-0667, passed 11-14-2017)
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
§ 32.395 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.
   (A)   There is established in and for the city the Oak Forest Emergency
Management Agency (“EMA”), to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or
damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other
hostile action, or from natural or man-made disaster, in accordance with the
Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1975.
   (B)   The agency shall consist of the Director and additional members as may
be appointed by the Mayor.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
§ 32.396 DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Director of the Emergency Management Agency of the city shall be
appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice and consent of Council on an
annual basis.
   (B)   The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training, operation and supervision of the agency, subject to
policy direction of the Mayor and Council, as provided by statute.
   (C)   The Director shall represent the city on all matters pertaining to the
Emergency Management Agency. During periods of emergency, as defined by law for
agency purposes, the Director shall coordinate the actions of all the Emergency
Management Agency.
   (D)   The Director is authorized to require the assistance of any and all
able-bodied residents for protection to the public welfare during periods
emergency.
   (E)   The Director is authorized to delegate his or her authority as he or
she deems it.
   (F)   In the event of the absence, resignation or death of the Director or
his or her inability to serve, the Mayor, or any person designated by him or
her, shall be and act as Director until a new appointment is made as provided
in this subchapter.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
§ 32.397 INTERPRETATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to be a modification of
the executive authority of the Mayor under the various provisions of state law
giving the Mayor certain emergency powers.
   (B)   Rather it is the express intent of this subchapter to assign the
emergency authority that is now existent or subsequently granted or extended by
law to the Emergency Management Agency of the city.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
§ 32.398 FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Emergency Management Agency of the city shall perform functions
within the city as are prescribed in and by the State Emergency Management
Agency plan and program prepared by the Governor and in and by such orders,
rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Governor and, in addition
shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required
pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political subdivision,
municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency Act of 1975.
   (B)   These emergency management and coordinative function include, but are
not limited to, coordination of, but not limited to the following; mutual aid,
ground search and rescue, weather situations (flooding, ice storms, tornado
spotting), maintain the operation of outdoor warning system, radiological and
hazardous material, resource management (preparing and maintaining the
emergency operational plan), communication support, evacuation and relocation,
assist in accident re-construction (rail, air, and vehicle), incident command
center for MABAS divisions, and other situations that require an incident
command center.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
Statutory reference:
   The statutes cited in this section have been repealed. Emergency management
provisions are currently set forth as the Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS
Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 32.399 MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.
   (A)   Any member of the City Emergency Management Agency may be designated
as a member of a mobile support team created by the Director of the State
Emergency-Management Agency as provided by law.
   (B)   The leader or mobile support team shall be designated by the Director
of the city “EMA”.
   (C) Any member or a mobile support team who is a city employee or officer
shall, while serving on call to duty by the Governor or the state director,
receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities
incident to the employment or office. Any member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the city shall, while so serving, receive from the state reasonable
compensation as provided by law.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
§ 32.400 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
   The Director of the Emergency Management Agency of the city may negotiate
mutual aid agreements with other cities or political subdivisions of the state,
but no agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the Mayor and
Council and by the State Director of the Emergency Management Agency.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
§ 32.401 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists due to actual
enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state of a
major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or a
human made or natural disaster, the City Emergency Management Agency shall
cooperate fully with the State Emergency Management Agency and with the
Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
§ 32.402 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Emergency Management Agency of the city who are paid
employees or officers of the city, if called for training by the state director
of the Emergency Management Agency, shall receive, for the time spent in that
training, the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held. Members who
are not city employees or officers shall receive for that training time the
compensation as may be established by the Mayor.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
§ 32.403 REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE.
   The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any
reimbursement by the state to the city for expenses incident to training
members of the Emergency Management Agency of the city as prescribed by the
State Director of the Emergency Management Agency, compensation for services
and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside the city
in response to a call by the Governor or the state director of the agency, as
provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to
agency activities as provided by law.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
§ 32.404 VOLUNTEERS.
   (A)   All persons other than mayoral appointments and employees of the city,
volunteering for service pursuant to this subchapter, shall serve without
compensation.
   (B)   While engaged in the service, they shall have the same immunities as
persons and employees of the city performing similar duties.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
§ 32.405 INTEGRATION OF CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Appointed officers and employees of the city shall be integrated under the
division of the Emergency Management Agency of the city as the Mayor and the
Director deem necessary and expedient, and such officers and employees are
directed and authorized to comply with directives issued under this subchapter.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
§ 32.406 PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   The Mayor and Council may, on recommendation of the Director or on
their own motion, authorize the Director to engage in the purchase of contracts
necessary to place the city in a position to effectively combat any disaster
resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile and to
protect the public health and safety, protect property and provide emergency
assistance to victims in the case of a disaster or in the case of a human made
or natural disaster.
   (B)   In the event of an enemy-caused or other disaster, the Director is
authorized, on behalf of the city, to procure such services, supplies,
equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the
exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to city contracts or obligations, as authorized by
the State ESDA Act of 1975, provided that if Council meets at such time, the
Director shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by
Council.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
Statutory reference:
   The statutes cited in this section have been repealed. Emergency management
provisions are currently set forth as the Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS
Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 32.407 OATH.
   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Emergency Management
Agency of the city shall, before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to
the following oath, in writing, which shall be filed with the Director:
   "I, _____________________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support
and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that do not advocate, nor am I now, nor have I ever been a member of
any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that
during such time as I am affiliated with the Oak Forest Emergency Management
Agency, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence."
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
§ 32.408 OFFICE SPACE.
   The Mayor and Council are authorized to designate space in a city building
or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Mayor, for the office of the
Emergency Management Agency of the city.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
§ 32.409 APPROPRIATIONS; LEVY OF TAXES.
   (A)   The Mayor and Council may make an appropriation for Emergency
Management Agency purposes in the manner provided by law and may levy, in
addition, for agency purposes only, a tax not to exceed $0.05 per $100 of the
assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as
provided by the State ESDA Act of 1975.
   (B)   However, that amount collectible under the levy shall in no event
exceed $0.25 per capita.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
Statutory reference:
   The statutes cited in this section have been repealed. Emergency management
provisions are currently set forth as the Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS
Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 32.410 CREDENTIALS OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Credentials of authority in a manner and form to be determined by the
Director may be issued to Emergency Management Agency officers and personnel.
   (B)   The Mayor and the City Clerk are authorized to affix the seal of the
city on such credentials.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009)
§ 32.411 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the Emergency
Management Agency of the city in any enforcement of any lawful rule or
regulation issued pursuant to this subchapter or in the performance of any duty
imposed upon him or her by virtue of this subchapter;
   (B)   Do any act prohibited by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant
to this subchapter if such act is of a kind that will give assistance to the
enemy, imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of the city or prevent,
hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; or
   (C)   Wear, carry or display without authority any mark or identification
specified by the agency.
(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed 12-8-
2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
BUREAU OF FIRE INVESTIGATION
§ 32.425 PREAMBLES.
   The preambles recited in the ordinance codified in this subchapter shall be
incorporated as part of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 2.58.010) (Ord. 2413, § 1, passed --1999)
§ 32.426 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established within the city a Fire Investigation Bureau.
(2000 Code, § 2.58.020) (Ord. 2413, § 2, passed --1999)
§ 32.427 CONTROL AND AUTHORITY; LIAISON.
   (A)   The Fire Investigation Bureau shall be under joint control of the
Chief of each of the Oak Forest Police and Fire Departments.
   (B)   In the event of a conflict between the joint heads, the Fire Chief
shall have ultimate authority.
   (C)   The Fire and Police Chief may appoint a liaison to act as head of the
Fire Investigation Bureau.
(2000 Code, § 2.58.030) (Ord. 2413, § 3, passed --1999)
§ 32.428 PURPOSES AND DUTIES.
   (A)   This Bureau shall investigate fires to determine whether the fire was
caused as a result of carelessness or design.
   (B)   The Bureau shall develop operating procedures to aid in its work. The
Bureau shall, as needed, seek outside expertise to aid in the investigation of
the cause and origins of a fire.
(2000 Code, § 2.58.040) (Ord. 2413, § 4, passed --1999)
§ 32.429 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The fire/arson investigator shall have the overall authority of the
remains of all areas, structures and materials involved in the fire from the
time the fire is put out until which time he or she deems it necessary to
release them.
   (B)   Upon the completion of the investigation, the arson investigator, if
appropriate, shall deliver the results of the investigation to the Police
Department.
   (C)   The Fire and Police Departments will work in full cooperation during
fire/arson investigations.
(2000 Code, § 2.58.050) (Ord. 2413, § 5, passed --1999)
§ 32.430 FIRE INVESTIGATOR QUALIFICATIONS.
   The qualifications of a fire/arson investigator shall be, at a minimum, the
following:
   (A)   A fire/arson investigation certification outlined by the Illinois
State Fire Marshal's office (120 hours);
   (B)   Firefighter III certification as outlined by the Illinois State Fire
Marshal’s Office; and
   (C)   Additional requirements as deemed necessary by the Fire and Police
Chiefs.
(2000 Code, § 2.58.060) (Ord. 2413, § 6, passed --1999)
ECONOMIC ADVISORY COUNCIL
§ 32.445 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   The Citizens’ Commission previously known as the Oak Forest Economic
Development Commission (EDC) shall be dissolved effective with the passage of
the ordinance codified in this subchapter, and replaced with an Economic
Advisory Council (EAC), compact in size, but specifically charged with the
following mission, agenda and/or duties:
   (A)   Promote and recommend programs and policies to improve the economic
vitality of our community, while helping to mitigate any adverse physical and
economic conditions affecting the social and economic growth of the City of Oak
Forest, now and in the future;
   (B)   Working in conjunction with the Oak Forest Chamber of Commerce, to
devise and implement an ongoing business outreach program, designed to assess
the needs and identify those issues related to government policies and/or
services which affect existing businesses in Oak Forest;
   (C)   Working in conjunction with the city’s community development staff,
research and compile an overall economic development strategy and/or marketing
plan, serving as a blueprint for the recruitment of new investment in Oak
Forest’s commercial, industrial and service sectors;
   (D)   Recommend guidelines and structure objective criteria to better
evaluate the use of development incentives as a means of business attraction
and retention;
   (E)   Compile and conduct those surveys or other research instruments
necessary to ascertain the status of the economic climate and circumstances
affecting businesses operating within the corporate limits;
   (F)   Subject to the powers and limitations granted by the City Council to
the EDC, the EAC shall be charged with the design, implementation and review of
various economic development programs, including, but not limited to, the
creation of economic development corporations, facade improvement, property tax
incentives and specific incentives directed at certain redevelopment efforts,
including the economic impact of the projects;
   (G)   Working in conjunction with the staff of various city departments, and
upon approval of the program by the City Council, review applications and
recommend to the City Council, worthy candidates for inclusion in the city’s
various economic development programs; and
   (H)   Serve as economic development ambassadors for the city conducting
various marketing and public relations activities related to the attraction of
new business investment and the retention of existing business.
(2000 Code, § 2.72.010) (Ord. 2842, § 1, passed --2004)
§ 32.446 COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The membership of the EAC shall consist of seven persons, appointed by
the Mayor, subject to the advice and consent of the City Council.
   (B)   EAC membership shall be limited to residents of Oak Forest or owners/
operators of businesses within Oak Forest, appointed at-large, but remain
representative of a cross-section of the city’s civic, business and
professional leadership, having demonstrated the skills and expertise necessary
to the implementation of a successful economic development program.
   (C)   The EAC’s membership shall serve rotating terms of three years, with
initial membership limited to the following terms of office:
      (1)   Four members shall serve for an initial term of two years; and
      (2)   Three members shall serve for an initial term of three years.
   (D)   In addition to the appointed membership from the community at-large,
one ex-officio member, an alderman, serving as the representative of, and
direct liaison to, the City Council, and the executive director of the Oak
Forest Chamber of Commerce, serving as the representative of, and direct
liaison to, the Chamber of Commerce, shall be considered full voting members of
the EAC with all rights, privileges and responsibilities, thereto assigned.
Given the unique nature of the position and the need to maintain an effective
relationship with the Chamber of Commerce, as the primary group representing
business interests which may extend outside the corporate limits of Oak Forest,
the residency requirement shall be waived for the Chamber’s executive director.
   (E)   At a minimum, meetings shall be held quarterly; however, the chair of
the EAC shall reserve the right to convene additional meetings, at the request
of the Mayor, City Council and/or community development coordinator, as
circumstances dictate.
   (F)   The EAC shall be empowered to elect a member of its body to serve as
chair, acting theretofore, as the EAC’s public spokesman, where applicable. The
city’s Community Development Coordinator and the Community Development
Department shall provide staff support to the EAC, as time, budget and staff
resources permit.
(2000 Code, § 2.72.020) (Ord. 2842, §2, passed --2004; Am. Ord. 2011-06-0345O,
passed 6-14-2011)
§ 32.447 VOLUNTEERS.
   In the conduct of its duties and responsibilities, the EAC shall be
authorized to enlist the services of those other members of the community whose
expertise and commitment to volunteer service will further expedite the
fulfillment of the EAC’s mission, agenda and duties.
(2000 Code, § 2.72.030) (Ord. 2842, § 3, passed --2004)
§ 32.448 EXPENDITURES.
   The EAC shall be authorized to obligate and/or expend funds, for purposes
stated and to the amount appropriated in the EAC’s annual budget, subject to
approval by the City Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.72.040) (Ord. 2842, § 4, passed --2004)
§ 32.449 FACADE IMPROVEMENT GRANT PROGRAM.
   (A)   The economic advisory council is authorized to implement and oversee a
facade improvement grant program to promote the continued use and maintenance
of commercial buildings in the city and to recommend the payment of grants to
business property owners for improvements to their building facades. The facade
improvement grant program shall be administered as follows:
      (1)   Grant eligibility. To be eligible for a facade improvement grant, a
building must be used in commercial or industrial purposes. Applicants must
plan to install a minimum of $5,000 of eligible improvements, as defined in
division (A)(3) of this section, to be eligible for a facade improvement grant.
      (2)   Limit and nature of grant award. Facade improvement grants will be
issued to qualifying applicants in a maximum amount not greater than 33% of the
actual cost of the eligible improvements except for qualifying sign
amortization projects where the maximum amount will be not greater than 50% of
the actual cost. Facade improvement grants shall be limited to a maximum of
$50,000 per building within any three-year period.
       (3)   Eligible costs. The following improvement costs are eligible for
reimbursement from the facade improvement grant:
         (a)   Installation, repair and replacement of exterior exit doors to
provide public access, meet current building and fire codes, and/or improve the
overall appearance of the building;
         (b)   Painting of the exterior of the building;
         (c)   Repair, replacement or addition of exterior shutters and
awnings, except for backlit and/or plastic awnings;
         (d)   Repair and replacement of signs;
         (e)   Repair, replacement and installation of exterior stairs,
porches, railings and exit facilities;
         (f)   Repair and rebuilding of exterior walls, including cleaning,
sealing, tuck-pointing, painting and the like;
         (g)   Tuck-pointing, other repair and cleaning of exterior bricks;
         (h)   Repair of windows, frames, sills, glazing, replacement of glass,
and installation of new windows;
         (i)   Repair or construction of cornices in order to replicate the
building’s original facade;
         (j)   Repair, installation, replacement or addition of any other
improvement the City Administrator deems appropriate; and
         (k)   Landscaping and streetscape improvements including, but not
limited to brickpavers, lighting and furnishings.
      (4)   Ineligible costs. The following improvement costs are not eligible
for reimbursement from the facade improvement grant:
         (a)   Building permit fees and related costs;
         (b)   Extermination of insects, rodents, vermin and other pests;
         (c)   Title reports and legal fees;
         (d)   Acquisition of land or buildings;
         (e)   Air conditioning and heating facilities; and
         (f)   Parking lots.
   (B)   Application; submittals. Applicants under this section shall submit
the following application materials to the Community Development Director, or
his or her designee:
      (1)   Once completed and original application form, on a form approved by
and provided by the Community Development Director, which form shall include:
         (a)   Applicant’s name, address and contact information;
         (b)   Subject property common address and property identification
number;
         (c)   Legal description of subject property;
         (d)   Current use of the property;
         (e)   Improvement information, including, without limitation:
            1.   Contractor information;
            2.   Cost estimate;
            3.   Facade area;
            4.   Requested amount of grant;
            5.   Proposed improvements;
            6.   Copies of the drawings of the proposed work, to scale and
preferably in color; and
            7.   Brief narrative description of the project;
         (f)   Pictures of facade and particular areas to be enhanced; and
         (g)   Assessed value of the property.
   (C)   Economic Advisory Council; review and recommendations; City Council
action.
      (1)   Upon the Community Development Director’s receipt of application
materials, he or she shall review the application to determine its completeness
with the above requirements. If an application is deemed complete by the
Community Development Director, he or she shall submit a report to the Economic
Advisory Council outlining the facts, proposed improvements, and requested
assistance.
      (2)   In the event that the Community Development Director finds that an
application is incomplete or that the proposed scope of improvements are
ineligible or partially ineligible for reimbursement under the facade
improvement grant program, the Community Development Director shall inform the
applicant in writing of any deficiency in his or her application or ineligible
improvements.
      (3)   Not later than 45 days after receipt of the report from the
Community Development Director, as established in division (C)(1) of this
section, the Economic Advisory Council shall convene to consider the
application and a draft facade improvement grant agreement, shall be approved
by resolution duly adopted by City Councilto approve final cost estimates.
      (4)   The Economic Advisory Council shall convene to review and approve
final cost estimates, and grantee award amount. If the applicant fails to
submit three adequate cost estimates, the Economic Advisory Council may deny
approval and/or return application back to City Council for consideration.
   (D)   Conditions. The applicant shall be subject to the following
conditions.
      (1)   Upon approval of the application, the applicant shall enter into a
facade improvement grant agreement with the City of Oak Forest the form and
substance of which to be provided by the Community Development Director, which
shall govern the use of the grant. The agreement shall be recorded with the
office of the Cook County Recorder of Deeds. The applicant shall be responsible
for all fees and costs incurred in recording the facade improvement grant
agreement.
      (2)   The applicant shall execute a restrictive covenant for the
maintenance of facade improvements. The restrictive covenant shall be recorded
with the office of the Cook County Recorder. The applicant shall be responsible
for all fees and costs incurred in recording the restrictive covenant.
      (3)   Should the applicant fail to complete the eligible cost items or
otherwise abandon the property before completion of the eligible cost items,
the city shall have a lien against the property in its favor in the amount of
the facade improvement grant released to the applicant.
      (4)   The applicant must maintain in good condition, and not change in
any manner whatsoever, without first obtaining the express prior written
consent of the City Administrator, the eligible cost items for which funds from
the facade improvement grant were used for a period of at least ten years from
the completion of those items, pursuant to the restrictive covenant for the
maintenance of facade improvements.
      (5)   In the event that the owner of the building sells, transfers or
conveys the property within five years after the date upon which any funds have
been released from the facade improvement grant, the owner, or his or her
successor, shall reimburse the city for the funds then released, to the date of
sale, transfer or conveyance, from the facade improvement grant in accordance
with the following sliding scale.
 
Year of Sale      Percentage of City Grant Then Release to Reimburse
Up to one year    100%
Up to two years   80%
Up to three years 60%
Up to four years  40%
Up to five years  20%
 
(Ord. 2006-07-0047O, passed 7-25-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-06-0346O, passed 6-14-
2011; Am. Ord. 2014-08-0513O, passed 8-26-2014; Am. Ord. 2025-08-1105O, passed
8-12-2025)
SAFETY COMMITTEE
§ 32.460 INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   The Executive and Departmental Safety Committees are an integral part
of the city’s overall risk management plan.
   (B)   This is one place where management and employees can truly come
together as one to create results. To be effective, the Committees must
interact in an environment of open communication and have a desire to make a
difference.
   (C)   By defining their goals and objectives, the Committees can create a
shared vision that will enable action and promote a safe work environment for
all employees.
(2000 Code, § 2.96.010) (Ord. 2882, Art. 2 (part), passed - -2005)
§ 32.461 MISSION STATEMENT.
   The mission of the City of Oak Forest Safety Committee is to develop and
promote a safe environment for all employees and visitors to the facilities
through the involvement of all individuals with regard to education,
communication and safe work practices.
(2000 Code, § 2.96.020) (Ord. 2882, Art. 2 (part), passed - -2005)
§ 32.462 EXECUTIVE SAFETY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Role and function. The Executive Safety Committee develops, implements
and oversees the administration of the organizations risk management program.
In that role, the Committee’s functions include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Developing and recommending risk management programs intended to
enhance the personal safety and well-being of employees, residents and the
general public, and to control the severity and frequency of accidents in order
to reduce damage to property and equipment;
      (2)   Coordinating, establishing and implementing annual risk management
goals and objectives designed to meet the needs of the City of Oak Forest based
on review of loss history;
      (3)   Reviewing all motor vehicle accidents, equipment or other property
damage accidents, and work-related injuries and illnesses;
      (4)   Reviewing safety-related statistical data, records and reports
provided by the intergovernmental risk management agency (IRMA), the risk
management agency, and other sources for the purpose of making informed
decisions with regard to risk management policies and practices;
      (5)   Determining the size and make-up of the Departmental Safety
Committee and monitoring the Committee’s activities and progress by reviewing
the minutes submitted by the Departmental Safety Committee;
      (6)   Reviewing and acting on recommendations submitted by the Employee
Safety Committee and giving them direction;
      (7)   Serve as an advisory body to management on health and safety
issues;
      (8)   Providing suggestions and recommendations for resolution of health
and safety concerns.
   (B)   Activities.
      (1)   Review accident/incident reports. Types of accidents, causes and
trends shall be identified and appropriate corrective action suggested;
      (2)   Obtain and analyze available data on part injuries and illnesses
and identify trends and suggest appropriate corrective actions;
      (3)   Provide support and serve as a resource in the development,
implementation, and maintenance of a comprehensive risk management, safety and
loss prevention program; and
      (4)   Develop written programs to ensure compliance with OSHA health and
safety regulations.
   (C)   Members. The executive safety committee shall be comprised of (three
elected officials), the City Administrator, department heads, and the safety
coordinator at minimum. Others may be added at the discretion of the committee
chair.
   (D)   Meetings. Meetings will be held on a monthly basis. (Second Tuesday of
each month at 1:30 p.m.).
      (1)   Special meetings of the committee may be called by the chairperson
upon his or her initiative, or upon the request of a majority of the members.
      (2)   Union/management bargaining issues will be referred to the
appropriate bargaining unit.
(2000 Code, § 2.96.030) (Ord. 2882, Art. 2 (part), passed - -2005)
§ 32.463 DEPARTMENTAL SAFETY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Role and function. The Departmental Safety Committee serves as liaison
between the departmental employees of the City of Oak Forest and the Executive
Safety Committee. In that role, the Committee’s functions shall include but not
be limited to:
      (1)   Identifying annual specific goals and objectives based on loss
history;
      (2)   Creating and maintaining among employees an active interest in
practicing safety awareness on the job;
      (3)   Addressing issues that will promote the health and wellness of all
employees;
      (4)   Recommending to the Executive Safety Committee methods of improving
the city’s risk management program;
      (5)   Carrying out the Executive Safety Committee’s directives and
supporting actively its decisions and recommendations; and
      (6)   Conducting monthly facility inspections based on criteria located
within the safety manual and reporting these findings to the executive safety
committee.
   (B)   Activities.
      (1)   Identify unsafe work practices and conditions and suggest
appropriate remedies;
      (2)   Conduct safety inspections of both operations and facilities,
identify safety hazards and recommend corrective measures;
      (3)   Review accident/incident reports. Types of accidents, causes and
trends shall be identified and appropriate corrective action suggested;
      (4)   Obtain and analyze available data on part injuries and illnesses
and identify trends and suggest appropriate corrective actions;
      (5)   Assist in the development and implementation of effective health
and safety awareness programs; and
      (6)   Encourage feedback from all individuals with regard to health and
safety-related ideas, problems and solutions.
   (C)   Members.
      (1)   The Departmental Safety Committee shall be comprised of a diverse
group of employees from both union represented and nonunion represented from
all major operating departments.
      (2)   At a minimum, department heads will appoint one employee from each
department (and/or division).
   (D)   Meetings.
      (1)   Meetings will be held monthly. (Meetings may be cancelled due to
lack of business, but only after approval of safety coordinator and Executive
Safety Committee chair).
      (2)   Special meetings of the Committee may be called by chairperson upon
his or her initiative, or upon the request of majority of the members.
   (E)   Safety suggestions.
      (1)   Solicitation from employees. Members shall solicit safety
suggestions from their coworkers and bring those suggestions to the attention
of the Departmental Safety Committee. The Committee shall review the
suggestions and determine whether to implement them, refer them to the
Executive Safety Committee, or reject them. The Committee shall notify the
contributing employee(s) of its decision.
      (2)   Safety Suggestion Program. Members shall follow the safety
suggestion program procedures described within the city’s safety manual
regarding the processing of written safety suggestions submitted by employees.
(2000 Code, § 2.96.040) (Ord. 2882, Art. 2 (part), passed - -2005)
§ 32.464 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Management’s responsibilities.
      (1)   Enforce all safety rules and procedures;
      (2)   Actively promote safety;
      (3)   Allow the time for Committee representative participation in
meetings and assigned responsibilities;
      (4)   Allocate the fund/resources necessary to implement Safety Committee
activities;
      (5)   Lead by example in following all safety rules;
      (6)   Support Committee decisions;
      (7)   Provide timely feedback to the Committee;
      (8)   Perform the initial investigation of all injuries, incidents and
near misses;
      (9)   Actively promote safety and risk management;
      (10)   Act as communication liaison between management and the Committee;
      (11)   Facilitate the Safety Committee meetings;
      (12)   Coordinate the assignment of activities to Committee members;
      (13)   Establish necessary deadlines based on member input;
      (14)   Follow up on assigned responsibilities;
      (15)   Schedule and develop an agenda for meetings based on member input;
      (16)   Prepare an annual report of the Committee’s accomplishments;
      (17)   Prepare a report of the Committee’s goals and objectives for next
calendar year;
      (18)   Orientation of new members; and
      (19)   Ensure the effectiveness of the meeting by directing discussions
to meet the Committee’s mission and objectives.
   (B)   Safety Coordinator responsibilities.
      (1)   Actively promote safety and risk management;
      (2)   Serve in the capacity as a resource to the Committee on risk
management issues;
      (3)   Review all accident investigation reports;
      (4)   Conduct health and safety inspections and prepare reports;
      (5)   Assist with the development of the agenda; and
      (6)   Serve as liaison between the Executive and Departmental Safety
Committees.
   (C)   City Administrator’s responsibilities.
      (1)   Actively promote safety and risk management;
      (2)   Ensure the meeting minutes are recorded, completed and distributed
in a timely fashion;
      (3)   Distribute the agenda with minutes to Committee members, one week
prior to each scheduled meeting;
      (4)   Take and record attendance;
      (5)   Make arrangements for the meeting room;
      (6)   Distribute any correspondence and/or directives developed by the
Committee; and
      (7)   Develop and maintain files of meetings and correspondence.
   (D)   Committee members responsibilities.
      (1)   Actively promote safety and risk management;
      (2)   Attend all health and safety meetings on time or arrange for an
alternate to attend;
      (3)   Communicate Committee activities to his or her department;
      (4)   Serve on appointed project teams or subcommittees;
      (5)   Bring safety or health concerns to committee meetings and/or to the
attention of the affected employee’s supervisor;
      (6)   Assist with the development of the agenda upon request; and
      (7)   Serve as an example by following all safety rules and work
practices.
   (E)   Employee responsibilities.
      (1)   Actively promote safety and risk management;
      (2)   Bring safety concerns to his or her supervisor or Committee
representative immediately;
      (3)   Learn and follow health and safety rules and procedures; and
      (4)   Attend all safety training courses relevant to his or her job
classification.
(2000 Code, § 2.96.050) (Ord. 2882, Art. 2 (part), passed - -2005)
§ 32.465 SAMPLE SAFETY COMMITTEE AGENDA.
   (A)   Call to order.
   (B)   Roll call.
   (C)   Approval of minutes.
   (D)   Old business; accident review board findings reviewed/discussed.
   (E)   New business.
      (1)   New accident report review.
      (2)   Quarterly loss history review.
      (3)   Upcoming safety training.
      (4)   Training materials.
      (5)   Facility inspection report(s) review.
   (F)   Confirmation of next meeting.
   (G)   Adjournment.
(2000 Code, § 2.96.060) (Ord. 2882, Art. 2 (part), passed - -2005)
STREETSCAPE ADVISORY COUNCIL
§ 32.480 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   With the passage of the ordinance codified in this subchapter, a Citizens’
Commission, known and referred to as the Oak Forest Streetscape Advisory
Council (SAC) shall be formed, specifically charged with the following mission,
agenda and/or duties:
   (A)   Promote and recommend programs and policies to improve the design and
aesthetics of our streetscape, particularly in the commercial corridors,
contributing to the vitality of our community, while helping to mitigate any
adverse physical and economic conditions affecting the social and economic
growth of the City of Oak Forest, now and in the future;
   (B)   Working in conjunction with Oak Forest staff, to devise and implement
an ongoing outreach program, designed to assess the needs and identify those
issues related to government policies and/or services which affect the
beautification and/or rejuvenation of the streetscape in Oak Forest;
   (C)   Working in conjunction with the city’s community development staff,
research and compile an overall strategy and/or capital improvement plan,
serving as a blueprint for the recruitment and development of working
partnerships among Oak Forest’s commercial, industrial and service sectors;
   (D)   Recommend guidelines and structure objective criteria to better
evaluate the use of streetscape materials—furniture, landscape, signage and
plantings—as a means of business attraction and retention, as well as overall
beautification;
   (E)   Compile and conduct those surveys or other research instruments
necessary to ascertain the status of the streetscape and the physical
environment, including those unique circumstances affecting certain locations
within the corporate limits;
   (F)   Coordinate the city’s annual beautification awards program; and
   (G)   Serve as ambassadors for the city— conducting various outreach and
public relations activities related to the successful integration and overall
preservation of Oak Forest’s two major environments—the built environment and
the natural environment.
(2000 Code, § 2.97.010) (Ord. 2850, § 1, passed - -2004; Ord. 2006-06-0034O,
passed 6-13-2006)
§ 32.481 COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The membership of the SAC shall consist of not less than five and not
more than 11 persons, appointed by the Mayor, subject to the advice and consent
of the City Council. SAC membership shall be limited to residents of Oak Forest
or owners/operators of businesses within Oak Forest, appointed at-large, but
remain representative of a cross-section of the city’s civic, business and
professional leadership, having demonstrated the skills and expertise necessary
to the implementation of a successful community outreach program.
   (B)   Vacancies on the SAC shall be filled in the same manner in which the
original appointments are required to be made.
   (C)   In addition to the appointed membership from the community at-large,
one ex-officio member, an alderman, serving as the representative of, and
direct liaison to, the City Council, and the Community Development Coordinator,
or designee, serving as the representative of, and direct liaison to, municipal
departments, shall be considered full voting members of the SAC with all
rights, privileges and responsibilities, thereto assigned.
   (D)   At a minimum, meetings shall be held quarterly; however, the chair of
the SAC shall reserve the right to convene additional meetings, at the request
of the Mayor, City Council and/or Community Development Coordinator, as
circumstances dictate, providing adequate public notice as required by law.
   (E)   (1)   The SAC shall be empowered to elect a member of its body to
serve as chair, acting theretofore, as the SAC’s public spokesperson, where
applicable.
      (2)   The city’s Community Development Coordinator and the Community
Development Department shall provide staff support to the SAC, as time, budget
and staff resources permit.
(2000 Code, § 2.97.020) (Ord. 2850, § 2, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 2012-09-
0393O, passed 9-11-2012)
§ 32.482 VOLUNTEERS.
   In the conduct of its duties and responsibilities, the SAC shall be
authorized to enlist the services of those other members of the community whose
expertise and commitment to volunteer service will further expedite the
fulfillment of the SAC’s mission, agenda and duties.
(2000 Code, § 2.97.030) (Ord. 2850, § 3, passed - -2004)
§ 32.483 EXPENDITURES.
   The SAC shall be authorized to obligate and/or expend funds, for purposes
stated and to the amount appropriated in the SAC’s annual budget, subject to
approval by the City Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.97.040) (Ord. 2850, § 4, passed - -2004)
GAZEBO COMMITTEE
§ 32.495 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established a city standing advisory Committee which shall
be known as the Oak Forest “Gazebo Committee.”
(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)
§ 32.496 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Gazebo Committee shall have no more than five people appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
   (B)   The initial appointments for Gazebo Committee members shall be made
upon the passage of this section, and will expire on April 30, 2008.
   (C)   Gazebo Committee members shall not be compensated for their services.
   (D)   Three members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum.
   (E)   A majority decision of all members present at a duly-constituted
meeting shall be required for all Committee actions.
(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)
§ 32.497 OFFICERS OF THE GAZEBO COMMITTEE.
   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall designate from the
Committee’s members a chairperson of the Gazebo Committee, who shall serve for
a term of one year and until a successor is appointed. The Committee shall
elect from its members, a Secretary and other officers as it may deem
advisable.
(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)
§ 32.498 DUTIES OF THE CHAIR.
   (A)   The chair shall have the duty to call all meetings of the Gazebo
Committee and to preside at all Gazebo Committee meetings.
   (B)   In the absence of the chair, a majority of a quorum of the members, by
majority vote, may select from one of their number a temporary chair to preside
at the meeting.
(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)
§ 32.499 GAZEBO COMMITTEE MEETINGS.
   (A)   All Committee meetings shall be conducted in accordance of the
requirements of the Open Meetings Act.
   (B)   The Secretary shall keep minutes of Committee meetings which shall be
turned over to the City Clerk following approval.
   (C)   At the first initial meeting of the Committee and at the first meeting
in each January thereafter, the Committee shall establish a regular meeting
schedule for the remainder of the year, which will be posted in accordance with
the Open Meetings Act meetings, which will be turned over to the City Clerk
following approval.
(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)
§ 32.500 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Gazebo Committee shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To plan events at the city’s gazebo;
   (B)   To recommend events and a budget for events to the Mayor and City
Council;
   (C)   To form subcommittees as the Committee deems necessary or desirable
for the efficient conduct of special events within the city;
   (D)   To evaluate any community event over which the Committee is given
responsibility, and to provide the Mayor and City Council with a written report
of the evaluation and recommendations within 60 days after the event;
   (E)   To establish reasonable rules and regulations governing the functions
of the Gazebo Committee, consistent with the powers and duties set forth
herein;
   (F)   To establish, review and approve yearly calendar dates for monthly
meetings and various special events at the gazebo subject to the approval of
the Mayor and City Council;
   (G)   The Gazebo Committee shall not conduct any special events without the
approval of the Mayor and City Council;
   (H)   The Gazebo Committee shall not have the power to approve the
expenditure of any city funds unless specifically approved within the city
budget. The expenditures shall only be committed to and made when approved by
the Mayor and City Council; and
   (I)   To perform other functions or responsibilities as may be assigned from
time to time by the Mayor or City Council.
(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN STEERING COMMITTEE
§ 32.515 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established an ad hoc City Advisory Committee which shall be
known as the Oak Forest “Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee.” This Committee
shall become effective upon the appointment of its initial members and shall
cease to exist 30 days after the City Council’s final approval of the city’s
Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)
§ 32.516 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee shall have no more than
seven people appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council.
   (B)   The initial appointments for Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee
members shall be made upon the passage of this subchapter, and will expire when
the Committee dissolves as specified in §
32.515 above.
   (C)   Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee members shall not be compensated
for their services.
   (D)   Four members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum.
   (E)   A majority decision of all members present at a duly-constituted
meeting shall be required for all Committee actions.
(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)
§ 32.517 OFFICERS OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN STEERING COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall designate from
the Committee’s members a chairperson of the Comprehensive Plan Steering
Committee, who shall serve until the Committee dissolves in accordance with
this subchapter.
   (B)   The Committee shall elect from its members, a Secretary and other
officers as it may deem advisable.
(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)
§ 32.518 DUTIES OF THE CHAIR.
   (A)   The chair shall have the duty to call all meetings of the
Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee and to preside at all Comprehensive Plan
Steering Committee meetings.
   (B)   In the absence of the chair, a majority of a quorum of the members, by
majority vote, may select from one of their number a temporary chair to preside
at the meeting.
(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)
§ 32.519 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN STEERING COMMITTEE MEETINGS.
   (A)   All Committee meetings shall be conducted in accordance of the
requirements of the Open Meetings Act.
   (B)   The Secretary shall keep minutes of Committee meetings which shall be
turned over to the City Clerk following approval.
   (C)   At the first initial meeting of the Committee and at the first meeting
in each January thereafter, the Committee shall establish a regular meeting
schedule for the remainder of the year, which will be posted in accordance with
the Open Meetings Act meetings, which will be turned over to the City Clerk
following approval.
(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)
§ 32.520 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee shall have the following powers
and duties:
   (A)   To review and evaluate alternatives for the city’s comprehensive plan,
and to make recommendations to the City Planning and Zoning Commission
regarding the adoption of the city’s Comprehensive Plan;
   (B)   To form subcommittees as the Committee deems necessary or desirable to
perform the Committee’s functions;
   (C)   To perform other functions or tasks as assigned by the Mayor and City
Council;
   (D)   The Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee shall not perform any other
functions without the approval of the Mayor and City Council; and
   (E)   The Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee shall not have the power to
approve the expenditure of any city funds. The expenditures shall only be
committed to and made when approved by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)
YOUTHFUL FIRE DANGER AWARENESS PROGRAM
§ 32.535 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established in the city a youthful fire danger awareness program.
(2000 Code, § 2.98.010) (Ord. 2375, § 1, passed - -1999)
§ 32.536 PURPOSES.
   This program, which will act at the direction of the City Fire Chief, will
identify and counsel juveniles who intentionally or unintentionally use fire in
circumstances other than its proper intended use and, as appropriate, the
families of the individuals.
(2000 Code, § 2.98.020) (Ord. 2375, § 2, passed - -1999)
§ 32.537 PERSONNEL.
   (A)   (1)   Youthful damage counselors will be trained in youthful fire
damage awareness programs approved by the office of the State Fire Marshal.
      (2)   The counselor will direct the avenues in which assistance is
indicated, cooperate with the juvenile court system and refer target
individuals to appropriate health professionals and/or local agencies.
   (B)   The counselors shall suggest the need for individuals to secure
professional help.
   (C)   The program shall be staffed by volunteer fire awareness counselors.
(2000 Code, § 2.98.030) (Ord. 2375, § 3, passed - -1999)
MEDICARE-ONLY COVERAGE
§ 32.560 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   It is declared to be the policy and purpose of the governing body of the
City of Oak Forest to extend to the eligible employees thereof, effective as of
January 1, 2004, the benefits of the Hospital Insurance provisions of the
Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, in pursuance to the policy,
and to that purpose, the City Council and Mayor of the City of Oak Forest take
action with the Social Security Division of the State Employees’ Retirement
System of Illinois as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or
regulations.
(2000 Code, § 2.99.010) (Ord. 2799, § 2, passed - -2004)
§ 32.561 COVERAGE OF ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEES; AUTHORIZATION.
   The Mayor of the City of Oak Forest is authorized and directed to execute
coverage of eligible employees as provided in §
32.560 above.
(2000 Code, § 2.99.020) (Ord. 2799, § 3, passed - -2004)
§ 32.562 WITHHOLDINGS FROM SALARIES AND WAGES.
   Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees for the purposes provided
in §
32.560 above, are authorized to be made in the amounts and at times as may be
required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid
over to the Internal Revenue Service for wages paid after December 31, 1986.
(2000 Code, § 2.99.030) (Ord. 2799, § 4, passed - -2004)
§ 32.563 EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS.
   Employer contributions on wages paid after December 31, 1986 shall be paid
to the Internal Revenue Service in accordance with federal laws and
regulations.
(2000 Code, § 2.99.040) (Ord. 2799, § 5, passed - -2004)
§ 32.564 RECORDS AND REPORTS; REQUIRED.
   The City of Oak Forest Finance Director shall maintain records and submit
reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations.
(2000 Code, § 2.99.050) (Ord. 2799, § 6, passed - -2004)
VETERANS COMMISSION
§ 32.575 CREATION.
   There is hereby created a Veterans Commission in the City of Oak Forest.
(Ord. 2008-10-0203O, passed 10-28-2008)
§ 32.576 COMPOSITION.
   The Commission shall consist of 13 members. All commissioners will be
appointed by the Mayor of the city with the advice and consent of the City
Council. The Oak Forest Veterans Commission shall have the right to select its
own Chairman from the members already appointed by the Mayor. Additionally,
honorary members to the Veteran’s Commission may be appointed by the Veterans
Commission but honorary members will not have voting privileges reserved for
regularly appointed members. The Commission shall meet on a monthly basis, more
often as may be necessary. They shall keep a record of their meetings and
supply the same to the City Clerk.
(Ord. 2009-07-0251O, passed 7-28-2009; Am. Ord. 2011-04-0335O, passed 4-12-
2011; Am. Ord. 2015-10-0565O, passed 10-27-2015)
§ 32.577 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The members shall be appointed for a term of three years. If a member
resigns or is otherwise unable to continue their duties as a commissioner,
another member may be appointed to fulfill the remaining time in that term with
the approval of the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
Members shall be selected on the basis of experience and/or knowledge of
veteran’s affairs and concerns with a strong desire to work with and for and to
otherwise assist local veterans and their families. Members shall serve without
compensation.
(Ord. 2009-07-0251O, passed 7-28-2009; Am. Ord. 2011-04-0335O, passed 4-12-
2011)
§ 32.578 GOALS AND CHARGES.
   The goals and charge of the Commission shall be:
   (A)    Recommend to the Mayor and City Council activities relating to
veterans affairs;
   (B)   Promote veterans awareness and welfare in the city;
   (C)   Represent the city at veteran's functions throughout the community;
   (D)   Coordinate joint sponsorship of programs with city veterans groups;
and
   (E)   Be a repository of educational information about veteran's issues for
the city, recognize accomplishments of local veterans, assist veterans who may
need help in securing benefits and, in general, be the knowledge base of
veteran matters in the city.
(Ord. 2008-10-0203O, passed 10-28-2008)
BUILDING DEPARTMENT
§ 32.590 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is established the Building Department.
   (B)   The Building Department shall consist of the position of Building
Commissioner, and other personnel as determined by need.
   (C)   All employment and positions in the department are subject to
budgetary considerations.
(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 32.591 POSITION OF BUILDING COMMISSIONER.
   The Building Commissioner shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Council. The Building Commissioner shall be an employee of
the city and be responsible for the general supervision of the Department.
(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 32.592 DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT.
   The Building Department shall be responsible for activities relating to the
review and inspection of construction related activities, as well as performing
inspections of construction related activities. Additionally, the department is
also responsible for performing inspections, code compliance activities related
to apartments, as well as residential and commercial properties, and other
activities which may be assigned.
(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 32.593 ORGANIZATION OF DEPARTMENT.
   The Building Commissioner shall be subject to the supervision of, and shall
report to the City Administrator, and to the Mayor.
(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)
GREEN STEPS COMMISSION
§ 32.605 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Findings.
      (1)   Oak Forest is an environmentally conscious community surrounded by
forest preserves, located within a major urbanized area, and has a long history
of volunteerism interested in resolving public issues; and
      (2)   Residents and businesses of Oak Forest have been enthusiastic in
helping to promote conservation, efficiency, sustainability and education to
help preserve our natural resources and protect our natural environment; and
      (3)   The City of Oak Forest wishes to formalize a process within
government that will help identify "green issues" and seek ways toward which
we, as a community, might better understand such issues and seek their
resolution.
   (B)   A commission is hereby created and established, which shall be known
as the Oak Forest Green Steps Commission.
(Ord. 2010-06-0295O, passed 6-8-2010)
§ 32.606 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Oak Forest Green Steps Commission shall be composed of seven
Commissioners and one Aldermanic Ex-Officio Member to serve as liaison between
the Commission and the Oak Forest City Council.
   (B)   All Commissioners will be appointed by the Mayor of the City of Oak
Forest with the advice and consent of the City Council. The ex-officio member
shall be appointed by the Mayor. The Oak Forest Green Steps Commission shall
have the right to select its own Chairman from the members already appointed by
the Mayor.
   (C)   Vacancies on the Green Steps Commission shall be filled in the same
manner in which the original appointments are required to be made.
(Ord. 2010-06-0295O, passed 6-8-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-09-0394O, passed 9-11-2012)
§ 32.607 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Oak Forest Green Steps Commission are
meant to be broad in scope so as not to limit the commissioners in their
efforts to develop ideas that will make Oak Forest second to none in terms of
its "environmental footprint". The purpose of the Green Steps Commission will
be to encourage residents, schools, businesses and government within Oak Forest
to be more eco-conscious and make more eco-friendly choices. The duties and
responsibilities include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (A)   Identify both general and specific issues that need to be addressed
that will enable Oak Forest to preserve natural resources and protect the
natural environment.
   (B)   Create an atmosphere of concern about the natural resources we use and
what we must do about it to preserve our standard of living.
   (C)   Develop ideas that will help resolve existing problems in Oak Forest
such as more environmental friendly building codes and more efficient recycling
methodologies.
   (D)   Encourage businesses and other organizations to pursue innovative
"green" initiatives that will help them to achieve Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (L.E.E.D.) certification.
   (E)   Promote the goal of sustainability: the effort to conserve an
ecological balance to avoid the depletion of natural resources.
   (F)   Disseminate information that will educate others - particularly the
young - so that all will be aware of being more eco-conscious.
   (G)   Educate the public that protecting our environment and ecological
systems is a positive way to economically grow and prosper in the long run.
   (H)   Communicate ideas to the Mayor and City Council that will make them
consider eco-friendly choices in programs and project they propose for the city
of Oak Forest.
   (I)   Initiate efforts within the community that lead to programs and
projects that reduce our consumption of natural resources and promote
conservation.
   (J)   Strive to become an "All Green Community” whether by official
designation or simply through the efforts put forth by Oak Foresters
themselves.
(Ord. 2010-06-0295O, passed 6-8-2010)
CHAPTER 33: REVENUE AND FINANCE
Section
Locally Imposed and Administered Tax and
Employment Rights and Responsibilities
   
33.001   Title
   
33.002   Scope
   
33.003   Definitions
   
33.004   Notices
   
33.005   Late payment
   
33.006   Payment
   
33.007   Certain credits and refunds
   
33.008   Audit procedure
   
33.009   Appeal
   
33.010   Hearing
   
33.011   Interest and penalties
   
33.012   Abatement
   
33.013   Installment contracts
   
33.014   Statute of limitation
   
33.015   Voluntary disclosure
   
33.016   Publication of tax ordinances
   
33.017   Review of liens by Tax Administrator
   
33.018   Application
Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
33.030   Imposition; rate
   
33.031   Reports
   
33.032   Payment of tax
Police Protection Tax
   
33.045   Imposition; rate
Municipal Motor Fuel Tax
   
33.060   Definitions
   
33.061   Tax imposed
   
33.062   Collection of tax
   
33.063   Registration and maintenance of records
   
33.064   Allocation of funds collected
   
33.065   Failure to report and pay tax
   
33.066   Suspension/revocation of business license
Grocery Retailers’ and Service Occupation Tax
   
33.070   Municipal grocery retailers’ occupation tax and municipal grocery
service occupation tax
Municipal Utility Taxes
   
33.080   Definitions
   
33.081   Taxes imposed
   
33.082   Exceptions; exemptions
   
33.083   Additional taxes
   
33.084   Collection
   
33.085   Reports to city
   
33.086   Credit for over-payment
   
33.087   Limitation of liability
   
33.088   Simplified municipal telecommunication tax rate change
Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
33.090   Taxes imposed
   
33.091   Collection of tax by retailer
   
33.092   Illinois Department of Revenue
   
33.093   Failure to collect tax
   
33.094   Records
Purchasing System
   
33.100   Office of purchasing
   
33.101   Operating procedures
   
33.102   Joint purchasing agreements
   
33.103   Documentation of expenses
   
33.104   Recycled product procurement policy
Economic Development Projects
   
33.115   Definitions
   
33.116   Purposes
   
33.117   Powers of city
   
33.118   Exercise of powers; terms of bonds set by ordinance
   
33.119   Covenants in bonds
   
33.120   Signatures on bonds; validity
   
33.121   Liens on bond revenues and receipts
   
33.122   Liability for bonds
   
33.123   Investment of city funds
   
33.124   Exemption from construction and bidding requirements for public
buildings
   
33.125   Conflict of laws
Mortgage Credit Certificate Program
   
33.140   Home rule authority
   
33.141   Declaration of public purpose
   
33.142   Definitions
   
33.143   Establishment of program
   
33.144   Aggregate limit of certificates
   
33.145   Administration agreement
   
33.146   Appointment of Program Administrator; Local Administrator
   
33.147   Certificates
   
33.148   Mortgage credit certificate election
   
33.149   Public notice
   
33.150   Volume cap
   
33.151   Ratification
   
33.152   Approval of further actions
Industrial Revenue Bonds
   
33.165   Guidelines and criteria for issuance
   
33.166   Checklist
Miscellaneous Fiscal Provisions
   
33.180   Prevailing wage rate
   
33.181   Returned checks fee
   
33.182   Charge for dwelling units; fire protection fund
   
33.183   Ambulance service charges
   
33.184   Emergency service charges
   
33.185   Paid leave; minimum wage - employers
 
   
33.999   Penalty
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX AND
EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
§ 33.001 TITLE.
   The ordinance codified in this subchapter shall be known as, and may be
cited as, the locally imposed and administered tax and employment rights and
responsibility ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.010) (Ord. 2493, § 1, passed - -2000; Am. Ord. 2016-12-
0628O, passed 12-13-2016)
§ 33.002 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the city’s procedures in
connection with all of the city’s locally imposed and administered taxes and
employment relations.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.020) (Ord. 2493, § 2, passed - -2000; Am. Ord. 2016-12-
0628O, passed 12-13-2016)
§ 33.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act.
   CITY. The City of Oak Forest, Illinois.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The city’s Mayor and City Council.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX. Each tax imposed by the city
that is collected or administered by the city, not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
Property Tax Code or fees collected by the city other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The city’s controller is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
Local Tax Administrator to act in the Local Tax Administrator’s stead. The
Local Tax Administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
subchapter to give full effect to this subchapter. The exercise of the
authority by the Local Tax Administrator shall not be inconsistent with this
subchapter and the Act.
   NOTICE. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the city’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of the tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
city.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.030) (Ord. 2493, § 3, passed - -2000)
§ 33.004 NOTICES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given,
the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar days, prior
to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of
the Local Tax Administrator.
   (B)   The notice shall be sent by the Local Tax Administrator as follows:
      (1)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the person’s last known address; or
      (2)   Personal service or delivery.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.040) (Ord. 2493, § 4, passed - -2000)
§ 33.005 LATE PAYMENT.
   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
city, pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is:
   (A)   Physically received by the city, on or before the due date; or
   (B)   Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
readable U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the city, with adequate postage prepaid.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.050) (Ord. 2493, § 5, passed - -2000)
§ 33.006 PAYMENT.
   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order:
   (A)   First to the tax due for the applicable period;
   (B)   Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and
   (C)   Third to the penalty for the applicable period.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.060) (Ord. 2493, § 6, passed - -2000)
§ 33.007 CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without
written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction, however, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid
the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to
protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes
under duress.
   (B)   The statute of limitations or a claim for credit or refund shall be
two years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the city.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the Local Tax Administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any moneys to the city.
      (2)   Within ten days of the receipt by the Local Tax Administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the Local Tax Administrator shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      (3)   In the event the Local Tax Administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of 5% per annum, based on a year of 365
days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the
date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.070) (Ord. 2493, § 7, passed - -2000)
§ 33.008 AUDIT PROCEDURE.
   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this subchapter.
   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The tax;
      (2)   The time period of the audit; and
      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by Local Tax Administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30
days, after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days, nor more than
30 days, from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the Local
Tax Administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event the
taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that
is convenient to the taxpayer and the Local Tax Administrator.
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer’s
business or activities including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. A books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city.
   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the city. If the taxpayer fails to
provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the Local
Tax Administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax
administrator’s determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer’s tax
liability.
   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days, of the
city’s determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the Local Tax Administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing the tax.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.080) (Ord. 2493, § 8, passed - -2000)
§ 33.009 APPEAL.
   (A)   The Local Tax Administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the Local Tax Administrator’s issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      (1)   The reason for the assessment;
      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      (4)   The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the Local Tax
Administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
Local Tax Administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the Local Tax Administrator within
45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
Local Tax Administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within 14 days, of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final
bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the Local Tax Administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days, after the expiration of the 45-day period.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.090) (Ord. 2493, § 9, passed - -2000)
§ 33.010 HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under §
33.009 above, the Local Tax Administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any
appeal.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of a taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed 14 days.
   (C)   At the hearing the Local Tax Administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Local Tax Administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.100) (Ord. 2493, § 10, passed - -2000)
§ 33.011 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.
   (A)   Interest. The city provides for the amount of interest to be assessed
on a late payment, underpayment or nonpayment of the tax, to be per annum,
based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.
   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties.
      (1)   If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by
the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty, of 5% of the amount of
tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late
payment penalty of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a
return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall
be imposed.
      (2)   If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be
assessed equal to 10% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period
for which the return was required to be filed.
      (3)   A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to
file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.110) (Ord. 2493, § 11, passed - -2000)
§ 33.012 ABATEMENT.
   The Local Tax Administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the
Local Tax Administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or
failure to make a filing.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.120) (Ord. 2493, § 12, passed - -2000)
§ 33.013 INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.
   (A)   The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for
the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance.
   (B)   The Local Tax Administrator may not cancel any installment contract so
entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing.
   (C)   Upon written notice by the Local Tax Administrator that the payment is
30 days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have 14 working days to cure any
delinquency.
   (D)   If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the 14-day period
or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract
with the Local Administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled
without further notice to the taxpayer.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.130) (Ord. 2493, § 13, passed - -2000)
§ 33.014 STATUTE OF LIMITATION.
   (A)   The city, through the Local Tax Administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing.
   (B)   The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the reviewed
tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due and
owing.
      (1)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than two
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
      (2)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
city, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations
shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in which return
for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the
return for the applicable period was filed.
      (3)   No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax
return was filed by the taxpayer.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.140) (Ord. 2493, § 14, passed - -2000)
§ 33.015 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has
not received a written notice of an audit, investigation or assessment from the
Local Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
Local Tax Administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due.
   (B)   A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay
the amount of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods
prior to the filing of the application but not more than four years before the
date of filing the application.
   (C)   A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be
liable for any additional tax, interest or penalty for any period before the
date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined
and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid
tax along with applicable interest of the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case
the application shall be deemed invalid and void.
   (D)   The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90 days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the Local Tax Administrator. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined
and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid
tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case
the application shall be deemed invalid and void.
   (E)   The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90 days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the Local Tax Administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to
by the Local Tax Administrator, whichever is longer.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.150) (Ord. 2493, § 15, passed - -2000)
§ 33.016 PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.
   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the City
Clerk’s office.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.160) (Ord. 2493, § 16, passed - -2000)
§ 33.017 REVIEW OF LIENS BY TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Local Tax Administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.
   (B)   Upon a determination by the Local Tax Administrator that the lien is
valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect.
   (C)   If the lien is determined to be improper, the Local Tax Administrator
shall:
      (1)   Timely remove the lien at the city’s expense;
      (2)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and
      (3)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.170) (Ord. 2493, § 17, passed - -2000)
§ 33.018 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement
all of the city’s tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this subchapter, this subchapter shall be
controlling.
(2000 Code, § 3.28.180) (Ord. 2493, § 18, passed - -2000)
MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
§ 33.030 IMPOSITION; RATE.
   A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the city at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from sales made in the course of the business while this subchapter is
in effect, in accordance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.
(2000 Code, § 3.04.010) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed - -1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed - -1999)
§ 33.031 REPORTS.
   Every person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property
at retail in the city shall file a report as required by ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120,
§ 3.
(2000 Code, § 3.04.020) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed - -1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed - -1999)
§ 33.032 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   At the time the report required by §
33.031 above is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue
the amount of tax imposed by §
33.031 above on account of the receipts from sales of tangible personal
property during the preceding month.
(2000 Code, § 3.04.030)
POLICE PROTECTION TAX
§ 33.045 IMPOSITION; RATE.
   A tax is imposed for the purpose of police protection in the city at the
rate of 0.05% of the value, as equalized or assessed by the State Department of
Revenue, of all taxable property in the city for the first year in which this
tax is levied, and at the rate of 0.075% of the value, as equalized or assessed
by the Department, of all taxable property in the city in all succeeding years,
in accordance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-3.
(2000 Code, § 3.08.010)
MUNICIPAL MOTOR FUEL TAX
§ 33.060 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR FUEL. All volatile liquids compounded or used for fueling motor
vehicles, including gasoline, gasohol, compressed natural gas and diesel fuels.
   MOTOR FUEL RETAILER. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business
of selling motor fuel at retail, not for resale.
(2000 Code, § 3.36.010) (Ord. 2684, § 2 (part), passed - -2002)
§ 33.061 TAX IMPOSED.
   There is imposed and levied upon the retail purchase within the city of
motor fuel at the rate of $0.03 per gallon or any fraction thereof.
   (A)   This tax shall be in addition to any and all other federal, state and
local taxes.
   (B)   The ultimate incidence and liability for payment of such taxes shall
be upon the motor fuel retailer. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed
to impose a tax upon the occupation of selling motor fuel.
(2000 Code, § 3.36.020) (Ord. 2684, § 2 (part), passed - -2002)
§ 33.062 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   Each motor fuel retailer in the city shall have the duty to collect
the motor fuel tax from each purchaser and to pay it over to the city, along
with an accounting thereof, on return forms provided by the city.
   (B)   The return and tax payment shall be due on the same filing dates as
are established for filing with the Illinois Department of Revenue of the
Retailer’s Occupation Tax Return Form ST-1, Sales and Tax Use Return.
(2000 Code, § 3.36.030) (Ord. 2696, § 2, passed - -2003; Ord. 2684, § 2 (part),
passed - -2002)
§ 33.063 REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   (A)   Each motor fuel retailer shall maintain complete and accurate books,
records and accounts showing the gross receipts for the sale of motor fuel and
the taxes collected from the purchaser thereof.
   (B)   These documents shall be available in the city for examination and for
audit by the city upon reasonable notice during customary business hours.
(2000 Code, § 3.36.040) (Ord. 2684, § 2 (part), passed - -2002)
§ 33.064 ALLOCATION OF FUNDS COLLECTED.
   The proceeds received from the collection of the municipal gas tax shall be
allocated in the amount of $0.02 per gallon to the motor fuel tax fund and
$0.01 per gallon to the general fund.
(2000 Code, § 3.36.050) (Ord. 2684, §2 (part), passed - -2002; Ord. 2010-04-
0289O, passed 4-27-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-04-0341O, passed 4-26-2011)
§ 33.065 FAILURE TO REPORT AND PAY TAX.
   (A)   If any motor fuel retailer fails to timely file any report or if any
amount due shall remain unpaid after the due date there shall be a late payment
penalty of 1% of the unpaid tax for each month, or any portion thereof, that
full payment is not received.
   (B)   The city may also bring a civil action to collect any unpaid tax or
penalty.
(2000 Code, § 3.36.060) (Ord. 2684, § 2 (part), passed - -2002)
§ 33.066 SUSPENSION/REVOCATION OF BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (A)   If the City Clerk as license commissioner, or his or her designee,
after an administrative hearing finds that any motor fuel retailer has wilfully
evaded the responsibility to collect the tax imposed by this subchapter, he or
she may suspend or remove any city licenses issued to the establishment.
   (B)   The owner, operator or licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard
at the hearing. Any license suspension or revocation resulting from the hearing
shall not relieve or discharge the civil liability for nonpayment of the tax
due.
(2000 Code, § 3.36.070) (Ord. 2684, § 2 (part), passed - -2002)
GROCERY RETAILERS’ AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
§ 33.070 MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND MUNICIPAL GROCERY
SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax.
      (1)   Beginning January 1, 2026, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in the business of selling groceries at retail in the city at the rate
of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business
while this section is in effect.
      (2)   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-24.
      (3)   The tax imposed by this section, and all civil penalties that may
be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be remitted to, collected by and
enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue in accordance with the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-24, as amended. The Illinois
Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this section.
      (4)   The failure to timely collect or remit all taxes due pursuant to
this section, or otherwise comply with state law, is a violation of this code,
and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in this code, and may be
subject to suspension and/or revocation of any business license issued by the
city, as set forth in §
110.010 of this code.
   (B)   Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax.
      (1)   Beginning January 1, 2026, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in the city in the business of making sales of service, who, as an
incident to making those sales of service, transfer groceries as an incident to
a sale of service at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales made
in the course of such business while this section is in effect.
      (2)   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-24.
      (3)   The tax imposed by this section, and all civil penalties that may
be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be remitted to, collected by and
enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue in accordance with the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-24, as amended. The Illinois
Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this section.
      (4)   The failure to timely collect or remit all taxes due pursuant to
this section is a violation of this code, and shall be subject to the penalties
as set forth in this code, and may be subject to suspension and/or revocation
of any business license issued by the city, as set forth in §
110.010 of this code.
(Ord. 2025-07-1101O, passed 7-22-2025)
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAXES
§ 33.080 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, and for
all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received
in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every
kind and material and for all services rendered therewith, and shall be
determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product
or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or
any other expenses whatsoever; provided, however that GROSS RECEIPTS shall not
include: any amounts specifically excluded from the definition of gross
receipts in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2(d), the Illinois Municipal Code; and
that portion of the consideration received for the distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas to any local governmental body or school district
whose territory includes the municipality.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee,
guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any person having or
maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether the place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently
or temporarily, or whether the person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this state.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Has the meaning ascribed to it in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-
105 of the Public Utilities Act but shall include alternative retail electric
suppliers as defined in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-102.
   PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of
the city, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, excluding any local
governmental body or school district whose territory includes the municipality.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility directly in the generation, production,
transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 33.081 TAXES IMPOSED.
   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges.
   (A)   The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase
at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the city at the
following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
      (1)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
$0.00558 per kilowatt-hour;
      (2)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
$0.00366 per kilowatt-hour;
      (3)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
$0.00330 per kilowatt-hour;
      (4)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
$0.00320 per kilowatt-hour;
      (5)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
$0.00311 per kilowatt-hour;
      (6)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
$0.00293 per kilowatt-hour;
      (7)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
$0.00288 per kilowatt-hour;
      (8)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
$0.00284 per kilowatt-hour;
      (9)   For the next 10, 000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.00279 per kilowatt-hour;
      (10)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt-hours in month; $0.00275 per kilowatt-hour; and
      (11)   The tax rates set forth in the preceding table will be used at
least through December 31, 2008, are proportional to the rates enumerated in
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2 (as modified by Public Act 90-561), and do not
exceed the revenue that could have been collected during 1997 using the rates
enumerated in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2 (as modified by Public Act 90-561).
   (B)   The privilege of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas
for use or consumption, and not for resale, at a rate not to exceed 5% of the
gross receipts therefrom.
(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 33.082 EXCEPTIONS; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   None of the taxes authorized by this subchapter may be imposed with
respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to
which the business or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of
the United States, be made the subject of taxation by this state or any
political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling or transmitting gas or
electricity, or using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at
retail, be subject to taxation under the provisions of this subchapter for
those transactions that are or may become subject to taxation under the
provisions of the “Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act” authorized by § 8-
11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code; nor shall any tax authorized by this
subchapter be imposed upon any person engaged in a business or on any privilege
unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon all persons
engaged in businesses of the same class in the city, whether privately or
municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege within the
city.
   (B)   Any local governmental body or school district whose territory
includes the municipality shall be exempted from the taxes imposed by this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 33.083 ADDITIONAL TAXES.
   (A)   These taxes shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the
taxpayer or its business.
   (B)   All of the taxes enumerated in this subchapter are in addition to the
payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to the city by the
taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public
places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of
poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer’s
business.
(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 33.084 COLLECTION.
   The tax authorized by §
33.081(A) above shall be collected from the purchaser by the person maintaining
a place of business in this state who delivers the electricity to the
purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid, is recoverable in the
same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity. Any tax
collected by the person maintaining a place of business in this state
delivering the electricity shall constitute a debt owed to the city by the
person maintaining a place of business in this state. Persons delivering the
electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding the tax to the
gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering the electricity
shall also be authorized to add to the gross charge an amount equal to 3% of
the tax to reimburse the person delivering the electricity for the expense
incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns,
remitting the tax and supplying data to the city upon request. If the person
delivering the electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then
the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the city in the
manner prescribed by the city. Persons delivering the electricity who file
returns pursuant to this division shall, at the time of filing the return, pay
the city the amount of the tax collected pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 33.085 REPORTS TO CITY.
   On or before the last day of each month, each person maintaining a place of
business in this state who delivers the electricity to the purchaser, in the
case of the tax imposed by §
33.081(A) above, and each taxpayer, in the case of the tax imposed by §
33.081(B) above, shall make a return to the city for the preceding month
stating:
   (A)   Its name;
   (B)   Its principal place of business;
   (C)   Its gross receipts or kilowatt-hour usage, as applicable, during the
month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
   (D)   Amount of tax;
   (E)   Other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities
may require; and
   (F)   Each person making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making the return, pay to the city, the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided that in connection with any return, the person may, if he or she so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between the billings, and the taxable gross
receipts or kilowatt-hour usage, as applicable.
(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 33.086 CREDIT FOR OVER-PAYMENT.
   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due
under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then the amount shall be credited against any tax due,
or to become due, under this subchapter from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three
years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. No action
to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this subchapter shall
be commenced more than three years after the due date of the amount.
(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 33.087 LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   If the provisions of this subchapter with respect to the exemption of
school districts and units of local government from the taxes imposed by this
subchapter or the application thereof are held unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid, the amount of tax due as a consequence of the holding shall be limited
to the amount that the taxpayer is authorized to charge and collect from the
school districts and units of local government pursuant the provisions of § 9-
221 of the Public Utilities Act or any successor thereto.
   (B)   (1)   The City Clerk is hereby directed to send a certified copy of
this subchapter to all taxpayers and to provide to all taxpayers the names and
addresses of each school district and unit of local government which own
facilities within the corporate limits of the city.
      (2)   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect, following its
passage, approval and publications as required by law and shall be effective
with respect to: the use or consumption of electricity; and gross receipts
actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after the first day of
January, 2007.
(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 33.088 SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATION TAX RATE CHANGE.
   (A)   The rate of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed
under the authority of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act
(ILCS Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-1 et seq.) upon the act or privilege of originating
in the municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate or interstate
telecommunications by a person is hereby changed to 6% of the gross charges for
the telecommunications purchased at retail.
   (B)   The tax hereby imposed shall be collected and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of
Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (C)   (1)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage and approval and publication in pamphlet form as required by law,
provided, however, that division (A) above shall take effect for all gross
charges billed by telecommunications retailers on and after the first day of
January, 2007.
      (2)   The Municipal Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of
this subchapter with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before September
20, 2006.
(Ord. 2006-07-0046O, passed 7-11-2006)
MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
§ 33.090 TAXES IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act, at retail in this municipality at the rate of 3% of the
gross receipts from such cannabis sales made in the course of that business, in
the city. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-23.
(Ord. 2022-08-0923O, passed 8-9-2022)
§ 33.091 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER.
   The imposition of the tax imposed by this section is in accordance with the
provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-23, as amended, and is in addition to any and all
other taxes and charges. Retailers may reimburse themselves for their tax
liability hereunder by separately stating the tax as an additional charge,
which charge may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with any state
tax that retailers are required to collect.
(Ord. 2022-08-0923O, passed 8-9-2022)
§ 33.092 ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.
   The tax imposed by this section, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be remitted to, collected by and
enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue in accordance with the
provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-23, as amended. The Illinois Department of Revenue
shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this
subchapter and any such tax collected by such retailer and required to be
remitted to the Illinois Department of Revenue shall constitute a debt owed by
the retailer to the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 2022-08-0923O, passed 8-9-2022)
§ 33.093 FAILURE TO COLLECT TAX.
   The failure of a retailer to timely collect or remit all taxes due pursuant
to this section may be subject to those penalties imposed by the Illinois
Department of Revenue applicable under the Illinois Municipal Cannabis
Retailers Occupation Tax Law.
(Ord. 2022-08-0923O, passed 8-9-2022; Am. Ord. 2022-11-0933O, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 33.094 RECORDS.
   The records and audit procedures and requirements shall be as authorized by
the Retailers Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/7) and implemented by the
Illinois Department of Revenue.
(Ord. 2022-08-0923O, passed 8-9-2022)
PURCHASING SYSTEM
§ 33.100 OFFICE OF PURCHASING.
   (A)   There is established in and for the city an office of purchasing under
the direction of the City Administrator, or if a vacancy exists in that
position, under the direction of the City Clerk or Deputy City Clerk, who shall
be referred to as the purchasing agent. This office will be responsible to the
Mayor and Council for the entire purchasing program.
   (B)   The office or designee shall have the following responsibilities, in
addition to any others designated by the Mayor and Council:
      (1)   Act to procure all necessary supplies, materials and services,
subject to the approval of Council, for the efficient operation of the
government at the lowest possible cost;
      (2)   Report to the Mayor and Council any collusive or restrictive
bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all
purchases;
      (3)   Establish and amend, with the approval of Council, all rules and
regulations authorized by this subchapter;
      (4)   Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing,
prices, market conditions and new products, and keep abreast of the benefits of
research done in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions,
national technical associations, trade associations having national recognition
and private businesses and organizations;
      (5)   Prescribe and maintain forms necessary to the operation of this
subchapter;
      (6)   Prepare, adopt and maintain a vendors’ catalog file, which catalog
shall be filed according to materials and shall contain descriptions of
vendors’ commodities and prices;
      (7)   Exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk to take full advantage
of discounts;
      (8)   Act to procure all federal and state exemptions to which the
government is entitled;
      (9)   Cooperate with other personnel to secure the maximum efficiency in
budgeting and accounting; and
      (10)   Declare as irresponsible those bidders or vendors who default on
their quotations, and disqualify them from receiving any business from the
government for a stated period of time, as determined by the Mayor and Council.
(2000 Code, § 2.28.010)
§ 33.101 OPERATING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Introduction/statement of policy.
      (1)   The purpose of this purchasing manual is to provide the City of Oak
Forest staff with guidelines and directions for the acquisition of goods and
services. When used with good judgment and common sense, the policies and
procedures conveyed within will allow the city to obtain required supplies and
services efficiently and economically.
      (2)   This manual is designed to be a fluid document and will be modified
from time to time to conform to changes in legislation, technology and actual
practice. Although it may not answer every question related to purchasing
practices, it does provide general guidelines for purchasing activities.
Employees who need help dealing with specific situations not covered by the
manual should contact the controller for assistance.
      (3)   The provisions of this manual shall be approved by the City
Council. Administration of the manual shall be the responsibility of the City
Administrator.
      (4)   Failure to follow the procedures outlined in this manual may lead
to disciplinary action in accordance with the provisions of the City of Oak
Forest personnel policy manual.
   (B)   Purchasing policies.
      (1)   Code of ethics. All city personnel engaged in purchasing and
related activities shall conduct business dealings in a manner above reproach
in every respect. Transactions relating to expenditure of public funds require
the highest degree of public trust to protect the interests of the city and the
residents of Oak Forest. City employees shall strive to:
         (a)   Ensure that public money is spent efficiently and effectively
and in accordance with statutes, regulations and city policies;
         (b)   Maintain confidentiality at all times;
         (c)   Not accept gifts or favors from current or potential suppliers,
which might compromise the integrity of their purchasing function;
         (d)   Purchase without favor of prejudice;
         (e)   Ensure that all potential suppliers are provided with adequate
and identical information upon which to base their offer or quotation and that
any subsequent information is made available to all bidders;
         (f)   Establish and maintain procedures to ensure that fair and equal
consideration is given to each offer or quotation received and selection is
based upon the lowest responsible bid;
         (g)   Offer a prompt and courteous response to all inquires from
potential or existing suppliers;
         (h)   Responsibly plan purchases to insure that the need for
“emergency” approvals reflects true emergencies; and
         (i)   It shall be the responsibility of the City Administrator to
determine if a violation of this code of ethics has occurred and if
disciplinary action is necessary in accordance with the city’s personnel
manual.
      (2)   Approval of city purchases. No employee shall purchase goods or
services on behalf of the city without first seeking approval as required by
this policy. All purchases shall require advance approval of the appropriate
department head, purchasing agent or the City Council in accordance with the
guidelines described in this division:
 
Dollars Limits       Required Approval
Up to $1,000         Department head
$1,001.00 to $10,000 City Administrator
$10,001 and above    City Council
 
      (3)   Regular purchase orders. All purchases exceeding $1,000 shall
require the issuance of a regular purchase order to the vendor before an order
for goods or services is filled. Employees shall be responsible for planning
for purchases exceeding $1,000 in advance, and should allow sufficient time to
have a requisition processed and purchase order issued and mailed to the
vendor. Vendors must indicate the correct purchase order number on an invoice
and forward it to the Finance Clerk to process it for payment.
      (4)   Change orders to regular purchase orders. After a regular purchase
order is issued to the vendor, it may become necessary to change it to include
additional quantities, shipping costs and the like. If the actual purchase
exceeds the requisition by more than 10%, the department head should forward a
request to edit the purchase order to the controller indicating the reason for
the increase. If the change is less than or equal to 10%, no action is
necessary.
      (5)   Blanket purchase orders. Blanket purchase orders are intended to
give employees flexibility when purchasing mass quantities from the same vendor
on a recurring basis (e.g., concrete, patching material, car washes). Blanket
purchase orders will be issued to a vendor on a monthly basis. The department
head shall enter a requisition for the approximate quantity needed for the
month. The controller will approve the monthly expenditure and issue a purchase
order. The purchase order will be closed at the end of the month. In instances
where a blanket purchase order has been issued, it is not necessary to process
a requisition and have a regular purchase order issued in advance of obtaining
the goods. Employees may obtain items from vendors in the field upon approval
of the department head. Vendors must reference the correct blanket purchase
order number on an invoice and forward it to the Finance Clerk to process it
for payment.
      (6)   Contract purchase order. Contract purchase orders shall be issued
if the city has an annual contract with a vendor or supplier (e.g., insurance
policy, maintenance contract). Contract purchase orders will be created by the
Finance Clerk at the beginning of each fiscal year. Department heads should
forward the terms of any contract to the controller so that a purchase order
can be created and mailed to the vendor. The purchase order will be closed at
the end of the fiscal year. Vendors must indicated the correct contract
purchase order number on an invoice and forward it to the Finance Clerk to
process it for payment.
      (7)   Union and contractual benefits. A request for payment for union and
contractual benefits paid to city employees should be forwarded to the Finance
Clerk to be included on the list of bills presented to the City Council.
Examples of union and contractual benefits include optical and dental
reimbursement, tuition reimbursement and uniform reimbursement. The check
request approved by the department head will supersede the requirement for a
purchase order.
      (8)   Grant purchases. Purchases made with grant proceeds require a
regular purchase order, if it is greater than $1,000. The department head
should request the controller to propose a budget adjustment to the City
Council if the income and expenditure was not previously budgeted.
   (C)   Competitive quotes and exceptions to the policy.
      (1)   General policy for soliciting quotes.
         (a)   Employees are responsible for obtaining quotes for purchases in
the instances outlined in this section. When requesting a purchase, quotes
should be forwarded to the purchasing agent. Requisitions submitted without the
required quotes or a satisfactory explanation of why quotes were not obtained
(e.g., sole source, emergency, standardized vendor and the like) would be
returned to the originator without approval.
 
Up to $1,500      One verbal quote is required, however, employees are
                  encouraged to seek additional quotes when possible.
                  Three quotes must be obtained and submitted to the purchasing
$1,501 to 10,000  agent with the requisition. A purchase order will be issued
                  after approval by the purchasing agent.
                  Three written quotes must be obtained and submitted to the
                  purchasing agent with the requisition. The purchasing agent
$10,001 to 20,000 will forward the request to the City Council for approval. A
                  purchase order will be issued after approval by the City
                  Council.
                  Must be competitively bid in accordance with state law and
$20,001 and above city ordinances. City Council approval is required for all
                  contracts of this dollar amount. A purchase order will be
                  issued after approval by the City Council.
 
         (b)   Items purchased more than once during a fiscal year (e.g.,
paper, office supplies and the like) do not need quotes every time a purchase
is made. However, competitive quotes for these items shall be sought at the
beginning of each fiscal year to ensure that vendors are competitive.
      (2)   Joint purchasing.
         (a)   City employees are authorized to obtain goods and services using
the State of Illinois joint purchasing program.
         (b)   When available through the state program, it is not necessary
for city employees to obtain quotes or to competitively bid the goods or
services, which are sought.
         (c)   Employees shall be responsible, however, for ensuring that the
goods or services are of a quality sufficient to meet the city's needs and that
pricing is competitive.
         (d)   When making purchases using the state’s assigned vendor,
employees shall submit a purchase requisition to the purchasing agent and shall
include the State of Illinois’ contract number. This information should be
indicated on the requisition by using the special instructions field when
entering the purchase requisition. The controller will then issue a purchase
order to the vendor.
         (e)   The city is also authorized to enter into agreements for joint
purchasing with authorized units of government under the law.
         (f)   These units include, but are not limited to, the City of
Chicago, Cook County and other municipalities in the Northwest Municipal
Conference and the South Suburban Mayors’ and Managers’ Association.
Furthermore, if a local vendor matches the contract amount in a competitively
bid joint purchase program, that vendor will be deemed the lowest responsible
bidder for that purchase.
      (3)   Sole source purchases.
         (a)   Contracts for parts, supplies or equipment that are available
only from a single source are referred to as sole source purchases.
         (b)   Sole source procurements may arise from the following
circumstances:
            1.   Equipment for which there is no comparable competitive product
or is available only from one supplier;
            2.   Public utility services from natural or regulated monopolies;
            3.   A component or replacement part for which there is no
commercially available substitute, and which can be obtained only from the
manufacturer;
            4.   An item where compatibility is the overriding consideration,
such as computer software; and
            5.   A used item, for example, a television transmitter tower, that
becomes immediately available and is subject to prior sale.
         (c)   These items shall not be subject to requirements for seeking
competitive quotes or bids. When submitting a request for purchase, the
requisitioner must indicate that the item or service is a sole source purchase.
This should be noted on the special instructions field when entering the
requisition. The controller will then issue a purchase order to the vendor.
         (d)   Sole sources purchases in excess of $10,000 shall be presented
to the City Council prior to acquisition with a request to waive bids, approve
the purchase and enter into a formal contract.
      (4)   Emergency purchases policy.
         (a)   EMERGENCIES are defined as events that could not have been
foreseen where immediate action is necessary to safeguard the public’s health
and safety. In the event of an emergency affecting the public health and
safety, the department head or his or her designee may authorize a vendor to
perform work necessary to resolve the emergency without formal bid
solicitation.
         (b)   A department head may authorize a vendor to perform any and all
work necessary only if the public health and safety could be affected.
         (c)   After the emergency has been resolved, the department shall
enter a requisition in the purchase order module for the goods or services
purchased.
         (d)   Using the requisition special instructions field, the department
shall indicate that it was an emergency and forward an explanation to the
purchasing agent.
         (e)   The controller will then issue an emergency purchase order to
the vendor.
      (5)   Waiving of bids. When appropriate, the City Council may waive the
bidding procedure and authorize a purchase by a vote of two-thirds of all
aldermen.
   (D)   Competitive bidding and requests for professional services.
      (1)   When a formal bid is required.
         (a)   All purchases of goods or services exceeding $20,000 shall be
purchased by sealed bids, formal bidding procedures and from the lowest
responsive bidder after an adequate period of public notice.
         (b)   Public notice shall be published in at least one newspaper of
general circulation in the city, at least 14 days prior to bid closing.
         (c)   The newspaper notice shall include, at a minimum, a brief
description of the item to be purchased or sold, where bid blanks and
specifications may be secured, the time and place for bid opening and a
rejection rights clause.
      (2)   Bid opening procedures. All sealed bids shall be publicly opened by
an employee as assigned by the applicable department head at the time stated in
the legal notice. The purchasing agent or his or her designee shall be present
at the bid opening as well as at least one other employee to serve as a witness
and tabulate the bid results.
      (3)   Bid lists.
         (a)   Each department shall be responsible in maintaining their own
lists of prospective bidders.
         (b)   Requests to be placed on the bid list received by City
Administrator or controller shall be forwarded to the appropriate department
head.
         (c)   Departments shall be responsible for maintaining current lists
of bidders and for determining prospective bidder’s qualifications.
      (4)   Requests for professional services.
         (a)   Some contracts, by their nature, are not adapted to award by
competitive bidding. Examples include, but are not limited to, contracts for
the services of individuals possessing a high degree of professional skill
where the education, experience or character of the individual is a significant
factor in determining their ability to meet the city’s needs.
         (b)   These contracts generally result from a request for proposal
(RFP) solicited from consultants for “professional services.”
         (c)   The city is required by the Local Government Professional
Services Selection Act to follow specific procedures when hiring an architect,
engineer or land surveyor. The procedures must be followed, unless:
            1.   The city has a satisfactory relationship for services with one
or more firms;
            2.   An emergency situation exists and an architect, engineer or
land surveyor must be selected in an expeditious manner; or
            3.   When the cost of those services is expected to be less than
$25,000. If none of these conditions apply, the city must solicit proposals.
   (E)   Minimum requirements for certain bidders on city contracts.
      (1)   Prior to the award of any contract for the purchase of any work for
the City of Oak Forest, any successful bidder shall produce each of the
following:
         (a)   Federal employee tax number if an entity other than an
individual or social security number if an individual;
         (b)   Proof of compliance with provisions of Subchapter VI of Chapter
21, Title 42 of the United States Code and Federal Executive Order No. 11246 as
amended by Executive Order No. 11375 (known as Equal Opportunity Employer
provisions);
         (c)   Certificates of insurance indicating the following coverages:
general liability workers’ compensation, complete operations, automobile,
hazardous occupation, product liability and professional liability as may be
necessary for the project and in the amounts as described in the bid
specifications;
         (d)   Proof of compliance with all provisions of the Illinois
Prevailing Wage Act, including wages, medical and hospitalization insurance and
retirement for all those trades covered in the Act.
      (2)   Failure to produce these items within five business days of the
date of written request by the city shall result in the bidder’s
disqualification. For purposes of this division (E), WORK shall mean any
repair, construction, installation or labor provided in furtherance of any
repair, construction or installation.
(2000 Code, § 2.28.020) (Ord. 2659, passed 10-8-2002; Ord. 2931, §§ 2, 3 (Exh.
A), passed - -2005; Ord. 2014-05-0495O, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 33.102 JOINT PURCHASING AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   The city shall share in centralized procurement through joint
purchasing with the state, as revised on July 1, 1972.
   (B)   The city is authorized to enter into agreements for joint purchasing
authorized units of government under the law, including the city of Chicago,
Cook County and other municipalities in the Northwest Municipal Conference and
the South Suburban Mayors’ and Managers’ Association.
(2000 Code, § 2.28.030)
§ 33.103 DOCUMENTATION OF EXPENSES.
   (A)   No expenditure of city funds shall be submitted to Council or approved
by Council, particularly for the purpose of reimbursement of expenses of
elected officials of the city, unless evidence is presented to Council as to
the following:
      (1)   The amount of the expenditure involved;
      (2)   To what business establishment, individual or other person the
expenditure was committed and is to be paid;
      (3)   When the expenditure was committed;
      (4)   The purpose or the interest of the city for which the expenditure
was committed; and
      (5)   In the case of expenditures to be assigned against expense accounts
of elected or appointed officials, those involved in the expenditure and for
whom the expenditure was committed.
   (B)   Should an item of expenditure be placed before Council for approval
without the evidence required in division (A) above available to members of
Council for inspection prior to the vote of approval, any vote of approval on
an overall list that includes such an item shall be presumed not to include
approval of an item. Without the above substantiation, items will not be
considered to be approved.
   (C)   Where evidence of an expenditure is a receipt from the use of a credit
card such as American Express, Master Card, Visa or the like, only the original
receipt of an expenditure will be acceptable evidence to the city of the
expenditure; an electrostatic (i.e., Xerox and the like) copy of the receipt
will not be acceptable evidence of the expenditure. An expenditure that is not
supported by original evidence, as set forth herein, will not be approved
regardless of a general vote of Council on an overall list that might include
an inadequately supported claim for expenditure remuneration.
   (D)   The intention of this subchapter is to seek the greatest possible
confirmation of the most efficient use of city funds. Wherever there is a
doubt, the doubt is to be resolved in favor of the proposition that the most
efficient use of city funds has not been achieved. In that case, the
expenditure will be presumed not to be most efficient and approval of Council
will be presumed not to have been given.
(2000 Code, § 2.28.040)
§ 33.104 RECYCLED PRODUCT PROCUREMENT POLICY.
   It shall be the policy of the city to encourage the procurement of recycled
products by showing a preference for recycled products which demonstrate the
same fitness and quality at a price less than, equal to or up to 10% more than
nonrecycled products, and to adhere to the following guidelines.
   (A)   All departments involved in procurement shall conduct a review of
existing product and service specifications to determine whether existing
specifications either require the use of products manufactured from virgin
materials or exclude the use of recycled products, reusable products or
products designed to be recycled.
   (B)   In the event that specifications exclude the use of recycled products
or require the use of virgin materials, then those exclusions or requirements
shall be eliminated unless demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the department
head, that recycled products would not achieve a necessary performance
standard. A copy of the findings shall be submitted to the City Administrator.
   (C)   All city departments shall recommend changes to the City Administrator
to ensure that performance standards for particular products can be met, that
specifications are not overlay stringent and that specifications will
incorporate requirements for the use of recycled materials, reusable products
and products designed to be recycled, to the maximum extent possible.
   (D)   Outside contractors bidding to provide products or services to the
city, including printing services, must demonstrate that they will comply with
the specifications described herein to the greatest extent feasible.
   (E)   When recycled products are used, reasonable efforts shall be
undertaken to label the products to indicate that they contain recycled
materials. Other recycled products used by the city shall, to the extent
practical, also indicate that they contain recycled materials.
   (F)   The city shall cooperate to the greatest extent feasible with the
South Suburban Mayors and Managers Association and neighboring city and county
governments in an effort to develop a comprehensive, consistent and effective
procurement effort intended to stimulate the market for recycled products,
reusable products and products designed to be recycled.
   (G)   All related city departments and commissions shall work cooperatively
to further the purposes of this policy. The city’s economic development process
shall incorporate the goal of stimulating the market for recycled materials.
(2000 Code, § 2.28.050) (Ord. 2007-04-0097O, passed 5-8-2007)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
§ 33.115 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. Any land, interest in land, building,
structure, facility, system, fixture, improvement, addition, appurtenance,
machinery or equipment, or any combination thereof, and all real and personal
property deemed necessary in connection therewith, for use by any person,
provided that the existence of the economic development project will create or
retain employment opportunities in the municipality.
   POLLUTION. Any form of environmental pollution, including, but not limited
to, water pollution, air pollution, land pollution, solid waste pollution,
thermal pollution, radiation contamination or noise pollution, as determined by
the various standards prescribed by the state, the federal government or other
governmental entities, and including, but not limited to, anything which is
considered as pollution or environmental damage in the Environmental Protection
Act, compiled as ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 through 51, and any amendment
thereto and substitution therefor.
   POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY. Any land, interest in land, building, structure,
facility, system, fixture, improvement, appurtenance, addition, machinery or
equipment, or any combination thereon and all real and personal property deemed
necessary in connection therewith, having to do with or the end purpose of
which is reducing, controlling or preventing pollution.
   PROJECT. Any economic development project or pollution control facility or
any combination thereof.
   PROJECT COSTS. Includes the sum total of all reasonable or necessary costs
incidental to the acquisition, construction, reconstruction repair, alteration,
improvement and extension of a project, including, without limitation, the cost
of studies and surveys; plans, specifications and architectural and engineering
services; legal, marketing or other special services; financing, acquisition,
demolition construction, equipment and site development of new and
rehabilitated buildings; rehabilitation, reconstruction, repair or remodeling
of existing buildings; and all other necessary and incidental expenses,
including an initial bond and interest reserve, together with interest on bonds
issued to finance a project to a date six months subsequent to the estimated
date of completion.
(2000 Code, § 3.12.010) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed - -1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed - -1999)
§ 33.116 PURPOSES.
   The purposes of this subchapter are to provide a financing device which will
aid in financing projects in order to relieve conditions of unemployment; to
encourage the increase of industry within the municipality, thereby reducing
the evils attendant upon unemployment; to provide for the increased welfare and
prosperity of the residents of the municipality; and to provide a financing
device which will aid in financing the cost of pollution control facilities in
order to eliminate, abate or reduce serious dangers to the public health and
welfare caused by environmental pollution. Those purposes are declared and
determined to be public purposes and functions pertaining to the government and
affairs of the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 3.12.020)
§ 33.117 POWERS OF CITY.
   (A)   In addition to powers which it may now have, the municipality shall
have the power, under this subchapter, to:
      (1)   Construct, acquire by gift, purchase or lease, reconstruct,
improve, better or extend and finance one or more projects, whether or not now
or hereafter in existence, within or without the municipality or partially
within or partially without the municipality, but in no event further than ten
miles from the territorial boundaries of the municipality, and, if desirable,
acquire by gift, purchase or lease lands or rights in land in connection with
any project;
      (2)   Issue its revenue bonds to defray in whole or in part the project
costs of any project and designate an appropriate name for the bonds;
      (3)   Rent, lease or sell any project to any person in a manner that
payments to be received with respect to the project shall produce revenues and
receipts sufficient to provide for the prompt payment at maturity of principal,
interest and redemption premiums, if any, upon all bonds issued to finance the
cost of the project;
      (4)   Pledge to the punctual payment of bonds authorized under this
subchapter, the interest thereon, and the redemption premiums, if any, the
revenues and receipts to be received from the project;
      (5)   Mortgage the project in favor of holders of bonds issued therefor;
      (6)   Sell and convey the project, including, without limitation, the
sale and conveyance thereof subject to a mortgage, if any, as provided in this
subchapter, for a price as Council may determine. However, no sale or
conveyance of the project shall ever be made in a manner as to impair the
rights or interests of the holders of bonds issued to finance the project costs
of the project;
      (7)   Issue its bonds to refund, in whole or in part, bonds theretofore
issued by the municipality under authority of this subchapter; and
      (8)   Enter into a loan agreement in lieu of any lease agreement with any
person and accept a note and/or a mortgage as evidence of any security for the
person’s obligation to repay the proceeds of revenue bonds, and pledge the note
and/or mortgage for the benefit of the holders of bonds.
   (B)   Property acquired by the municipality pursuant to this subchapter
shall be exempt from the imposition and collection of taxes thereon while owned
by the municipality, but the use of the property is subject to taxation to be
paid by the lessee or occupant as provided in § 26 of the Revenue Act of 1939,
filed May 17, 1939, as amended.
(2000 Code, § 3.12.030)
§ 33.118 EXERCISE OF POWERS; TERMS OF BONDS SET BY ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The exercise of all powers granted by this subchapter may be
authorized, and bonds may be authorized to be issued under this subchapter for
the purposes set forth in this subchapter, by an ordinance of Council, which
may be adopted at the same meeting at which it is introduced and which shall
take effect immediately upon adoption.
   (B)   The bonds shall bear interest at a rate, shall be payable at a time,
may be in one or more series, may bear a date, may mature at a time not
exceeding 40 years from their respective dates, may be payable in a medium of
payment at a place, may carry registration privileges, may be subject to terms
of redemption at such premiums, may be executed in such a manner, may contain
terms, covenants and conditions, and may be in such a form, either coupon or
registered, as the ordinance may provide, or as may be subsequently determined
by Council before the bonds are issued. The bonds may be sold at a public or
private sale in a manner and upon terms as may be deemed advisable by Council.
Pending the preparation of the definitive bonds, interim receipts or
certificates in a form and with provisions as Council may determine may be
issued to the purchaser of bonds sold pursuant to this subchapter. The bonds
and interim receipts or certificates shall be deemed to be securities and
negotiable instruments within the meaning and for all purposes of the Uniform
Commercial Code.
(2000 Code, § 3.12.040)
§ 33.119 COVENANTS IN BONDS.
   (A)   Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds under this subchapter
may contain covenants from the project for which the bonds are to be issued,
including:
      (1)   The creation and maintenance of reserves;
      (2)   The issuance of other or additional bonds relating to the project
or any rehabilitation, improvements, renovations, enlargements or additions
thereto;
      (3)   The maintenance and repair of the project;
      (4)   The insurance to be carried thereon and the use and disposition of
insurance moneys;
      (5)   The appointment of any bank or trust company within or outside the
state, having the necessary trust powers as trustee for the benefit of the
bondholders, paying agent and bond registrar;
      (6)   The investment of funds held by the trustee; and
      (7)   The terms and conditions upon which the holders of the bonds or any
portion thereof or any trustees therefor are entitled to the appointment of a
receiver.
   (B)   Any ordinance may provide that the principal of and interest on the
bonds shall be secured by a mortgage or indenture of trust covering the project
for which the bonds are issued, and may include any improvement or extension
thereafter made. The mortgage or indenture of trust may contain the covenants
and agreements to properly safeguard the bonds and shall continue in effect
until the principal of, the interest on and the redemption premiums, if any, on
the bonds so issued have been fully paid. The duties of the municipality and
its corporate authorities and officers under this subchapter and any ordinance,
mortgage or indenture of trust shall be enforceable by any bondholder by
mandamus, foreclosure of any mortgage or indenture of trust or other
appropriate suit, action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction,
provided that the ordinance, mortgage or indenture of trust may provide that
all remedies and rights to enforcement may be vested in a trustee for the
benefit of all the bondholders, which trustee shall be subject to the control
of a majority of the holders or owners of any outstanding bonds.
(2000 Code, § 3.12.050)
§ 33.120 SIGNATURES ON BONDS; VALIDITY.
   The bonds shall bear the signatures of the officers of the municipality as
may be designated in the ordinance authorizing the bonds, and the signatures
shall be the valid and binding signatures of the officers, notwithstanding that
before the delivery thereof and payments therefor, any or all of the persons
whose signatures may appear thereon have ceased to be officers of the
municipality issuing the bonds. The validity of the bonds is not dependent on
nor affected by the validity or regularity of any proceeding relating to the
acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping,
betterment or extension of the project for which the bonds are issued. The
ordinance authorizing the bonds may provide that the bonds shall contain a
recital which shall be conclusive evidence of their validity and of the
regularity of their issuance.
(2000 Code, § 3.12.060)
§ 33.121 LIENS ON BOND REVENUES AND RECEIPTS.
   All bonds issued under this subchapter have a lien upon the revenues and
receipts derived from the project for which the bonds have been issued, and
Council may provide in the ordinance authorizing the bonds for the issuance of
additional bonds to be equally and ratably secured by a lien upon the revenues
and receipts or may provide that the lien upon the revenues and receipts is
subordinate.
(2000 Code, § 3.12.070)
§ 33.122 LIABILITY FOR BONDS.
   (A)   All bonds issued under this subchapter shall be limited obligations of
the municipality payable solely out of the revenues and receipts derived from
the project with respect to which the bonds are issued.
   (B)   No holder of the bonds has the right to compel any exercise of taxing
power of the municipality to pay the bonds or the interest or premium, if any,
thereon, and the bonds do not constitute an indebtedness of the municipality or
a loan of credit thereof within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory
provision.
   (C)   It shall be plainly stated on the face of each bond that it has been
issued under the provisions of this subchapter and that it does not constitute
an indebtedness of the municipality or a loan of credit thereof within the
meaning of any constitutional or statutory provision.
(2000 Code, § 3.12.080)
§ 33.123 INVESTMENT OF CITY FUNDS.
   The municipality or any trustee on behalf of the municipality may invest any
funds held by it pursuant to this subchapter in bonds, notes, certificates of
indebtedness, treasury bills or other securities constituting direct
obligations of the United States of America; in certificates of deposit or time
deposits constituting direct obligations of any bank as defined by the Illinois
Banking Act, as amended, provided that investments may be made only in those
certificates of deposit or time deposits in banks which are insured by the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or its successor; or in short-term
discount obligations of the Federal National Mortgage Association. Any
securities may be purchased at the offering or market price thereof at the time
of such purpose.
(2000 Code, § 3.12.090)
§ 33.124 EXEMPTION FROM CONSTRUCTION AND BIDDING REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC
BUILDINGS.
   The acquisition and construction of a project shall not be subject to any
requirement relating to public buildings, structures, grounds, works or
improvements proposed by the Illinois Compiled Statutes or any other similar
requirement which may be lawfully waived by this section. Any requirement of
competitive bidding or restriction imposed on the procedure for awarding
contracts for such purpose or for the lease or other disposition of property of
the municipality is not applicable to any action taken under this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 3.12.100)
§ 33.125 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   (A)   The powers conferred by this subchapter are in addition to and
supplemental to, and the limitations imposed by this subchapter shall not
affect, the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance.
   (B)   Projects may be acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed,
improved, bettered, equipped, extended and financed, and bonds may be issued
under this subchapter for such purposes, notwithstanding that any other law or
ordinance may provide for the acquisition, purchase, construction,
reconstruction, improvement, equipping, betterment, extension and financing for
a like project, or for the issuance of bonds for like purposes, and without
regard to the requirements, restrictions, limitations or other provisions
contained in any other law or ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 3.12.110)
MORTGAGE CREDIT CERTIFICATE PROGRAM
§ 33.140 HOME RULE AUTHORITY.
   The municipality is a home rule unit under the provisions of the 1970
Constitution of Illinois, and as a home rule unit may, under the powers granted
by § 6(a) of Article VII thereof, “exercise any power and perform any function
pertaining to its government and affairs,” and this subchapter is adopted
pursuant to the municipality’s home rule powers, any provisions contained in
any other municipal ordinance or resolution or in Illinois law to the contrary
notwithstanding.
(2000 Code, § 3.16.010)
§ 33.141 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is found, determined and declared that the purpose of this
subchapter is to take steps designed to reduce the cost of financing for both
the acquisition of principal residence housing located in the municipality and
the rehabilitation and improvement of principal residence housing located in
the municipality in order to provide decent, safe and sanitary housing for
qualifying persons of moderate income.
   (B)   It is further found, determined and declared that the principal
residence ownership, rehabilitation and improvement will provide for and
promote the public health, safety, morals and welfare, maintain and foster the
increase of industrial and commercial activity and economic development, and
preserve and increase the ad valorem tax base of the municipality and its
environs. The foregoing are declared and determined to be public purposes and
functions pertaining to the government and affairs of the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 3.16.020)
§ 33.142 DEFINITIONS.
   All words and phrases not otherwise defined in this subchapter shall have
the respective meanings set forth in the administration agreement approved in
this subchapter (as executed and as amended from time to time), unless a
different meaning clearly appears in the context.
(2000 Code, § 3.16.030)
§ 33.143 ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM.
   (A)   There is established and implemented a qualified mortgage credit
certificate program under § 25 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended (the
“program”), for the purpose of issuing certificates. The certificates shall be
issued to borrowers in connection with the acquisition, rehabilitation or
improvement of the borrower’s principal residence within the incorporated area
of the municipality (the “program area”).
   (B)   The certificates shall carry a credit rate as shall be provided in the
administration agreement (as executed and as amended from time to time), which
credit rate shall be not less than 10% nor more than 50%, and an indebtedness
amount specified in each certificate.
   (C)   The municipality elects not to issue the principal amount of qualified
mortgage bonds specified in the election referred to in §
33.148 below that are otherwise authorized to be issued by the municipality
during calendar year 1992 pursuant to §§ 103, 143(a) and 146 of the Internal
Revenue Code, as amended, and the regulations promulgated thereunder, in no
event, however, to exceed the principal amount of $1,323,032.
   (D)   The Program Administrator is authorized and directed, on behalf of the
municipality, to timely file all reports, annual and otherwise, as are or may
be required by § 25 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, and the
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (E)   The certificates authorized herein shall be provided in the manner, in
the amounts and in the time frames required by IRS Regulations § 125-4T(g) in
connection with owner-financed target area residences, if any, within the
program area.
   (F)   The imposition of fees to fund the costs of the program is authorized
and directed as provided in the administration agreement. Those fees shall be
charged to each borrower and shall not exceed 2% of the borrower’s indebtedness
amount. The amount and type of the fees shall not be unreasonable and shall
include only those which are permissible under IRS Regulations § 1.25-4T(h)(2).
(2000 Code, § 3.16.040)
§ 33.144 AGGREGATE LIMIT OF CERTIFICATES.
   The total proceeds of the certificates shall not exceed 25% of the amount of
nonissued qualified mortgage bonds as specified in §
33.143(C), and the total proceeds shall be determined as provided in IRS
Regulations § 1.25-5T(b).
(2000 Code, § 3.16.050)
§ 33.145 ADMINISTRATION AGREEMENT.
   (A)   For the purpose of administering the details of the program and to
provide for the issuance of the certificates, the form, terms and provisions of
the proposed administration agreement are in all respects approved, and the
Mayor and the City Clerk are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to
execute and deliver the administration agreement in the name of and on behalf
of the municipality and thereupon to deliver the administration agreement to
the other parties thereto.
   (B)   The administration agreement is to be in substantially the form before
this meeting and approved, or with such changes therein as shall be approved by
the officials of the municipality executing the same, their execution thereof
to constitute conclusive evidence of their approval of any and all changes or
revisions therein from the form of administration agreement before this
meeting. From and after the execution and delivery of the administration
agreement, the officials, agents and employees of the municipality are
authorized, empowered and directed to do all acts and things and to execute all
documents as may be necessary to carry out and comply with the provisions of
the administration agreement as executed and as amended from time to time.
(2000 Code, § 3.16.060)
§ 33.146 APPOINTMENT OF PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR; LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   George K. Baum and Company, a Missouri corporation, is designated to
serve in the capacity of the Program Administrator under and pursuant to the
terms of the administration agreement. The Program Administrator shall evidence
its acceptance of the rights, duties, responsibilities and obligations as
Program Administrator by its execution of the administration agreement. Prior
to the time that the administration agreement has been executed by the parties
thereto, the Program Administrator designated is authorized and directed to
take actions as it deems necessary not inconsistent with this subchapter to
establish the program.
   (B)   The Local Administrator shall be such entity which enters into the
administration agreement with the municipality and the Program Administrator,
as shall be approved by the officers of the municipality executing the
administration agreement. The execution of the administration agreement by the
officers of the municipality shall constitute conclusive evidence of their
approval of the Local Administrator.
(2000 Code, § 3.16.070)
§ 33.147 CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   For the purpose of lowering borrowing costs for borrowers pursuant to
the program, there is authorized to be issued and delivered, pursuant to this
subchapter and the administration agreement, certificates, the total proceeds
of which do not exceed 25% of the principal amount of qualified mortgage bonds
elected not to be issued pursuant to the election described in §
33.148 below.
   (B)   The certificates shall be designated “City of Oak Forest, Cook County,
Illinois Single Family Mortgage Credit Certificates, Series 1992.”
   (C)   The certificates shall be issued and delivered by the Local
Administrator under the supervision of the Program Administrator as set forth
in the administration agreement.
   (D)   The certificates shall be executed by the manual or facsimile
signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk of the municipality, and the seal of
the municipality or a facsimile thereof shall be affixed thereto or printed
thereon.
   (E)   At the time each certificate is issued, it shall be countersigned by
the manual signature of the Local Administrator or as otherwise provided in the
administration agreement.
   (F)   The form of the certificates shall be that prescribed by the Internal
Revenue Service.
   (G)   If no form is prescribed or if the form is not readily available, the
certificates shall be issued in the form prepared by the Program Administrator
in accordance with the provisions of the administration agreement.
   (H)   The certificates shall contain the information required by IRS
Regulations § 1.256T(b) and other information as the Program Administrator in
its discretion may deem necessary.
(2000 Code, § 3.16.080)
§ 33.148 MORTGAGE CREDIT CERTIFICATE ELECTION.
   (A)   The mortgage credit certificate election (the “election”), whereby the
municipality elects not to issue qualified mortgage bonds in the amount set
forth therein in order to establish the mortgage credit certificate program,
the total proceeds of which shall not exceed 25% of the nonissued amount set
forth in the election, is approved in all respects.
   (B)   The amount of qualified mortgage bonds elected not to be issued shall
be $1,323,032, or such lesser amount as is set forth in the election as
executed by the Mayor of the municipality, his or her execution thereof to
constitute conclusive evidence of his or her and the City Council’s approval of
the lesser amount.
   (C)   The Mayor of the municipality is authorized to execute, deliver and
file the election on behalf of, and as the act and deed of, the municipality,
the election to be in substantially the form before this meeting and approved,
or with such changes therein as shall be approved by the Mayor of the
municipality, his or her execution thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of
his or her approval of any and all changes therein from the form of the
election before this meeting.
   (D)   The municipality reserves its right to revoke the election, in whole
or in part, during 1992, but the revocation shall be limited to that portion of
its allocation not theretofore used to issue certificates.
(2000 Code, § 3.16.090)
§ 33.149 PUBLIC NOTICE.
   Public notice of the eligibility requirements for the certificates and the
method of certificate issuance shall be published once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 3.16.100)
§ 33.150 VOLUME CAP.
   There is allocated to the qualified mortgage bonds, which the municipality
is electing not to issue pursuant to §
33.148 above, the entire amount of the municipality’s “volume cap” as defined
in § 146 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, for calendar year 1992, the
amount being $1,323,032, or the lesser amount, if any, determined by the Mayor
of the municipality and specified in the election and the certificate of the
Mayor attached thereto.
(2000 Code, § 3.16.110)
§ 33.151 RATIFICATION.
   The actions of the officials of the municipality heretofore taken in
connection with the certificates and the program are ratified and confirmed.
(2000 Code, § 3.16.120)
§ 33.152 APPROVAL OF FURTHER ACTIONS.
   (A)   From and after the execution and delivery of the documents approved,
the proper officials, agents and employees of the municipality are authorized,
empowered and directed to do all acts and things and to execute all documents
as may be necessary to carry out and comply with the provisions of the
documents, as executed, and to further the purposes and intent of this
subchapter.
   (B)   All acts and doings of the officials of the municipality which are in
conformity with the purposes and intent of this subchapter, and in furtherance
of the issuance of the certificates and the establishment of the program, are
in all respects, approved and confirmed.
(2000 Code, § 3.16.130)
INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BONDS
§ 33.165 GUIDELINES AND CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE.
   Council, as a general policy, will consider issuing industrial revenue bonds
to qualified businesses and industries upon the assurance that the taxpayers
are fully protected and the affirmation that the business and industry will
benefit the city. To ensure the carrying out of these general policies, the
following guidelines and criteria are established.
   (A)   Applications for industrial revenue bonds shall be made to the Mayor.
The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $500
and supporting financial documents and information as are necessary to make a
complete and thorough analysis of the applicant.
      (1)   Information so supplied shall include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   The amount of the proposed bond issue;
         (b)   The name of the purchaser of the bonds, if available;
         (c)   The last five annual reports of the applicant, duly certified;
         (d)   The latest preliminary financial status report of the
applicant’s current fiscal year;
         (e)   All items listed on the checklist set forth in §
33.166 below;
         (f)   The proposed use of the proceeds of sale of the bonds; and
         (g)   A statement regarding the dependency of the success of the
project on industrial revenue bond financing and the reasons for requesting the
financing.
      (2)   Council, the Mayor and the Treasurer may request additional
information from the applicant.
   (B)   All fees, including printing, legal, fiscal, review and costs of
preparation of all ordinances, resolutions, agreements and other legal and
financial documents that are necessary to authorize and deliver the industrial
revenue bonds, shall be reimbursed to the city by the applicant, but may be
included as part of the bond project costs. If the bonds are not sold, or at
any time within ten days after delivery of a written request for such action by
the city, the applicant shall pay all costs and fees incurred by the city to
the date of the request.
   (C)   The applicant shall pay to the city a fee for the issuance of the
bonds in an amount of not less than $5,000. Council may establish a higher fee
based upon the amount of the bonds authorized to be issued. The fee provided
for in this division may be included as a cost of the project.
   (D)   The applicant shall contract for the sale of the bonds at terms
agreeable to the applicant and the purchaser of the bonds.
   (E)   The city may require the applicant to deposit cash with the Treasurer,
in an amount to be determined by the Treasurer, to ensure that all of its costs
subsequent to the issuance of the bonds will be reimbursed by the applicant.
   (F)   Before the bonds will be authorized to be issued, the applicant shall
deliver to the Mayor the following:
      (1)   A statement from the City Engineer that the proposed project is in
compliance with the city's comprehensive plan, that the business or industry
will benefit the city and that it will not have any adverse impact upon traffic
or sewer or water facilities;
      (2)   A statement from the City Attorney that he or she has reviewed all
documents pertinent to the application and bond issue and that, based upon the
review, there is no reason to withhold approval of the proposed issue; and
      (3)   A statement from the city’s financial consultant that he or she has
reviewed all documents pertinent to the application and bond issue and that the
applicant is financially sound and can reasonably be expected to pay all
principal and interest on the bonds when due.
   (G)   Council may require the applicant to appear before it to explain the
proposed project and to answer questions concerning it.
   (H)   The applicant shall enter into a written agreement with the city in
which, among other things, the applicant agrees to:
      (1)   Use all reasonable efforts to find one or more purchasers for the
bonds;
      (2)   Enter into a loan agreement with the city in which the applicant
obligates himself or herself to pay, on behalf of the city, all of the
principal and interest on the bonds when due;
      (3)   Pay the city the fee for issuing the bonds; and
      (4)   Reimburse the city for all fees charged to it and for all expenses
incurred by it in connection with the issue.
   (I)   Upon the receipt of all information required in the application and
the execution of the agreement provided for in division (H)(2) of this section,
Council shall consider authorizing the issuance of the bonds and, if it decides
to do so, shall adopt a resolution inducing the applicant to proceed with the
project.
(2000 Code, § 3.20.010)
§ 33.166 CHECKLIST.
   Following is a checklist for application to the city to authorize the
issuance of industrial revenue bonds.
   (A)   Guidelines and criteria.
      (1)   Nonrefundable fee of $500.
      (2)   Project information:
         (a)   Description of the project;
         (b)   Amount of proposed bond issue;
         (c)   Proposed purchase of the bonds;
         (d)   Description of the legal status of the applicant;
         (e)   If not a public corporation, the names and interest of any owner
of more than 10% of the company; and
         (f)   Statement regarding:
            1.   Dependency of success upon IRB financing; and
            2.   Reasons for requesting IRB financing.
      (3)   Agreement to pay the city’s fee for issuing the bonds and to
reimburse the city for all fees charged to it and all expenses incurred by it
in connection with the authorization and issuance of the bonds.
      (4)   Contract for the sale of the bonds.
      (5)   Agreement to post cash security in an amount to be determined by
the Treasurer if, in the opinion of the Treasurer, the security is required to
ensure that all the expenses incurred by the city subsequent to the issuance of
the bonds will be paid to the city.
      (6)   Statements from:
         (a)   City Engineer;
         (b)   City Attorney; and
         (c)   City’s financial consultant.
   (B)   Nature of business.
      (1)   Economic.
         (a)   Financial stability:
            1.   Prospectus;
            2.   Reports to stockholders;
            3.   Certified audits for last five years; and
            4.   Evidence of contract with prospective tenants.
         (b)   Type of product;
         (c)   Number of employees at new plant;
         (d)   Number of employees expected to reside in city;
         (e)   Number of new jobs created;
         (f)   Types of skills required by plant’s employees;
         (g)   Average annual payroll; and
         (h)   Projected assessed valuation of the project.
      (2)   Environmental.
         (a)   Size of the plant in square feet;
         (b)   Amount of land required;
         (c)   Proximity to residential areas, schools and parks;
         (d)   Type of effluent;
         (e)   Toxic substances, odor, glare, noise;
         (f)   Physical appearance of the buildings;
         (g)   Estimated number of vehicles entering the plant area per day;
and
         (h)   Drainage and storm sewer requirements.
      (3)   Community services.
         (a)   Traffic and safety requirements;
         (b)   Utility requirements:
            1.   Gallons of water used per day;
            2.   Fire protection requirements;
            3.   Sewerage requirements:
               a.   Amount; and
               b.   Type and BOD level.
            4.   Projected electricity and gas usage;
            5.   Need for water main and sewerage line extensions; and
            6.   Provisions for future connections to water and sewer lines.
         (c)   Ability of the schools to accommodate possible enrollment
increases.
      (4)   Civic awareness.
         (a)   Evidence of industry’s past civic activity; and
         (b)   Responsiveness of industry to community requests.
(2000 Code, § 3.20.020)
MISCELLANEOUS FISCAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.180 PREVAILING WAGE RATE.
   (A)   (1)   To the extent and as required by The Prevailing Wage Act,
approved June 26, 1941, as amended, being ILCS Ch. 820, Act 130, §§ 0.01 - 12,
the general prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics
and other workers engaged in construction of public works coming under the
jurisdiction of the city is ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate
of wages for construction work in Cook County as determined by the Department
of Labor of the State of Illinois as of June 1, 2008, a copy of that
determination being attached to original Ordinance 2008-06-0188O, passed June
10, 2008, and incorporated by reference.
      (2)   As required by the Act, any and all revisions of the prevailing
rate of wages by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois shall
supersede the department’s June determination and apply to any and all public
works undertaken by the city.
      (3)   The definition of any terms appearing in this section which are
also used in the aforesaid Act shall be the same as in the Act.
   (B)   Nothing in this section contained shall be construed to apply to the
general prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or
employment performed on behalf of the city except public works construction to
the extent required by the aforesaid Act.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by
any interested party in the main office of the city this determination of the
prevailing rate of wage. A copy of this determination or of the current revised
determination of prevailing rate of wages then in effect shall be attached to
all contract specifications.
   (D)   By July 15th, the City Clerk shall file a certified copy of Ordinance
2008-06-0188O with the Secretary of State of Illinois in Springfield and with
the Illinois Department of Labor.
   (E)   Within 30 days after filing a certified copy of Ordinance 2008-06-
0188O with the Secretary of State, the City Clerk shall cause to be published
in a newspaper of general circulation within the area a notice that this
determination is effective and constitutes the determination of this public
body.
   (F)   The City Clerk shall mail a copy of Ordinance 2008-06-0188O to any
employer, and to any association of employers and to any person or association
of employees who have filed their names and addresses, requesting copies of any
determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of workers
whose wages will be affected by those rates.
(2000 Code, § 3.24.010) (Am. Ord. 2008-06-0188O, passed 6-10-2008)
§ 33.181 RETURNED CHECKS FEE.
   (A)   If any check is issued to the city and is later returned to the city
from a bank or other financial institution and marked “nonsufficient funds,”
“NSF” or the like, the drawer of the check shall be charged an additional
administrative fee of $25.
   (B)   If a check is returned to the city from a bank or other financial
institution, the city may, at its option, either redeposit the check and bill
the drawer thereof $10 by mail, or notify the drawer by mail that the $10
charge and the amount of the original check are payable to the city, in cash,
within five business days.
(2000 Code, § 3.24.020)
§ 33.182 CHARGE FOR DWELLING UNITS; FIRE PROTECTION FUND.
   (A)   As used in this section, DWELLING UNIT means a single unit providing
complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
DWELLING UNIT expressly includes any residential unit and a unit of a
multifamily dwelling.
   (B)   Any person constructing a dwelling unit within the city shall be
charged at the rate of $100 for each dwelling unit to be constructed. The
payment shall be made prior to the issuance of a building permit.
   (C)   All moneys received shall be held in a separate fund to be known as
the fire protection fund and shall be earmarked and expended for a fire
protection program.
(2000 Code, § 3.24.030)
§ 33.183 AMBULANCE SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   All persons, corporations, partnerships, businesses or other entities
shall be charged for emergency ambulance service for basic life support
services requiring the services of an emergency medical technician and for
advanced life support services requiring the services of a paramedic.
   (B)   Charges may also be levied to reimburse the city when extraordinary
expenses for material used in rendering the emergency medical services are
incurred. In no event shall the charges exceed the reasonable cost of services
rendered.
(2000 Code, § 3.24.040) (Ord. 2371, § 1, passed - -1999)
§ 33.184 EMERGENCY SERVICE CHARGES.
   The charges for basic life support services, services of emergency
technicians, advance life support services or other fees shall be set in
amounts and at rates set and approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 2371 § 2, 1999)
§ 33.185 PAID LEAVE; MINIMUM WAGE - EMPLOYERS.
   (A)   Employers shall comply with all federal and state employment laws and
guidelines with regard to paid leave and the payment of minimum wage.
Employee eligibility for paid leave and payment of minimum wage shall be
pursuant to all federal and state employment laws and guidelines.
   (B)   No additional obligations with regard to paid leave or payment of
minimum wage, including, without limitation, any additional obligations adopted
by the County of Cook Board of Commissioners, shall apply within the city,
including public school districts and park districts, specifically, for
employers and the city opts out of any such regulations or requirements, except
those required by federal and state law or the City of Oak Forest.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      EMPLOYEE. An individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of
the number of persons the employer employs or the number or hours worked.
      EMPLOYER.  
         (a)   Any person employing one or more employees or seeking to employ
one or more employees, if the person has its principal place of business within
the city or does business within the city.
         (b)   EMPLOYER does not mean:
            1.   The government of the United States or a corporation wholly
owned by the government of the United States;
            2.   An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian
tribe;
            3.   The government of the state or any agency or department
thereof; or
            4.   The government of any municipality.
(Ord. 2016-12-0628O, passed 12-13-2016; Am. Ord. 2024-12-1052O, passed 12-23-
2024)
§ 33.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who willfully violates any other provision of §§
33.080 through
33.087 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
in a manner consistent with §§
33.001 through
33.018.
(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
51.   WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
         
52.   SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM
         
53.   EMERGENCY ENERGY PLANS
         
54.   GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Illinois Plumbing Code; requirements for installation of backflow
prevention device
   
50.02   Prohibition on maintenance of and cross-connection between city water
system and private, auxiliary, or emergency water supplies
   
50.03   Periodic surveys of connections with city water supply; inspection of
cross-connections
   
50.04   Violations; termination of water service
   
50.05   Responsibility to report backflow; liability
   
50.06   Elimination of all nonconforming or illegal cross-connections
   
50.07   Wells
Rules and Regulations for Cross-Connection Control
   
50.20   Purpose
   
50.21   Application
   
50.22   Policy
   
50.23   Definitions
   
50.24   Water system
   
50.25   Cross-connection prohibited
   
50.26   Survey and investigations
   
50.27   Where protection is required
   
50.28   Type of protection required
   
50.29   Backflow prevention devices
   
50.30   Inspection and maintenance
   
50.31   Booster pumps
   
50.32   Effective date
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE; REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTALLATION OF BACKFLOW
PREVENTION DEVICE.
   (A)   All plumbing installed within the City of Oak Forest shall be
installed in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
   (B)   In accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of
the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, an approved
backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water
supply system, the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, will
give notice to the water customer to install an approved backflow prevention
device immediately at the customers sole cost and expense and in conformity
with all applicable state and city statutes, ordinances, rules, and
regulations.
   (C)   Upon installation, the Building Commissioner, or his or her designee,
shall inspect, test, and approve a backflow protection device installed
pursuant to division (B) above. The customer shall be responsible for the cost
of any inspection and test upon written demand of the city. Copies of every
test of devices shall be filed with the Community Development Director.
   (D)   In accordance with the authority set forth in divisions (A), (B) and
(C) above, the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, shall
have the right to enter any property and building at any reasonable time to
conduct any inspection or testing. Further, on demand of the Community
Development Director, or his or her designee, the owner, lessee or occupant of
a property shall furnish to the Community Development Director, or his or her
designee, any information that he or she may request regarding the piping
system or systems or water use on the property.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.02 PROHIBITION ON MAINTENANCE OF AND CROSS-CONNECTION BETWEEN CITY WATER
SYSTEM AND PRIVATE, AUXILIARY, OR EMERGENCY WATER SUPPLIES.
   No person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall establish or permit to
be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply cross-connects with the city’s
water supply or distribution system, unless the private, auxiliary or emergency
water supply and the method of connection and use of the supply shall have been
approved by the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, and the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.03 PERIODIC SURVEYS OF CONNECTIONS WITH CITY WATER SUPPLY; INSPECTION OF
CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The Community Development Director, or his or her designee, shall
survey and investigate all industrial, institutional, commercial, and other
properties served by the city’s water supply and distribution system to
determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply exist.
The surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record and
shall be repeated at least every two years, or as often as the Community
Development Director, or his or her designee, deem necessary. Records of the
surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least
five years.
   (B)   In accordance with the authority set forth in division (A) above, the
Community Development Director, or his or her designee, shall have the right to
enter any property and building at any reasonable time to verify the presence
or absence of cross-connections with the city’s water supply or distribution
system. Further, the Community Development Director, or his or her designee,
shall have the right to enter any property at any reasonable time served by a
connection to the city’s water supply or distribution system for the purpose of
verifying information submitted by the customer regarding any required cross-
connection control devices or provisions. On demand of the Community
Development Director, or his or her designee, the owner, lessee or occupant of
a property shall furnish to the Community Development Director, or his or her
designee, any information that he or she may request regarding the piping
system or systems or water use on the property.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.04 VIOLATIONS; TERMINATION OF WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   The Community Development Director, or his or her designee, shall be
and is hereby authorized and directed to terminate, after reasonable notice to
the occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection
in violation of the provisions of this subchapter is known to exist, and to
take other precautionary measures as he or she may deem necessary to eliminate
any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains.
Water service to the property shall not be restored until the conditions have
been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
and until the applicable reconnection fees paid to the city.
   (B)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, in the event
that the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, determines, in
his or her sole discretion, that an imminent danger exists to the city’s water
supply or distribution system, the Community Development Director, or his or
her designee, may verbally demand immediate disconnection of any cross-
connection. This action shall be followed by written notification of the cause
of the disconnection.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.05 RESPONSIBILITY TO REPORT BACKFLOW; LIABILITY.
   Any person must immediately report a backflow into the city’s water supply
or distribution system upon becoming aware of the backflow. Any person
responsible for any substance that enters the potable water system through
backpressure or backsiphonage, or contamination through backflow shall be
solely responsible for the cost of cleaning and purifying the city water supply
and distribution system.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.06 ELIMINATION OF ALL NONCONFORMING OR ILLEGAL CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   No later than January 1, 2008, all existing cross-connections to the city’s
water supply and distribution system shall, at the property owner’s sole cost
and expense, be eliminated or controlled in accordance with the requirements of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.07 WELLS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted to directly or
indirectly amend or repeal any section of the city’s Building Code regarding
the usage of wells.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
§ 50.20 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
   (A)   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer’s water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system;
   (B)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer’s potable water system and
non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety; and
   (C)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer’s potable water systems.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.21 APPLICATION.
   These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises served by the public
potable water supply system of the City of Oak Forest.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.22 POLICY.
   The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of the
public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or backsiphonage
of contaminants through the customer’s water service connection. If, in the
judgment of the Community Development Director, or his or her designee or his
or her authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the Community
Development Director, or his or her designee, shall give notice to the consumer
to install an approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to
the premises. The consumer shall immediately install an approved device or
devices at his or her own expense; failure, refusal or inability on the part of
the consumer to install the device or devices immediately shall constitute
grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until the device or
devices have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation,
maintenance, testing and repair as required in §
50.26(D)(4) below for a period of at least five years. The Community
Development Director, or his or her designee, may require the consumer to
submit a cross-connection inspection report to the City of Oak Forest to assist
in determining whether or not service line protection will be required. All
cross-connection inspections shall be conducted by a Cross-Connection Control
Device Inspector certified by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and
be registered with the City of Oak Forest as a contractor.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.23 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCY. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   APPROVED. Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation, or listed in the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm.
Code 890.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor’s public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
   BACKFLOW.  The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois
Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   CONSUMER or CUSTOMER. The owner, official custodian or person in control of
any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the customer’s
premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a CUSTOMER’S WATER
SYSTEM.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree that could create a health hazard.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping system, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
      (1)   DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection formed when a water
system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
      (2)   INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection through which an
unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a
safe potable water system.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY.  An assembly composed of two single,
independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A DOUBLE
CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of
the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each
check valve.
   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-
being of consumers. The word “severe” as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD means a
hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
   INSPECTION. A plumbing INSPECTION to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing
Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
   NON-POTABLE WATER. Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 601 et seq.
   PLUMBING. The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a PLUMBING system by any person. PLUMBING includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or
at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work or assemble. PLUMBING includes all piping, from discharge of
pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. PLUMBING
includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building
drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or
buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of
connection of the building drain to the building sewer or private sewage
disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls.
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which meets the requirements of 35 III. Adm. Code 601
et seq., for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.
   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
   PROCESS FLUID(S). Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
as would constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced into
the public or a consumer’s potable water system. This includes but is not
limited to:
      (1)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
      (2)   Process waters;
      (3)   Used waters originating from the public water supply system which
may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
      (4)   Cooling waters;
      (5)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells,
lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;
      (6)   Chemicals in solution or suspension;
      (7)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes, or for fire fighting purposes.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. All gins, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least 15 service connections or which regularly serve at
least 25 persons at least 60 days per year. A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY is either a
“community water supply” or a “non-community water supply.”
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device containing a
minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically
operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check
valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the
cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to
maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply
pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each
end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test
cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
   SURVEY. The collection of information pertaining to a customer’s piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and
testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within
that customer’s piping system. The SURVEY must be in written form, and should
not be an actual plumbing inspection.
   SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer’s potable water system.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer’s water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
   WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or official custodian of a public water system.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.24 WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public water supply system and the consumer’s water system.
   (B)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system under the control of the Community Development Director/
Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, up to the point where the
consumer’s water system begins.
   (C)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
   (D)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer’s water
system.
   (E)   The consumer’s water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.25 CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   (B)   (1)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable
portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better
bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the Agency.
      (2)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.26 SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The consumer’s premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved cross-connection control device inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer’s premises, and
testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection control devices and
assemblies within the consumer’s premises.
   (B)   On request by the Community Development Director, or his or her
designee, or his or her authorized representative, the consumer shall furnish
information regarding the piping system or systems or water use within the
customer’s premises. The consumer’s premises shall be open at all reasonable
times to the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, for the
verification of information submitted by the consumer to the public water
supply custodian regarding cross-connection survey or inspection results.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his or her water
system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or her
or the public potable water system. All cross-connection control or other
plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing
License Law, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 320, § 3(1).
   (D)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
      (1)   All cross-connections are removed or approved cross-connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage.
      (2)   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s instructions.
      (3)   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a
cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions. The CCCDI must register as a contractor with the City of Oak
Forest prior to performing inspections in the city.
      (4)   Testing and records.
         (a)   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer. A copy of
every test and/or inspection shall be given to the Community Development
Director. Failure to have each device inspected and a copy provided to the
Community Development Director shall be subject to penalties as set forth in
this chapter.
         (b)   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be
available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with ILCS Ch. 415,
Act 5, § 19.
         (c)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
            1.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
               a.   Date of each test;
               b.   Name and approval number of person performing the test;
               c.   Test results;
               d.   Repairs or servicing required;
               e.   Repairs and date completed; and
               f.   Service performed and date completed.
            2.   A copy of the maintenance log shall be made available to the
Building Commission, for inspection, upon request.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.27 WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
   (A)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890 and the Agency’s regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In addition, an
approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line
to a consumer’s water system serving premises, where in the judgment of the
Community Development Director, or his or her designee, actual or potential
hazards to the public water supply system exist.
   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless the auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the Community Development
Director, or his or her designee, and the source is approved by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
      (2)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system, which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the Community Development Director, or his or her designee.
      (3)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, and the Cross-
Connection Control Device Inspector, are not correctable or intricate plumbing
arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross-
connections exist.
      (4)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey.
      (5)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
   (C)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890 and the Agency’s regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In addition, an
approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to
a consumer’s water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the
following types of facilities unless the Community Development Director, or his
or her designee, determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public
water supply system exist:
      (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
      (2)   Laboratories;
      (3)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
      (4)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations;
      (5)   Food or beverage processing plants;
      (6)   Chemical plants;
      (7)   Metal plating industries;
      (8)   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
      (9)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
      (10)   Car washes;
      (11)   Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks;
      (12)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks; and
      (13)   Hair styling salons which use process fluids.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.28 TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The type of protection required under §
50.27(A), (B), and (C) shall depend on the degree of hazard, which exists as
follows.
      (1)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe (high) health hazard.
      (2)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or (high) health hazard.
      (3)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, or a double check valve
assembly, shall be installed where the public water supply system may be
polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to
health (low health hazard).
   (B)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
      (1)   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other
chemicals;
      (2)   Water is pumped into the system from another source;
      (3)   Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source; or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; or
      (4)   There is a connection whereby another source can be connected to
the sprinkler system.
   (C)   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.29 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works
Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National
Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specification, and listed in the Illinois
Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions and 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653.802, and only as
specified by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the
University of Southern California or applicable industry specifications.
Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be
performed. Manufacturer’s maintenance manual shall be available on-site.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.30 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer’s instructions.
      (1)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document
that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of
the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or
bypassed air gaps shall be made within 24 hours.
      (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time
of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within 15 days.
      (3)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five
days.
   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      (1)   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      (3)   Test results;
      (4)   Repairs or servicing required;
      (5)   Repairs and date completed; and
      (6)   Servicing performed and date completed.
   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay as required by division (A) above.
   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Community Development Director, or his or her designee.
   (G)   Copies of the inspections and maintenance logs shall be submitted to
the Community Development Director on an annual basis or upon request.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.31 BOOSTER PUMPS.
   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, the pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut-off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the Community
Development Director, or his or her designee, at least once a year that the
device is operable.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.32 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   These rules and regulations shall be in full force and effect from and after
upon their passage and publication.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The Community Development Director, or his or her designee, shall deny
or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water
service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by
these regulations is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner
acceptable to the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, or if
it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed,
or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a low
pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not installed and maintained
in working order.
   (B)   Water service to the premises shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected or eliminated the conditions or defects in conformance with these
regulations and to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director, or
his or her designee, and the required reconnection fee is paid.
   (C)   Water service to the premises shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected or eliminated the conditions or defects in conformance with these
regulations to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Utilities/Operations.
   (D)   Neither the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, or
its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customers of the City of Oak
Forest for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from
termination of the customer’s water supply in accordance with the terms of this
chapter, whether or not the termination of the water supply was with or without
notice.
   (E)   The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
clean-up of the potable water supply stem.
   (F)   Any person found to be violating any provision of these rules and
regulations shall be served with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and provided a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice,
permanently cease all violation(s).
   (G)   Any person who has knowledge of a backflow into any potable water
system or the public water system must report that backflow to the Water
Department immediately upon becoming aware of the backflow. Any person
violating any of the provisions of these rules and regulations, in addition to
the fine provided, shall become liable to City of Oak Forest for any expense,
loss or damage occasioned by reason of the violations, whether the same was
caused before or after notice.
   (H)   Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be subject to
penalties and fines set forth in §
10.99 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Oak Forest, as amended.
(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)
CHAPTER 51: WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
Section
   
51.01   Registration fee for new users
   
51.02   Meters
   
51.03   Rates and charges
   
51.04   Free service
   
51.05   Billing and collection; duties of City Clerk
   
51.06   Billing errors
   
51.07   Effective date for rates and charges
   
51.08   Basis for fresh water supply system charge
   
51.09   Computation of fresh water supply system charge
   
51.10   Liability for payment; surcharge for delinquency
   
51.11   Tap-in or connection permits and fees
   
51.12   Charge for water used during construction
   
51.13   Shutting off and turning on service
   
51.14   Fresh water supply system improvement and replacement account
   
51.15   Records; annual audit report
   
51.16   Maintenance responsibilities of city and property owners
   
51.17   Wells
   
51.18   Connection to fire hydrants
   
51.19   Water shut-offs, Buffalo boxes and manholes
   
51.20   Water conservation
   
51.21   Inspection
   
51.22   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
51.23   Liens
   
51.24   Foreclosure of liens
   
51.25   Appeals
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 REGISTRATION FEE FOR NEW USERS.
   Every owner of property, occupant thereof and/or user of the services of the
water and/or sewerage system of the city, who is a new resident of the city,
shall pay $30 upon registering for permission to use the water and/or sewerage
system. This registration fee shall be applicable only once and shall be
nonrefundable. This registration fee shall be used to cover city expenses
involved in the operative and administrative work connected with the water and
sewer service.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.010)
§ 51.02 METERS.
   (A)   Required. All water sold or supplied by the city shall be furnished
through meters and shall be paid for at the meter rate now established by the
city or as may hereafter from time to time be established. The owners of all
property in the city in which water is used from the city system of water mains
shall have installed, as provided in this section, upon their respective
premises, a water meter of the kind designated in this section. The meter shall
be properly attached to a service pipe so as to correctly measure all city
water used on the premises.
   (B)   Tests. All meters so installed shall first be tested by a proper
officer of the city and a permit therefor shall be granted by the Director of
Public Works or another officer of the city authorized by the Mayor and
Council.
   (C)   Installation. All meters installed by the property owner or occupant
of the premises shall be placed by an employee of the Department of Public
Works or by a proper mechanic or plumber authorized by the Director. The owner
and occupant of the premises in which the meter is installed shall be liable
for the theft thereof, any breakage by freezing or otherwise or damage to it in
any manner. The owner shall replace or repair the same or any part thereof
within five days after notice by the Director or other officer of the city, and
on failure to comply with the notice, the water shall be shut off.
   (D)   Price schedule. The fee for all meters sold by the city to water
consumers will be determined based on the actual price from the city’s
supplier, plus 25% for labor, delivery and installation.
   (E)   Placement; protection.
      (1)   Upon premises where there are well-protected basements, meters
shall be set in the basements as near as possible to where the service pipe
enters the basement. All meters on service pipes connected with premises in
which there are no basements or which are inaccessible shall be set in meter
boxes to be approved by the Director or some duly authorized officer thereof.
In no event shall a meter be placed in a crawl space or in any area upon the
premises which is inaccessible.
      (2)   The owner must provide protection for the meter against freezing.
If the meter freezes, the city will repair or replace it once at no cost to the
owner. If it freezes again, it will be replaced by the city or repaired only at
cost to the owner. Meters frozen a second time shall not be considered an
emergency.
   (F)   Repairs. The owner or occupant of any building or premises where any
meter connected with a service pipe of the water supply system of the city is
installed shall see that the meter is kept and remains free from obstructions
on or around the same and that it is conveniently accessible at all reasonable
times for the purpose of reading, inspecting or repairing the same. The
Director or other employee or agent of the city shall be permitted, at all
reasonable hours, to inspect or examine the meter for the purpose of reading or
repairing the same. The water shall be turned off from any service pipe where
the meter connected therewith is not kept free, accessible and repaired as
required in this section, and the same shall not be turned on again until this
section has been complied with and until the cost of turning off and turning on
the water has been paid.
   (G)   Unauthorized connections and disturbances. No person, unless properly
authorized by the city, shall connect, disconnect, remove, repair or otherwise
disturb any water meter. No person shall turn on the supply of water to the
service pipe from which the supply has been turned off by the authority of the
city on account of nonpayment of water charges or noncompliance with this
section without first obtaining from the Director or some authorized officer of
the city a permit to do so.
   (H)   Faulty meters.
      (1)   If a meter, for any cause, fails to register the quantity of water
passing through the same for any period, the amount charged for water during
that period shall be estimated by the Director or another authorized officer of
the city. The estimate shall be based on the average amount registered during
the two preceding like periods. The charge for turning on or off the water in
all cases for a violation of this section shall be the same as is now
prescribed for that service in other cases.
      (2)   (a)   If any consumer desires to have his or her water meter
tested, he or she shall deposit with the Department of Public Works a fee as
follows, and the Department shall thereupon have the meter tested:
 
Meter Size (Inches) Fee
3/4                 $30
1 to 1-1/2          $50
 
         (b)   The fee for any other size meter will be determined based on the
actual cost to the city, including labor and burden.
      (3)   A water meter shall be considered accurate if, when subjected by
the Department to a standard test, its register indicates not to exceed 2% more
or 2% less than the actual quantity of water passing through it. If its
register exceeds 2% more than the actual quantity of water passing through it,
it shall be considered fast to that extent. If its register exceeds 2% less
than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered
slow to that extent.
      (4)   If a meter is tested at the request of the consumer and determined
to register fast, the Department shall credit the consumer with a sum equal to
the percent by which it is fast multiplied by the amount of all bills incurred
by the consumer within the three months prior to the test. If the meter is
determined to register slow, the Department shall collect from the consumer a
sum equal to the percent by which it is slow multiplied by the amount of all
the bills incurred by the consumer for the three months prior thereto.
      (5)   If the meters tested are found to be inaccurate as noted above, the
Department shall give credit on the next water bill or bills for the amount
deposited pursuant to division (H)(2) of this section, but if the meters tested
are found to be accurate, the fee shall be retained by the Department to cover
the expense of making the test.
   (I)   Types. The Buffalo meter of the American Meter Control Company or any
other water meter constructed upon like principles and of equal merit is
adopted and approved for exclusive use in the city, provided, however, that
every other meter which may be installed shall first be approved by the
Director before it is installed.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.020) (Ord. 2006-06-0037O, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 51.03 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Each user of the city's fresh water supply system shall be billed on a
quarterly basis for water consumed in that quarter. Effective May 1, 2022, each
individual meter shall be charged a quarterly base rate in the amount of $30 in
addition to the water consumed in that quarter. Each multi-family unit building
serviced by one water meter shall be charged a quarterly base rate in the
amount of $10 per unit, in addition to the water consumed in that quarter.
Effective May 1, 2022, each individual meter, owned by a senior citizen aged 65
years or older, known as the senior rate, shall be charged quarterly base rate
in the amount of $20 in addition to the water consumed
in that quarter.
   Residents turning 65 after May 1, 2022 or new applicants aged 65 or older,
are not eligible for the senior rate.
   The rate per thousand gallons of usage and the quarterly base rate will be
reviewed annually in accordance with the city's financial policies and adjusted
accordingly.
   (B)   The rate per thousand gallons for the applicable year shall be as set
forth in the following rate schedule.
 
Volume Rate per 1,000 Gallons of Usage
Rate Tier                         Category                   Beginning
                                                             May 1, 2025
0 to 25,000 gallons (per thousand Residential, apartment,     
gallons)                          commercial, taxing bodies, $11.83
                                  schools and churches
Over 25,000 gallons (per thousand Residential, apartment,     
gallons)                          commercial, taxing bodies, $13.30
                                  schools and churches
0 to 175,000 gallons (per         Condo associations          
thousand gallons)                                            $11.83
Over 175,000 gallons (per         Condo associations          
thousand gallons)                                            $13.30
 
(2000 Code, § 13.04.030) (Ord. 2007-04-0099O, § 3, passed 4-24-2007; Am. Ord.
2008-04-0174O, passed 4-22-2008; Am. Ord. 2008-05-0183O, passed 5-13-2008; Am.
Ord. 2010-11-0314O, passed 11-23-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-12-0474O, § 2, passed 12-
10-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-12-0533O, passed 12-16-2014; Am. Ord. 2017-04-0640O,
passed 4-25-2017; Am. Ord. 2018-04-0686O, passed 4-24-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-04-
0687O, passed 4-24-2018; Am. Ord. 2019-04-0733O, passed 4-23-2019; Am. Ord.
2020-04-0788O, passed 4-28-2020; Am. Ord. 2021-04-0831O, passed 4-13-2021; Am.
Ord. 2022-04-0902O, passed 4-26-2022; Am. Ord. 2023-04-0965O, passed 4-25-2023;
Am. Ord. 2024-04-1022O, passed 4-23-2024; Am. Ord. 2025-04-1072O, passed 4-22-
2025)
§ 51.04 FREE SERVICE.
   No free service of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city
shall be furnished to any person, public or private. Every user of the system
shall have a metered water connection to the system and every water meter shall
be sealed.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.040)
§ 51.05 BILLING AND COLLECTION; DUTIES OF CITY CLERK.
   The City Clerk shall render bills for water service and all other charges in
connection therewith and shall collect all moneys due thereon.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.050)
§ 51.06 BILLING ERRORS.
   An error in water and/or sewer billing shall not constitute a waiver of a
claim for adjustment.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.060)
§ 51.07 EFFECTIVE DATE FOR RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   The volume rates established in §
51.03 shall be effective May 1, 2025, and shall be reflected in each quarterly
billing.
   (B)   The base charge rates established in §
51.03 shall be effective May 1, 2022, and shall be reflected in each quarterly
billing.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.070) (Ord. 2007-04-0099O, passed 4-24-2007; Am. Ord. 2008-
04-0174O, passed 4-22-2008; Am. Ord. 2008-05-0183O, passed 5-13-2008; Am. Ord.
2010-11-0314O, passed 11-23-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-12-0474O, § 3, passed 12-10-
2013; Am. Ord. 2014-12-0533O, passed 12-16-2014; Am. Ord. 2017-04-0640O, passed
4-25-2017; Am. Ord. 2018-04-0686O, passed 4-24-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-04-0687O,
passed 4-24-2018; Am. Ord. 2019-04-0733O, passed 4-23-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-04-
0788O, passed 4-28-2020; Am. Ord. 2021-04-0831O, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Ord.
2022-04-0902O, passed 4-26-2022; Am. Ord. 2023-04-0965O, passed 4-25-2023; Am.
Ord. 2024-04-1022O, passed 4-23-2024; Am. Ord. 2025-04-1072O, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 51.08 BASIS FOR FRESH WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM CHARGE.
   (A)   The fresh water supply system (F.W.S.S.) charge shall consist of a
combination of a user charge for operation, maintenance and replacement and a
debt service charge, and shall be determined periodically by Council. The total
of the user charge and debt service charge for the F.W.S.S. shall be the rate
set forth in §
51.03.
   (B)   The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the annual debt
service of all outstanding loans, bonds and the like, by an estimated annual
water pumpage, to determine a charge per 1,000 gallons of water.
   (C)   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters. It shall consist of operation, maintenance and replacement costs
and shall be computed as follows:
      (1)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the F.W.S.S., including a replacement fund for the year; and
      (2)   Compute a user rate per 1,000 gallons of water by dividing the
amount of revenue and replacement fund required by the number of thousands of
gallons of billable flow estimated.
   (D)   The adequacy of the F.W.S.S. charge shall be reviewed annually by
certified public accountants for the city in their annual audit report. The
F.W.S.S. charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in the debt
service charge or a change in operation, maintenance and replacement costs.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.080) (Am. Ord. 2008-04-0174O, passed 4-22-2008; Am. Ord.
2008-05-0183O, passed 5-13-2008)
§ 51.09 COMPUTATION OF FRESH WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM CHARGE.
   The F.W.S.S. charge shall be computed by the following formula:
[CW=CB(V)+CD(V)]
where:
 
CW = fresh water supply system charge per billing period
CB = basic user charge (projected annual operation maintenance and replacement
     costs/annual billable flow)
CD = debt service charge (annual debt service/annual billable flow)
V  = volume of water used per billing period
 
(2000 Code, § 13.04.090)
§ 51.10 LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT; SURCHARGE FOR DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   The charge for F.W.S.S. service shall be payable quarterly. The owner
of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be
jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to the premises and the
service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition that
the owner, occupant and user are jointly and severally liable therefor to the
city.
   (B)   Bills for service shall be sent out by the city during the quarter
succeeding the period for which the service is billed. All water bills are due
and payable when sent out.
   (C)   All bills not paid within 30 days of the close of the billing period
shall have a surcharge of 5% added thereto.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.100)
§ 51.11 TAP-IN OR CONNECTION PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   Generally. No person shall tap into or otherwise make a connection to
the water mains of the city without first filing an application therefor and
obtaining a permit issued by the Director of Public Works. In addition thereto,
the written application shall be accompanied by the permit and inspection fees
provided in divisions (B) and (C) of this section.
   (B)   General permit and inspection fee.
      (1)   Each applicant for a permit provided for in division (A) of this
section shall pay a permit and inspection fee of $500 per residential lot,
residential unit in a multiple-unit structure, or commercial or industrial unit
in commercial or industrial property of less than 7,000 square feet. A fee of
$1,000 per unit shall be charged for all units of 7,000 square feet or more.
      (2)   The sum of $200 from each $400 fee or $400 from each $800 fee
shall, upon receipt, be placed in a bond retirement fund account. The funds
shall be used to retire any existing water improvement bonds. Thereafter, the
funds shall be placed in an account as designated by the City Treasurer.
   (C)   Additional permit and inspection fee.
      (1)   In addition to the tap-in fee requirement as provided in division
(B) of this section, each applicant to tap into or otherwise make connection
with the water mains of the city shall pay an additional permit and inspection
fee as herein provided: the sum of $2,000 per residential lot, per residential
unit in a multiple-unit structure, and per commercial or industrial unit in
commercial or industrial property of less than 7,000 square feet. A fee of
$4,000 per unit shall be charged for all units of 7,000 square feet or more.
      (2)   Any and all planned unit developments approved by the City Council
prior to May 14, 1996, shall be allowed to pay the tap-in or connection fees
applicable on the date of their approval by the City Council. Any and all
closed business locations when reapplying for a connection or tap-in fee will
be allowed to reconnect or tap back in at the fee and charges in effect
immediately prior to May 14, 1996.
      (3)   (a)   The city shall place the funds received under the terms of
this division in a separate account entitled “170th Street Water Development
Fund.” The funds shall be used to repay the advance of $450,000 as received by
the city under agreement no. 1378. Payments shall be made to the developer as
designated under agreement no. 1378 or his or her nominee, if written notice is
received, on at least a quarterly basis. The city shall not retain any fee for
collecting and processing the payments. Payment shall be made to the developer
under the condition that there is full compliance by the developer with the
terms of agreement no. 1378.
         (b)   In the event the 16-inch water main is not constructed, the
developer shall not be entitled to any recapture.
         (c)   Upon repayment of the sum of $450,000 or as otherwise provided
in agreement no. 1378, the city shall have an exclusive right to use the funds.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.110)
§ 51.12 CHARGE FOR WATER USED DURING CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   During construction of any building and before any water meter is
installed therein, the contractor so constructing the building may be permitted
to utilize the city water supply from whatever source is convenient by making
application therefor and paying to the city whatever fee is prescribed by
Council then in effect.
   (B)   There is established a charge of:
      (1)   Thirty dollars per single-family home;
      (2)   Thirty dollars per unit for a multi-family dwelling; and
      (3)   Fifty dollars for the first 4,000 square feet of floor space, and
$6 for each additional 1,000 square feet of floor space, up to a maximum of
$300, for nonresidential buildings, for the use of, and for the service
supplied by, the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city, which
charge shall be paid by any person at the time of application for a building
permit as compensation for water used from the municipal waterworks system
during the course of construction of any building or structure within the city.
   (C)   There is hereby established a charge of $14.11 per thousand gallons,
or a minimum charge of $141.10, for the use of and for the service supplied by
the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city, which shall be paid by
any person involved in the construction and paving of any roadway within the
city and requiring the use of water from the municipal waterworks system during
the course of such construction.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.120) (Ord. 2007-04-0099O, passed 4-24-2007; Am. Ord. 2008-
04-0174O, passed 4-22-2008; Am. Ord. 2008-05-0183O, passed 5-13-2008; Am. Ord.
2013-12-0474O, § 4, passed 12-10-2013; Am. Ord. 2017-04-0640O, passed 4-25-
2017; Am. Ord. 2018-04-0686O, passed 4-24-2018; Am. Ord. 2019-04-0733O, passed
4-23-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-04-0788O, passed 4-28-2020; Am. Ord. 2021-04-0831O,
passed 4-13-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-04-0902O, passed 4-26-2022; Am. Ord. 2023-04-
0965O, passed 4-25-2023; Am. Ord. 2024-04-1022O, passed 4-23-2024; Am. Ord.
2025-04-1072O, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 51.13 SHUTTING OFF AND TURNING ON SERVICE.
   (A)   Delinquency. A $120 service fee will be added to the water account if
payment is not received in the City Clerk’s office by 9:00 a.m. of the day when
water service is scheduled to be shut off.
   (B)   Remodeling, expansion and the like. When an owner requests a shut-off
and/or turn-on of water service after regular working hours for a nonemergency
situation, i.e. remodeling, upgrading of plumbing, expansion and the like, a
fee of $30 will be charged for each shut-off and/or turn-on request. (2000
Code, § 13.04.140) (Am. Ord. 2011-04-0334O, passed 4- 12-2011; Am. Ord. 2022-
04-0902O, passed 4-26-2022)
§ 51.14 FRESH WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT AND REPLACEMENT ACCOUNT.
   (A)   At least 5.9% of the revenues and moneys received for the fresh water
supply system charges shall be deposited quarterly and maintained in a separate
interest-bearing account entitled “Fresh Water Supply System Improvement and
Replacement Account.” (The percent shall be calculated as: replacement cost
divided by total operation, maintenance, replacement and debt service cost.)
   (B)   Funds from the account shall be used only for nonroutine, major, long-
term improvement, repair, replacement or expansion of the F.W.S.S. of the city.
The use of the funds for the stated purposes shall be considered first by the
Board of Local Improvements on the basis of information provided by the City
Engineer and other sources. On the affirmative vote of a majority of the
members of the Board, a recommendation to adopt a specific system project will
be made to Council. Council will, after holding a public hearing, vote on
adopting or rejecting the project, or referring it back to the Board.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.150)
§ 51.15 RECORDS; ANNUAL AUDIT REPORT.
   (A)   The city shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep
proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall
be made of all transactions relative to the F.W.S.S., and at regular annual
intervals it shall cause an audit of the books to be made by an independent
auditing concern to show the receipts and disbursements of the F.W.S.S.
   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall reflect revenues and operating expenses of the F.W.S.S., including
a replacement cost, to indicate that the water rates being charged are
adequate. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall also include the following:
      (1)   Total number of gallons billed;
      (2)   Debt service for the succeeding fiscal year;
      (3)   Total number of residential users; and
      (4)   Total number of nonresidential users.
   (C)   Access to records. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its
authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and
records of the city which are applicable to the city’s system of user charges
for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions
thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general
conditions to any state grant or state loan.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.160) (Ord. 2009-05-0240O, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 51.16 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY AND PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   The city is responsible for the maintenance of all water mains,
hydrants, valves and meters in the public way up to and including the B-box
valve and/or meter vault.
   (B)   The owner is responsible for the maintenance of the service line from
the B-box valve or meter vault to the inside point of service. It is the
owner’s responsibility to repair any underground leak between these two points,
to keep this line from freezing and to pay for lost water.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.170)
§ 51.17 WELLS.
   (A)   No owner of residentially zoned property in the city shall utilize a
well for the purpose of acquiring water for human consumption or for use within
the owner’s residence or any other residence in the city. However, any water
well in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
section (Ordinance 745, passed December 17, 1973) may be utilized for all
normal uses including human consumption, until 24 months after the city has
constructed a water line in front of the owner’s residence. The date of the
construction shall be construed to be the date when the City Manager advises
the homeowner, in writing, that the water main is ready for tap-on by the
property owner.
   (B)   Each owner of property zoned residential with a residence thereon
shall tap-on to the water main of the city if the water main is within 100 feet
of the property. However, if the owner has an exclusion for use purposes under
division (A) of this section, the tap-on is not required until the use is to
cease under this section.
   (C)   After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section
(Ordinance 745, passed December 17, 1973), no water well of any kind shall be
constructed in the city by an owner of property zoned residential. A variation
may be granted by Council for a situation in which it is not feasible for a
residential owner to wait for the construction of the water main to his or her
property. The property owner nevertheless is subject to the other provisions of
this section.
   (D)   Water wells for purposes of human consumption shall be inspected
within each six-month period beginning July 1, 1975. The owner of each well
must contact the City Health Department, in writing, for an inspection. A test
taken by the county’s Health Department supported by that Department’s
affidavit is in compliance with this section.
   (E)   An exemption from connecting to the city water main as per division
(B) of this section and from payment of a $25 inspection fee is granted to a
single-family residence owner of record who is owner as of the effective date
of the ordinance codified in this section (Ordinance 745, passed December 17,
1973) if the owner is 65 years of age or older.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.180)
§ 51.18 CONNECTION TO FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall make any connection to any fire
hydrant belonging to the city without first making written application to the
city and obtaining a permit authorizing the connection.
   (B)   Fee. A fee of $30 shall be paid by the applicant for the connection.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.190)
§ 51.19 WATER SHUT-OFFS, BUFFALO BOXES AND MANHOLES.
   (A)   No water shut-off, Buffalo box or manhole shall be placed in or under
any driveway or sidewalk.
   (B)   If any water shut-off, Buffalo box or manhole is located or placed
under any driveway or sidewalk, the location shall be changed at the sole
expense of the person making the installation.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.200)
§ 51.20 WATER CONSERVATION.
   (A)   Declaration of water shortage by Mayor. The Mayor is authorized to
declare a water shortage emergency to exist within the city and to immediately
put into effect a water conservation plan aimed at conserving the city’s water
supply during the shortage.
   (B)   Water Conservation Plan. At such time as the Mayor declares that a
water shortage emergency exists, he or she shall promulgate rules and
regulations providing for prohibitions and restrictions on the use of water in
the city. The rules and regulations shall be effective until the water shortage
is declared by the Mayor to be at an end. The rules and regulations shall be
known as the water conservation plan for the city.
   (C)   Prohibited uses of water. The Mayor may either prohibit or restrict
the usage of water as follows:
      (1)   Residential external use of water for sprinkling, pools and car
washing;
      (2)   Commercial car wash establishments;
      (3)   Commercial laundries; and
      (4)   Industrial uses.
   (D)   Restrictions on lawn sprinkling and other water uses.
      (1)   Lawn sprinkling restrictions. The city purchases Lake Michigan
water from the Village of Oak Lawn, subject to the two tier emergency
restrictions set forth below, in order for the city to comply with Illinois
Department of Transportation’s “Rules and Regulations for the Allocation of
Water from Lake Michigan” dated January 1985, as amended November 3, 1988.
Commencing from May 15 through September 15 of each year, it is unlawful for
any person to use water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns or gardens,
except on an odd/even basis only (on odd calendar days if the last digit in the
street address is odd or on even calendar days if the last digit in the street
address is even) between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. or 7:00 p.m. and
11:00 p.m.
      (2)   Provider directed for emergency conditions.
         (a)   Under emergency conditions, as determined by the Oak Lawn
President or the Oak Lawn President and the board of trustees based on the
recommendation of Oak Lawn’s Director of Public Works relative to the
operational capacity of its water distribution system, the demands placed on
the system by the users and the possible risk of damage to or failure of the
system, it is unlawful for any person to use water for the sprinkling or
irrigation of lawns or gardens, except during the permitted days and hours set
forth below:
            1.   Tier I—Conservation Emergency. Sprinkling or irrigation of
lawns or gardens is permitted only on an odd/even basis between the hours of 7:
00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
            2.   Tier II—Total Ban. Sprinkling or irrigation of lawns or
gardens (manually or by an automatic lawn sprinkler or irrigation system) is
prohibited.
         (b)   The Village of Oak Lawn shall provide notice by telephone,
facsimile transmission, email, United States mail, messenger delivery or
personal service to the Mayor and the City Administrator, whenever the Tier I
or Tier II restrictions are in effect. The notice shall specify the type of
tier emergency restriction and the duration of the restriction. Upon receipt of
notice that an emergency restriction is in effect, the city shall provide
notice in accordance with this section to limit or suspend the use of water
within the city for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns and gardens or for
any other special purpose(s) under this code.
      (3)   Emergency lawn and outdoor use restrictions. The city may further
limit or suspend the use of water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns and
gardens, car washing, or for any other outdoor use whenever it is determined
that the public exigencies require such action. Upon recommendation of the
Director of Public Works and City Council, the Mayor may order additional
restrictions.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use water for the sprinkling
or irrigation of lawn and gardens, car washing, or for any other outdoor use,
other than during the times allowed for these uses(s) of water. During the
emergency use restriction, the city shall post the notice of the water use
restriction, including the type and duration of the restriction within the
customary posting place in the City Hall, on the city’s cable access television
channels, its web site and in any other medium normally used by the city to
communicate information of public concern to the residents and public.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.210)
§ 51.21 INSPECTION.
   The city and its employees and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
shall have ready access at all reasonable times to the premises, places or
buildings where water service is supplied for the purpose of inspecting,
examining and testing the consumption, use and flow of water, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to interfere with, prevent or obstruct the city or it
duly authorized agent or the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency in its
duties hereunder.
(Ord. 2009-05-0240O, passed 5-26-2009) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.22 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   The city and other duly authorized employees of the proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes
of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. The Director of Public Works or his or her
representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including
metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge
to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in §
51.21 above, the Director of Public Works or duly authorized employees of the
city and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety
rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city
shall indemnify the company against liability claims and demands for personal
injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the
gauging and sampling operating, except as such may be caused by negligence or
failure of the company to maintain conditions as required in §
51.21.
   (C)   The city and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the water works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 2009-05-0240O, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 51.23 LIENS.
   (A)   Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid for 105 days after it
has been rendered, the city shall file with the county’s Recorder of Deeds a
statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain a legal description of
the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the city
claims a lien for this amount as well as all charges subsequent to the period
covered by the bill.
   (B)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and
the city has notice of this, notice of delinquency and lien filing shall be
mailed to the owner of the premises, if his or her address is known to the
city, whenever a bill remains unpaid for 105 days after it has been rendered.
   (C)   The failure of the city to record a lien or to make a notice, or the
failure of the owner to receive a notice, shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as set forth in §
51.24.
(Ord. 2013-02-0430O, § 2, passed 2-12-2013)
§ 51.24 FORECLOSURE OF LIENS.
   Property subject to a lien for unpaid water service charges shall be sold
for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to
pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
the statutory liens. The foreclosures shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of
the city. The City Attorney is authorized and directed to institute the
proceedings in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction over the
matters against any property for which a bill has remained unpaid for 105 days
after it has been rendered.
(Ord. 2013-02-0430O, § 3, passed 2-12-2013)
§ 51.25 APPEALS.
   The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges in this chapter shall be made available to a user within 30 days of
receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used or
in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the city within 30 days after
notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies.
(Ord. 2009-05-0240O, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of §
51.20 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(2000 Code, § 13.04.210)
CHAPTER 52: SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM
Section
General Provisions, Administration and Enforcement
   
52.001   Purpose and intent
   
52.002   Definitions
   
52.003   Combined waterworks and sewerage system
   
52.004   Use of public sewers required
   
52.005   Private sewage disposal systems
   
52.006   Sewerage fund
   
52.007   Sewerage system improvement and replacement account
   
52.008   Records; annual audit report
   
52.009   Notice of rates and user charges
   
52.010   Access to records
   
52.011   Damage to sewage works prohibited
   
52.012   Powers and authority of inspectors
Sewer Installation and Connection
   
52.025   Permit required
   
52.026   Sewer permit classes; fees
   
52.027   Performance bond
   
52.028   Transfer of title to city
   
52.029   Liability for periodic sewer charge
   
52.030   Changes in ownership of premises
   
52.031   Maintenance and repair by city
   
52.032   Reserve capacities of sewerage facilities
   
52.033   Costs of installation; nonliability of city
   
52.034   Separate sewers required
   
52.035   Use of old sewers
   
52.036   Sewer construction standards
   
52.037   Building connection requirements generally
   
52.038   Prohibited connections to sanitary sewers
   
52.039   Sewer connection standards
   
52.040   Inspection of connections
   
52.041   Excavations
   
52.042   Defective house connections
   
52.043   Sewer repair/replacement reimbursement fund
User Rates and Charges
   
52.055   Measurement of flow; meters
   
52.056   Charges and rates
   
52.057   Free service
   
52.058   Billing and collection; duties of City Clerk
   
52.059   Billing errors
   
52.060   Effective date of rates
   
52.061   Basis for wastewater service charges
   
52.062   Computation of wastewater service charges
   
52.063   Liability for payment; surcharge for delinquency
   
52.064   Notice of delinquency; disconnection of service and fee for
reconnection
   
52.065   Liens
   
52.066   Foreclosure of liens
   
52.067   Appeals
Discharges to Sewerage System
   
52.080   Compliance with federal discharge standards
   
52.081   Prohibited discharges to sanitary sewers
   
52.082   Prohibited discharges to storm sewers
   
52.083   Discharge of unpolluted waters
   
52.084   General prohibited discharges
   
52.085   Specific prohibited discharges
   
52.086   Determination of acceptability of wastes
   
52.087   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
52.088   Preliminary treatment and flow-equalizing facilities
   
52.089   Control manholes
   
52.090   Measurements, tests and analyses of industrial wastes
   
52.091   Methods of testing and analysis
   
52.092   Special agreements
Maintenance and Testing
   
52.105   Preventive maintenance program for sewers
   
52.106   Air testing of sanitary sewers
   
52.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Discharging sludge into sewers prohibited, see §
110.082
GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 52.001 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the public sewer system
is maintained to properly serve the community while minimizing pollution of
air, land and watercourses.
   (B)   This chapter is intended to meet the current requirements of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency for federal grants for
construction of treatment works.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.010)
§ 52.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The city.
   BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the
wastewater collection system for the costs of operation, maintenance and
replacement.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface and ground water drainage.
   COMMERCIAL USER. A user of the wastewater collection system, including
transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places engaged in
selling merchandise or rendering services.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access in order to measure and/or
sample discharges.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for the
payment of interest, principal and coverage of outstanding loans, bonds and the
like, which are applicable to the sanitary sewer system. This charge shall be
computed by dividing the annual debt service by the number of users connected
to the wastewater collection system.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the state’s Environmental Protection Agency.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EFFLUENT CRITERIA. Defined in the applicable NPDES permits.
   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq., as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,
Pub. L. 92-500 and Pub. L. 93-243.
   FEDERAL GRANT. U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II — Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and Implementing Regulations.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. A user of the wastewater collection system including
establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or
chemical transformation of materials of substance into products.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to fox or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER. A user of the wastewater collection system
including schools, churches, penal institutions and users associated with
federal, state and local governments.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the wastewater collection
system that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the wastewater
collection system receiving the waste;
      (3)   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under § 307(a) of the Federal Act; or
      (4)   Is found by the permit issuant authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on the treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from the treatment works.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in 1,000 milliliters of water.
It has replaced the unit formerly used, parts per million, to which it is
approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analyses.
   MSDGC. The Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
   NPDES PERMIT. Any permit or equivalent document or requirement issued by the
Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or, where
appropriated by the Director of the State Environmental Protection Agency,
after the enactment of the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972,
to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to § 402 of the Federal Act.
   PERSON. Means any PERSON, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream.
   PPM. Parts per million by weight.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewater from a source before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
city. It shall also include sewers within or outside the city boundaries that
service one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city sanitary
sewerage system, even though the sewers may not have been constructed with city
funds.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
wastewater collection system to maintain the capacity and performance for which
the system was designed and constructed.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the wastewater collection system including all
dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments and permanent multi-
family dwellings.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial waste or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface and ground waters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. May be used interchangeably with “wastewater.”
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquid,
including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
   SEWERAGE FUND. The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the wastewater collection system.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour
concentration for flows during normal operation.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   STATE ACT. The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
   STATE GRANT. The state participation in the financing of the construction of
treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for
making the grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the state.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage,
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. The portion of precipitation that is drained into sewers.
   SURCHARGE. An assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than normal concentration values.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of or are
suspended in water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of SUSPENDED SOLIDS
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the standard methods.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause a violation of receiving
water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
   USEFUL LIFE. The period during which the wastewater collection system will
be operated.
   USER CLASS. The type of user of the wastewater collection system; either
residential, commercial or industrial.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. It may be a combination of
liquid- and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water and stormwater that may be present.
   WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM. The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect and transport wastes to the interceptor sewers of the
Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago.
   WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per billing period levied on all users
of the wastewater collection system. The service charge shall be computed as
outlined in §
52.062.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial waste and sludge.
   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. Defined in the water pollution regulations of the
state.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.020)
§ 52.003 COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   It is found, determined and declared necessary for the best interest
of the city that the waterworks system of the city and the sanitary sewerage
system of the city be combined into a single utility to be known and designated
as the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city.
   (B)   All property, real, personal and mixed, comprising the waterworks
system and the sanitary sewerage system are found, determined and declared to
constitute the properties of the combined waterworks and sewerage system.
   (C)   From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
section (Ordinance 171, passed March 16, 1960), the waterworks system and the
sanitary sewerage system shall be owned and operated by the city as a combined
utility, known as the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city, and
all improvements and extensions to either the waterworks or sewerage system
shall be considered as improvements and extensions to the combined utility. All
properties, assets, obligations and liabilities of all kinds of the waterworks
system and of the sanitary sewerage system, existing, outstanding and accruing
or to accrue, shall be held, used, confessed and acknowledged as properties,
assets, obligations and liabilities of the combined utility.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.030)
§ 52.004 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall place or deposit or permit to be deposited in any
unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area
under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage or
other objectionable waste.
   (B)   No person shall discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other polluted water,
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this
chapter.
   (C)   Except as provided in §
52.005, no person shall construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   The owner of a house, building or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the city and abutting
on any street alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the
future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is required, at his or
her expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect the
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with this
chapter within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided
that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.040) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.005 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under §
52.004(D), a building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with divisions (C) and (D) of this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall obtain a written permit signed by the city. The
application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which
the applicant shall supplement by plans, specifications and other information
as are deemed necessary by the city. A permit and inspection fee of $100 shall
be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city.
The Building Department representative shall be allowed to inspect the work at
any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within two
working days of the receipt of written notice by the city.
   (D)   The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the state’s Private Sewage
Disposal Licensing Act and Code and the State Environmental Protection Agency
and with the county’s Department of Health specifications. No permit shall be
issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil
absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 40,000 square
feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural
outlet.
   (E)   At times as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
52.004(D), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this chapter and any septic tank, cesspool and similar private sewage
disposal facility shall be abandoned and filled with clean bank-run gravel.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facility in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the city.
   (G)   No statement in this section shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirement that may be imposed by the Health Commissioner.
   (H)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to the sewer within 60 days and the private sewage disposal system
shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.050)
§ 52.006 SEWERAGE FUND.
   (A)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the wastewater
collection system shall be deposited in sewerage accounts of the Sewerage Fund.
All the revenues and moneys shall be held by the city separate and apart from
private funds and from all other funds of the city. All of the sum, without any
deductions, shall be delivered to the city not more than ten days after receipt
of the same or at more frequent intervals as may, from time to time, be
directed by the Mayor and Council.
   (B)   The city shall receive all the revenues from the wastewater collection
system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of the system
as the same may be delivered to it and shall deposit the same in the account of
the fund designated as the Sewerage Fund of the city. The Fund shall be
administered in every respect in the manner provided by statute of the Revised
Cities and Villages Act, effective January, 1942, as amended.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.060)
§ 52.007 SEWERAGE SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT AND REPLACEMENT ACCOUNT.
   At least 20% of revenues and moneys received for the wastewater collection
system shall be deposited quarterly and maintained in a separate interest-
bearing sewerage account entitled the “sewerage system improvement and
replacement account” (replacement cost divided by total operation, maintenance,
replacement and debt service cost). Funds from the account shall be used only
for nonroutine, major, long-term improvement, repair, replacement or expansion
of the sanitary sewerage system of the city. The use of the funds for a
specific major improvement, repair, replacement or expansion of the sewerage
system shall be considered first by the Board of Local Improvements on the
basis of information provided by the City Engineer and other sources. On the
affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Board, a recommendation to
adopt a specific sanitary sewerage system project will be made to Council.
Council will, after holding a public hearing, vote on whether to adopt or deny
the project or to refer the matter back to the Board for further consideration.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.070)
§ 52.008 RECORDS; ANNUAL AUDIT REPORT.
   (A)   The city shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep
proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall
be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at regular
annual intervals it shall cause an audit of the books to be made by an
independent auditing concern to show the receipts and disbursements of the
wastewater collection system.
   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
collection system, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system do, in fact, meet these
regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall also include the following:
      (1)   Billing data to show the total number of gallons billed;
      (2)   The debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;
      (3)   The number of users connected to the system; and
      (4)   The number of nonmetered users.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.080)
§ 52.009 NOTICE OF RATES AND USER CHARGES.
   (A)   Each user will be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a
regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are
attributable to the wastewater collection system.
   (B)   A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the city, shall be filed
in the office of the county Recorder of Deeds and shall also be deemed notice
to all owners of real estate of the charges of the wastewater collection system
of the city on their properties.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.090)
§ 52.010 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The United States Environmental Protection Agency, the state’s Environmental
Protection Agency, or any authorized representative shall have access to any
books, documents, papers and records of the city which are applicable to the
city system of user charges for the purpose of making an audit, examination,
excerpt or transcription thereof to ensure compliance with the special and
general conditions of any state grant.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.100)
§ 52.011 DAMAGE TO SEWAGE WORKS PROHIBITED.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this section shall be
subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.110) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.012 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   Duly authorized employees of the city, the Metropolitan Sanitary
District of Greater Chicago, the state’s Environmental Protection Agency, and
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with
this chapter. The city representatives shall have no authority to inquire into
any process, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or
other industry beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source
of discharge to sewers, waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) of this section, the employees of the city, the MSDGC, the
state’s EPA and the U.S. EPA shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for
injury or death to city employees. The city shall indemnify the company against
loss or damage to its property by employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and
growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
§
52.005.
   (C)   Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited
to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of
any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with
the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.120)
SEWER INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION
§ 52.025 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or into, or
use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the city.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.140) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.026 SEWER PERMIT CLASSES; FEES.
   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: one for
residential wastewater service, and one for commercial, institutional/
governmental or industrial wastewater service. In either case, the owner or his
or her agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city.
The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or
other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the City Engineer. As
a condition of permit authorization, nonresidential applications must provide
information describing the wastewater constituents, characteristics and types
of activity at the time the application is filed, a permit and inspection fee
of $500 for each building sewer permit shall be paid to the city.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.150)
§ 52.027 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   No permit for a sewer connection, house connection or sewer extension shall
be issued by the Mayor and Council unless the person applying therefor or his
or her contractor or plumber has filed in the office of the City Clerk a
performance bond with a corporate surety thereon in the sum of $10,000 for a
sewer connection or house connection and in a sum equal to one and one-half
times the estimated cost of the work to be done for a sewer extension. The
performance bond shall be approved by the Mayor and Council, conditioned upon
the completion of the connection or extension in a proper and workmanlike
manner and upon the applicant indemnifying and saving harmless the city for any
and all damage to underground utilities or to the water and sewerage system of
the city and from any failure to restore any road, ditch, pavement driveway,
walk or other property, or portion thereof, damaged during the construction of
the connection or extension so as to leave the road, ditch, pavement, driveway,
walk or other property or portion thereof in as good a condition as the
applicant, contractor or plumber found them.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.160)
§ 52.028 TRANSFER OF TITLE TO CITY.
   After completion and acceptance of a sewer main or lateral extension, title
to it shall be transferred and conveyed to the city by the owner free and clear
of any and all liens and encumbrances, without cost to the city, and thereafter
the city shall assume all costs of the operation and maintenance of the main or
extension.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.170)
§ 52.029 LIABILITY FOR PERIODIC SEWER CHARGE.
   Each sewer connection and house connection originating from an extension
shall impose liability for a periodic sewer charge to be initially billed the
owner not later than 90 days after service is available to the owner’s
premises, whether or not the owner makes a physical connection to the sanitary
sewerage system.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.180)
§ 52.030 CHANGES IN OWNERSHIP OF PREMISES.
   Irrespective of any change in ownership of premises, each parcel of real
estate for which an application for a sewer connection and house connection has
been filed and accepted by the city shall be liable for the payment of the
periodic sewer charge.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.190)
§ 52.031 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR BY CITY.
   A sewer connection, after the installation thereon shall be the property of
the city and the city shall assume all costs of maintenance and repair thereof.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.200)
§ 52.032 RESERVE CAPACITIES OF SEWERAGE FACILITIES.
   A building sewer permit shall only be issued and a sewer connection shall
only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.210)
§ 52.033 COSTS OF INSTALLATION; NONLIABILITY OF CITY.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of a
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city
from any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.220)
§ 52.034 SEPARATE SEWERS REQUIRED.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building. Exceptions must be approved by Council.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.230)
§ 52.035 USE OF OLD SEWERS.
   An old building sewer may be used in connection with a new building only
when it is found to meet all requirements of this chapter. This determination
will be made upon examination and test by the city, all costs to be borne by
the applicant.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.240)
§ 52.036 SEWER CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall conform to the requirements of the
building code and the plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations
of the city. In the absence of code provisions, or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials (A.S.T.M.) Water Pollution Control
Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and
Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, First Edition, August 1, 1967, as amended,
and the Illinois Society of Professional Engineers’ Specification for Water and
Sewer Main Construction, the 1978 edition, or any successor editions of the
aforementioned publications, shall apply.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.250)
§ 52.037 BUILDING CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.
   A building sewer shall be brought to the building in accordance with city
ordinances and §
52.025.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.260)
§ 52.038 PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS TO SANITARY SEWERS.
   No person shall make connection of a roof downspout, exterior foundation
drain, areaway drain or other source of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.270)
§ 52.039 SEWER CONNECTION STANDARDS.
   The connection of a building sewer into a public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the Building Code and the Plumbing Code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the city, or to the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All the connections shall be
made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the city before installation.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.280)
§ 52.040 INSPECTION OF CONNECTIONS.
   The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the city when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The
connection shall be made under the supervision of a city representative.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.290)
§ 52.041 EXCAVATIONS.
   An excavation for a building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.300)
§ 52.042 DEFECTIVE HOUSE CONNECTIONS.
   Whenever a house connection is obstructed or found to be broken or defective
so that sewage escapes therefrom into surrounding soil or adjacent premises,
repair or replacement may be ordered by the Director of Public Works or his or
her representative. The repair shall be at the expense of the owner or person
in control of the property. When a part of a house connection is found to be
broken or broken into, the break or leak shall be properly repaired by
replacing the broken part with a corresponding new part. Patching of a break or
leak is prohibited.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.310) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.043 SEWER REPAIR/REPLACEMENT REIMBURSEMENT FUND.
   The city shall establish a Problem Sewer Repair/Replacement Reimbursement
Fund.
   (A)   Committee. The Fund shall be administered by a committee which shall
include the Public Works Superintendent, Public Works Assistant Superintendent
and the City Administrator. This Committee shall consider and recommend
eligible reimbursements for sewer work.
   (B)   Procedures. Any property owner may apply for partial reimbursement of
problem sewer replacement/repair costs. Criteria for eligibility for
reimbursement of repair/replacement cost shall include the following:
      (1)   Proof of ownership of the property. This proof may include a copy
of the last recorded deed. Other proofs may be considered by the Committee.
      (2)   Proof of property damage as a result of consistent and repetitive
sewer back-up damage. Submission of property insurance claims and photographs
are encouraged. The Committee shall be the sole judge of whether sufficient
proof has been submitted.
      (3)   Proof shall include evidence that the intrusions are the result of
faulty or inadequate sewers.
      (4)   Three bids from licensed and bonded plumbers shall be submitted to
the Committee. These bids shall contain the nature of work to be performed and
a listing of all fees and costs.
      (5)   The city shall be the sole judge of whether the submissions are
sufficient.
      (6)   The submission by the residents and acceptance by the Committee
does not create any right or entitlement for reimbursement.
      (7)   The Committee shall select one of the bids as presented or may
request additional submittals if the Committee concludes insufficient
information has been supplied.
      (8)   The Committee may establish further substantive and procedural
rules.
      (9)   In the event the city receives an excess number of complete and
fully compliant applications the Committee shall select the participants by use
of a lottery or similar device.
   (C)   Limits of reimbursement. The contribution to any residence shall be
50% of the direct out-of-pocket contractor costs to a limit of $3,000. No other
costs or charges shall be eligible for reimbursement.
   (D)   Time of reimbursement. The homeowners shall be eligible for
reimbursement upon proof of full payment of all contractor charges or final
lien waivers. The city shall be the sole judge whether the submitted documents
are sufficient proof of payment. Upon Committee approval of reimbursement, the
matter shall be referred to the City Council for their consideration.
   (E)   Release. Each property owner shall, prior to receipt of funds, submit
and execute a document releasing the city from any claim relating to any repair
or replacement of the problem sewer.
   (F)   Guarantees. The city does not guarantee the quality of the repair or
replacement work. The city is not responsible for any claim arising out of the
work performed on the subject property or the condition thereof. The city does
not warrant that all deficiencies are listed in the application. The city does
not warrant anything as to the condition of the property or the habitability
thereof.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.315)
USER RATES AND CHARGES
§ 52.055 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW; METERS.
   (A)   The volume of flow used for computing user charges shall be metered
water consumption read to the lowest even increments of ten gallons.
   (B)   If a person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part or all of his or her water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
shall install and maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a type
approved by the city for the purpose of determining the volume of water
obtained from the other sources, except for the case of a single-family
residence, the owner of which shall pay a quarterly wastewater service charge.
   (C)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged can be required
by the city if the volume cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water
consumption records.
   (D)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the property owner. Following approval and
installation, the meters may not be removed, unless service is cancelled,
without the consent of the city.
   (E)   If the user can prove through metering devices installed at his or her
expense and approved by the city that a portion of the water he or she uses is
not entering the sanitary sewerage system, the city will determine and make
adjustments in future billing. The city may require repeated proof at
reasonable intervals.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.320)
§ 52.056 CHARGES AND RATES.
   Each user of the city’s wastewater collection system shall be billed on a
quarterly basis for wastewater service in that quarter according to the
following rate schedule.
 
Rate\Effective Date                May 1, 2025
Per 1,000 gallons of metered water $2.28
 
(2000 Code, § 13.08.330) (Ord. 2007-04-0100O, passed 4-24-2007; Am. Ord. 2008-
04-0175O, passed 4-22-2008; Am. Ord. 2013-12-0475O, § 2, passed 12-10-2013; Am.
Ord. 2014-12-0534O, passed 12-16-2014; Am. Ord. 2017-04-0641O, passed 4-25-
2017; Am. Ord. 2019-04-0734O, passed 4-23-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-04-0789O, passed
4-28-2020; Am. Ord. 2021-04-0832O, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-04-0901O,
passed 4-26-2022; Am. Ord. 2023-04-0966O, passed 4-25-2023; Am. Ord. 2024-04-
1023O, passed 4-23-2024; Am. Ord. 2025-04-1073O, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 52.057 FREE SERVICE.
   No free service of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city
be furnished to any person, public or private. Every user of the system shall
have a metered water connection to the system and every water meter shall be
sealed.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.340)
§ 52.058 BILLING AND COLLECTION; DUTIES OF CITY CLERK.
   It is made the duty of the City Clerk to render bills for service under this
chapter and all other charges in connection therewith and to collect all moneys
due thereon.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.350)
§ 52.059 BILLING ERRORS.
   An error in water and/or sewer billing shall not constitute a waiver of a
claim for adjustment.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.360)
§ 52.060 EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES.
   The rates and charges established in §
52.056 shall be effective May 1, 2025, and shall be reflected in each quarterly
billing in a pro rata basis until July 31, 2025, when time prorating is no
longer necessary.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.370) (Ord. 2007-04-0100O, passed 4-24-2007; Am. Ord. 2008-
04-0175O, passed 4-22-2008; Am. Ord. 2013-12-0475O, § 3, passed 12-10-2013; Am.
Ord. 2017-04-0641O, passed 4-25-2017; Am. Ord. 2019-04-0734O, passed 4-23-2019;
Am. Ord. 2020-04-0789O, passed 4-28-2020; Am. Ord. 2022-04-0901O, passed 4-26-
2022; Am. Ord. 2023-04-0966O, passed 4-25-2023; Am. Ord. 2024-04-1023O, passed
4-23-2024; Am. Ord. 2025-04-1073O, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 52.061 BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied
by the wastewater collection system of the city shall consist of a combination
of a user charge for operation, maintenance and replacement and a debt service
charge, and shall be determined periodically by Council. The total of the user
charge and debt service charge for the wastewater collection system shall be
the rate set forth in §
52.056.
   (B)   The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the annual debt
service of all outstanding loans, bonds and the like, by an estimated annual
water pumpage to determine a charge per 1,000 gallons of water.
   (C)   The user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water
meters. It shall consist of operation, maintenance and replacement costs and
shall be computed as follows:
      (1)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater collection system, including a replacement fund for the
year; and
      (2)   Compute a user rate per 1,000 gallons of water by dividing the
amount of revenue and replacement fund required by the number of thousands of
gallons of billable flow estimated.
   (D)   The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed
annually by certified public accountants for the city in their annual audit
report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect
a change in the debt service charge or a change in operation, maintenance and
replacement costs.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.380) (Am. Ord. 2008-04-0175O, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 52.062 COMPUTATION OF WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following formula:
CW = CB(V) + CD(V)
where:
 
CW = wastewater service charge per billing period
CB = basic user rate (projected annual operation maintenance and replacement
     costs/annual billable flow)
CD = debt service charge (annual debt service/annual billable flow)
V  = volume of water used per billing period
 
(2000 Code, § 13.08.390)
§ 52.063 LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT; SURCHARGE FOR DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   The rate or charge for sewer service shall be payable quarterly. The
owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall
be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to the premises, and the
service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition that
the owner, occupant and user are jointly and severally liable therefor to the
city.
   (B)   Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the city during the
quarter succeeding the period for which the service is billed. All sewer bills
are due and payable when sent out.
   (C)   All bills not paid within 30 days of the close of the billing period
shall have a surcharge of 5% added thereto.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.400)
§ 52.064 NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY; DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE AND FEE FOR
RECONNECTION.
   If the charge for sewer service is not paid within 75 days after the close
of the billing period for the service, the City Clerk is authorized and
directed to cause notification to be given in writing to the owner of the
premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service that a delinquency
exists, and that service shall be discontinued without further notice unless
payment in full is received at the City Hall within five days of the mailing of
the notice. Upon the disconnecting of any service, a charge of $100 shall be
made for reconnecting the same after settlement of all charges.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.410)
§ 52.065 LIENS.
   (A)   Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for 105 days after it
has been rendered, the city shall file with the county’s Recorder of Deeds a
statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain a legal description of
the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the city
claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the
period covered by the bill.
   (B)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and
the city has notice of this, notice of delinquency and lien filing shall be
mailed to the owner of the premises, if his or her address is known to the
city, whenever a bill remains unpaid for 105 days after it has been rendered.
   (C)   The failure of the city to record a lien or to make a notice, or the
failure of the owner to receive a notice, shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as set forth in §
52.066.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.420)
§ 52.066 FORECLOSURE OF LIENS.
   Property subject to a lien for unpaid sewer service charges shall be sold
for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to
pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. The foreclosures shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of the
city. The City Attorney is authorized and directed to institute the proceedings
in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction over the matters
against any property for which a bill has remained unpaid for 105 days after it
has been rendered.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.430)
§ 52.067 APPEALS.
   The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges in this chapter shall be made available to a user within 30 days of
receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used or
in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the city within 30 days after
notification of a formal, written appeal outlining the discrepancies.
(Ord. 2009-05-0239O, passed 5-26-2009)
DISCHARGES TO SEWERAGE SYSTEM
§ 52.080 COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   All disposal by any person into the sewerage system is unlawful, except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.440) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.081 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES TO SANITARY SEWERS.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process water to any sanitary sewer.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.450) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.082 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES TO STORM SEWERS.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary sewage to
any storm sewer in the city.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.460) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.083 DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED WATERS.
   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to a storm
sewer or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process water may be discharged, on approval of the city, to a storm
sewer or natural outlet.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.470)
§ 52.084 GENERAL PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described water or waste to any public sewer:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   (B)   Any water or waste containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to constitute
a hazard to humans or animals or to create any hazard in the receiving waters
of the sewage treatment plant;
   (C)   Any water or waste having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works; or
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or of causing other interference with
the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either
whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.480) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.085 SPECIFIC PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of
the city and the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago, that the
wastes can harm either the sewers, the sewage treatment process or equipment;
can have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger
life, limb or public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion
as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city and MSDGC representatives
will give consideration to such factors as quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant
and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances
prohibited are:
   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
   (B)   Any water or waste containers toxic or poisonous materials or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l, or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150°F (0°
and 65°C);
   (C)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city;
   (D)   Any water or waste containing strong acids, iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
   (E)   Any water or waste containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or similar
objection-able or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement, to a degree that any material received in the composite sewage at
the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city and MSDGC
for such materials;
   (F)   Any water or waste containing phenols or other taste or odor producing
substances in concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the
city or MSDGC as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage to meet the
requirements of state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for the
discharge to the receiving waters;
   (G)   Any radioactive waste or isotope of a half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the city and MSDGC in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
   (H)   Any water or waste having a pH in excess of 9.5;
   (I)   Any mercury or any or its compounds in excess of 0.05 mg/l as Hg at
any time, except as permitted by the city and MSDGC in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations;
   (J)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time, except as permitted
by the city and MSDGC in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations;
   (K)   Materials which exert or cause:
      (1)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
      (2)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
      (3)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works;
or
      (4)   Unusual volumes of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
slugs.
   (L)   Any water or waste containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to a degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to
the receiving waters.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.490) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.086 DETERMINATION OF ACCEPTABILITY OF WASTES.
   (A)   If waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to
public sewers, which waters or wastes contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in §
52.085, which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in
Chapter 1, EPA Rules and Regulations, subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128 —
Pretreatment Standards, Federal Register Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, November
8, 1973, as amended, which, in the judgment of the city and/or the Metropolitan
Sanitary District of Greater Chicago, may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, and/or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city and/or MSDGC
may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under §
52.091.
   (B)   If the city and MSDGC permit the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the city and MSDGC and shall be subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.500)
§ 52.087 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the city and/or the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts, flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except
that the interceptors are not required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city
and MSDGC and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.510)
§ 52.088 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT AND FLOW-EQUALIZING FACILITIES.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his or her expense.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.520)
§ 52.089 CONTROL MANHOLES.
   Each industrial user is required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the city and/or the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater
Chicago, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with the
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. The manhole, when required,
shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the city and MSDGC. The manhole shall be installed by
the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to
be safe and accessible at all times.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.530)
§ 52.090 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
   (A)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial waste shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
condition for discharge established by the city and/or the Metropolitan
Sanitary District of Greater Chicago.
   (B)   The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city and MSDGC, but not less than
once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents
of the wastewater discharge to ensure that there is compliance with federal,
state and local standards. The owner shall report the results of measurements
and laboratory analyses to the city and MSDGC at the times and in the manner as
prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements,
analyses and reporting required by the city and/or MSDGC. At the times as
deemed necessary, the city and/or MSDGC reserves the right to take measurements
and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service, with costs to be
paid by the owner.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.540)
§ 52.091 METHODS OF TESTING AND ANALYSIS.
   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples
taken at the control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the
control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling
shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to
life, limb and property. The particular analysis involved will determine
whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or
whether a grab sample should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls,
whereas pH’s are determined from periodic grab samples.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.550)
§ 52.092 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the city, the Metropolitan Sanitary District
of Greater Chicago and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for transmission and
by MSDGC for treatment, subject to payment therefor in accordance with §
52.061 by the industrial concern, provided that the payment is in accordance
with federal and state guidelines for the user charge system and the industrial
cost recovery system.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.560)
MAINTENANCE AND TESTING
§ 52.105 PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE PROGRAM FOR SEWERS.
   (A)   A preventive maintenance program shall be instituted for the proper
maintenance and operation of the municipal sewerage system in order to ensure a
proper and satisfactory state of repair and performance level of the system at
all times. The City Engineer is authorized and directed to formulate and
institute the required program to carry out the intent of this section.
   (B)   The preventive maintenance program should establish procedures for the
periodic inspection and cleaning of the municipal sewerage system and necessary
repairs thereof. The program shall incorporate the following items and other
items as determined by the City Engineer:
      (1)   Visual inspections of all manholes and other structures and the
like;
      (2)   Visual inspections of sewer lines as can be determined from inside
manholes or structures by the naked eye, by mirrors or by other methods;
      (3)   Prevention of the entry of surface runoff into manholes or other
structures;
      (4)   Smoke testing to determine sources of entry of extraneous flows
through cross-connections of storm drains and other illegal connections;
      (5)   Television inspections to determine state of repair, performance
level, illegal connections and the like;
      (6)   Flow measurements to determine wet and dry weather flow by visual
inspection, weirs, flow gauges, electronic recorders and the like;
      (7)   Periodic inspections of lift stations, the serviceability of
standby power ascertained and the keeping of flow records;
      (8)   Where it is determined that, based on the population equivalent
being served, excessive amounts of flows are received, a determination of the
source of the flows and the elimination of extraneous flows.
   (C)   An overall map of the municipal sanitary sewerage system, on a base
map showing street and lot beyond, shall be prepared. The map shall consist of
one or more sheets and shall be updated periodically. The map shall show the
following details:
      (1)   Sanitary sewer manholes, structures and lift stations, if any;
      (2)   The size, length and direction of flows and materials of all
sanitary sewer lines;
      (3)   Rim and invert elevations, referred to U.S.G.S. datum, and slopes
of sewer runs;
      (4)   Flood hazard areas, based on U.S.G.S. maps;
      (5)   Approximate locations of house connections;
      (6)   Street drainage patterns and general physical features; and
      (7)   Storm sewer lines, manholes, inlets and other structures and
drainage features (streams, drainage ditches and the like).
(2000 Code, § 13.08.570)
§ 52.106 AIR TESTING OF SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this section to require air testing of sanitary
sewers and sanitary sewerage systems for the safety and welfare of the
residents of the city.
   (B)   This section shall apply to the construction of all sanitary sewers,
public and private, which tie into the municipal sanitary sewerage system and
which have a total length for each unit of sewer of 200 feet or more.
   (C)   The following test shall be made prior to the time of acceptance or
approval of a sanitary sewer by the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall not
approve any sanitary sewer until it meets the following test. This test shall
be known as the official low pressure air acceptance test.
      (1)   The contractor or owner shall furnish all equipment and personnel
to conduct an acceptance test using low pressure air. The test shall be
conducted under the supervision of the City Engineer.
      (2)   All branch fittings and ends of lateral stubs shall be securely
plugged to withstand internal test pressures. The section of line being tested
shall also be securely plugged at each manhole. All stoppers shall be
adequately braced when required.
      (3)   Air shall be slowly supplied to the plugged pipeline until the
internal air pressure reaches four pounds per square inch greater than the
average back pressure of any groundwater that may submerge the pipe. At least
two minutes shall be allowed for temperature stabilization before proceeding
further.
      (4)   The rate of air loss shall then be determined by measuring the time
interval required for the internal pressure to decrease from three and one half
to two and one half pounds per square inch.
      (5)   The pipeline shall be considered acceptable if the time interval
for the 1.0 psi pressure drop is not less than the holding time listed in the
following test table.
Table on following page
Minimum Holding Time in Seconds Required for Pressure to Drop From 3-1/2 to 2-
1/2 PSIG
  Pipe Diameter (Inches)
  4 6 8 10 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39
                      Pipe Diameter (Inches)
                      4   6   8   10  12  15  18  21  24  27  30  33  36   39
                  25  4   10  18  28  40  62  89  121 158 200 248 299 356  418
                  50  9   20  35  55  79  124 178 243 317 401 495 599 713  837
                  75  13  30  53  83  119 186 267 364 475 601 743 898 1020 1105
                  100 18  40  70  110 158 248 356 485 634 765 851 935
                  125 22  50  88  138 198 909 446 595 680
                  150 26  59  106 165 238 371 510
                  175 31  69  123 193 277 425
                  200 35  79  141 220 317
Length of Line in 225 40  89  158 248 340
Feet              250 44  99  176 275
                  275 48  109 194 283
                  300 53  119 211
                  350 61  139 227
                  400 70  158
                  450 79  170
                  500 88
                  550 97
                  600 106
                  650 113 170 227 283 340 425 510 595 680 765 851 935 1020 1105
 
Note: To be used when testing one diameter only.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.580)
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, except §
52.011, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the
notice, permanently cease the violation. The city may revoke any permit for
sewage disposal as a result of any violation.
   (B)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city by reason of that violation.
(2000 Code, § 13.08.130)
CHAPTER 53: EMERGENCY ENERGY PLANS
Section
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Recitals and findings
   
53.03   Submittal of emergency energy plans
   
53.04   Review of plan
   
53.05   Implementation of emergency energy plan
   
53.06   Provisions not to preclude statutory requirements
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELECTRIC UTILITY COMPANY. Any person or entity engaged in the business of
distributing, transmitting, or otherwise delivering electricity, regardless of
its source, for use or consumption within the city. The term shall not include
any person or entity who delivers electricity to fewer than 50 persons within
the city.
   EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN. A planned course of action developed by an electric
utility company to be implemented when the demand for electricity exceeds, or
is at significant risk of exceeding, the supply.
(2000 Code, § 13.12.010)
§ 53.02 RECITALS AND FINDINGS.
   The recitals and findings contained in the ordinance codified in this
chapter, and each of them, are made a part of this chapter and are incorporated
by reference as if set forth verbatim in this section.
(2000 Code, § 13.12.020)
§ 53.03 SUBMITTAL OF EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN.
   (A)   Every electric utility company must have adopted an emergency energy
plan no later than 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified
in this chapter, or within 30 days after becoming an electric utility company,
whichever is later. The City Administrator, in the exercise of reasonable
discretion, may extend the 30-day period for an additional 30 days for good
cause shown. Every company shall submit to the City Administrator any emergency
energy plan adopted by the company no later than 30 days after the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within 24 hours of the time
the plan is adopted, whichever is later. The company shall notify those
officials within 24 hours of any significant revisions to a plan and the
rationale for the revisions. The revisions shall be submitted as soon as it is
practicable and reviewed in accordance with §
53.04.
   (B)   The plan shall include, at a minimum, information detailing:
      (1)   The circumstances that would require the implementation of the
plan;
      (2)   The levels or stages of the emergency plan;
      (3)   The potential impact of the plan on public health and safety, and
on the duties of city public health and safety agencies;
      (4)   What steps the company has taken to mitigate those potential health
or safety problems;
      (5)   The geographic limits of each outage area;
      (6)   The number of customers within each outage area;
      (7)   Identification of customers and facilities within each outage area
for which a service interruption would pose increased risk to public health and
safety including, but not limited to, nursing homes, schools, buildings in
excess of 80 feet in height, day care centers, persons on life support systems,
radio and communication facilities for police, fire or public works personnel,
sewer and storm water pumping facilities and treatment facilities, and fresh
water pumping stations and treatment facilities; and
      (8)   The anticipated sequence and duration of service interruptions.
(2000 Code, § 13.12.030)
§ 53.04 REVIEW OF PLAN.
   (A)   (1)   Upon submittal of the emergency energy plan to the city, the
city shall review the plan. In order to assure appropriate coordination with
public health and safety agencies, the city shall have the right to accept or
select the following elements of the plan:
         (a)   The potential impact of the plan on public health and safety;
         (b)   The potential impact of the plan on the duties of the city’s
health and safety agencies; and
         (c)   What steps the company has taken to mitigate those potential
health or safety problems.
      (2)   The acceptance or rejection must be made by the city, in writing,
within 30 days after the date on which the plan was submitted.
   (B)   If a plan is selected, the reasons therefor shall be stated in
writing. In case a revised plan shall be resubmitted within 30 days after
notice of the rejection is given. The city shall accept or reject the revised
plan in writing within 30 days after the date on which it was resubmitted.
   (C)   An electric utility company is in violation of this chapter if it
fails to have in place an emergency energy plan approved by the city within 120
days after the plan was required to be submitted.
(2000 Code, § 13.12.040)
§ 53.05 IMPLEMENTATION OF EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN.
   (A)   Whenever an electric utility company determines that it is necessary
to implement an emergency energy plan, the company shall notify the City
Administrator, or his or her designee, pursuant to a notification procedure
approved by the City Administrator. The notification shall be made as soon as
practicable and shall be made prior to implementation of the plan.
   (B)   Notice of the implementation of each level or stage of the emergency
energy plan shall be made under this section pursuant to rules promulgated by
the City Administrator. The notification shall be made for each of the
following actions:
      (1)   The use of operating reserves - spinning;
      (2)   The curtailment of service to interruptible customers (customers
who have agreed to interruption of service under certain circumstances pursuant
to their contract with the electrical utility company);
      (3)   The declaration of a control area emergency;
      (4)   A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity use (the
notification shall include the specific wording of the appeal);
      (5)   The determination of the need for an intentional interruption of
service pursuant to the emergency plan (the notification shall include the
areas to be interrupted; the sequence and estimated duration of outage for each
area; and the affected feeders and number of affected customers in each area);
and
      (6)   Such other actions requiring notice pursuant to rules promulgated.
   (C)   The notification of the intentional service interruptions shall be
made immediately upon the determination that the interruptions are necessary.
Whenever practical, the notification shall be made at least two hours prior to
the time of the interruption, and in no case shall the notification be made
less than 30 minutes prior to the interruption.
   (D)   Notification required by this section shall be in addition to any
notification requirements contained in this code.
   (E)   Whenever an electric utility company implements an emergency energy
plan, the company shall provide appropriate personnel to staff the city’s
emergency response facilities as provided in the city’s emergency management
plan.
(2000 Code, § 13.12.050)
§ 53.06 PROVISIONS NOT TO PRECLUDE STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude or interfere with the
implementation by an electric utility company of measures necessary to assure
the provision of adequate, efficient, reliable and environmentally safe service
as required by the Illinois Public Utilities Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §§ 1-101
et seq.).
(2000 Code, § 13.12.070)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any electric utility company that violates this chapter or any rules
promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less than $2,500 and
not more than $10,000 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   Whenever the city incurs any expenses in providing the services of
public health and safety agencies as a result of: an electrical utility
company’s violation of this chapter or rules promulgated thereunder; or the
intentional interruption of power by an electric utility, whether or not
pursuant to an emergency energy plan; that company shall reimburse the city for
all amounts expended within 30 days of a certified invoice from the city.
(2000 Code, § 13.12.060)
CHAPTER 54: GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Section
General Provisions
   
54.01   Garbage containers required
   
54.02   Location of containers
   
54.03   Burning
   
54.04   Scavenging
   
54.05   Deposits on streets and public ways
   
54.06   Violations
Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings
   
54.20   Specifications for garbage containers
   
54.21   Specifications for landscape waste containers
   
54.22   Placement and removal of containers
   
54.23   Location of recycling containers
   
54.24   Charges for collection
   
54.25   City's right to contract
Multi-Family, Commercial and Industrial Uses
   
54.40   Specifications for garbage containers (non-residential)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 54.01 GARBAGE CONTAINERS REQUIRED.
   Every owner, agent of such owner or occupant of a house, building, flat or
apartment in the city, where people reside, board or lodge, or where meat or
vegetable matter is prepared, served or sold, shall maintain, in good order and
repair, a container for garbage.
(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)
§ 54.02 LOCATION OF CONTAINERS.
   A refuse container shall be stored in a location hidden from public view,
except when it is necessary to place it in the parkway for refuse collection.
(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)
§ 54.03 BURNING.
   No person shall burn refuse or garbage of any kind in the city, except that
controlled fires are permitted if they are specifically authorized by the Mayor
and Council.
(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)
§ 54.04 SCAVENGING.
   (A)   Unlawful pick-up of items placed for collection. It is unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation to rummage through, pick up, obtain or possess
any items placed by residents of the city for collection by the city' s
contracted waste hauler, as provided in §
54.21.
   (B)   Unlawful pick-up of recyclable items. It is unlawful for any person to
rummage through, pick up, collect, obtain or possess any recyclable items
placed by residents of the city for collection as part of the city's authorized
recycling program.
   (C)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Residents who have placed their refuse for collection as to the
refuse so placed;
      (2)   Individuals acting in their capacity as volunteers or otherwise as
part of the city's authorized recycling program;
      (3)   Private scavengers contracted to remove rubbish from non-single
family residential locations.
(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)
§ 54.05 DEPOSITS ON STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS.
   No person shall deposit odorous or perishable garbage or refuse of any kind
in any street, alley, parkway or public way, except as provided in this
chapter. Refuse which is too large to be placed in a container may be placed
alongside the container, but in such a way that it cannot be blown about or
scattered by the wind. The size and type of refuse being discarded is governed
by a disposal service contract.
(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)
§ 54.06 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Upon discovery of a violation of this chapter the city, by its clerk
or other duly authorized agent, shall serve or cause to be served a notice of
violation upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which garbage is
overflowing or the surrounding areas are not clean and free of garbage, and
shall demand the abatement of the nuisance within 24 hours.
   (B)   In the event the nuisance is not abated within 24 hours, the city may
proceed to abate the nuisance by removal of the garbage. The owner or occupant
shall be responsible for all costs of such abatement including all legal and
administrative fees. The minimum charge for such abatement shall be $150.
   (C)   Neither the city or any of its agents shall be liable for any damage
to property occasioned in the enforcement of this section.
(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)
SINGLE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS
§ 54.20 SPECIFICATIONS FOR GARBAGE CONTAINERS.
   For residential property, a container shall be a commercially manufactured
metal, rubber or plastic container which is watertight, has a close-fitting
cover and is provided with handles.
(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)
§ 54.21 SPECIFICATIONS FOR LANDSCAPE WASTE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Approved containers for landscape waste may include either a 33-gallon
or equivalent re-usable container (with an affixed adhesive label which reads
"YARD WASTE") or kraft-type paper bags.
   (B)   Collection of tied bundles of brush or tree clippings shall also be
acceptable provided the weight of such bundles does not exceed 6o pounds, the
length of the material does not exceed four feet, the diameter of the
individual limbs/branches do not exceed four inches, and the bundle itself does
not exceed three feet in diameter.
(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)
§ 54.22 PLACEMENT AND REMOVAL OF CONTAINERS.
   In residential areas where garbage pick-up is curbside, containers will be
replaced in the parkway no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding
collections and shall be removed from the parkway no later than 9:00 p.m. on
the day of collection.
(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)
§ 54.23 LOCATION OF RECYCLING CONTAINERS.
   A recycling toter shall be stored in a location hidden from public view,
except when it is necessary to place it in the parkway for recycling
collection. If no other reasonable alternative exists for storage of a
recycling toter, it may be stored in public view. It shall be placed in the
parkway not prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding collections and shall be
removed from the parkway not later than 9:00 p.m. on the day of collection.
(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)
§ 54.24 CHARGES FOR COLLECTION.
   Charges for use of the garbage collection system of the city shall be as
established from time to time by Council.
(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)
§ 54.25 CITY'S RIGHT TO CONTRACT.
   The city maintains the sole right to contract for garbage and rubbish
collection, recycling and disposal services. All single-family and two-family
residences shall be considered users of this contracted service and shall pay
the established charges for use. No other companies may service single-family
or two-family residences other than the firm or firms that have been so
contracted by the city.
(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)
MULTI-FAMILY, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES
§ 54.40 SPECIFICATIONS FOR GARBAGE CONTAINERS (NONRESIDENTIAL).
   (A)   All garbage and refuse from multi-family dwellings (three or more
units), apartments, businesses, schools, libraries, churches, lodge halls,
institutions and commercial and industrial establishments shall be stored in
rust-resistant, nonabsorbent, watertight metal containers with tight-fitting
covers (which covers must be used at all times) with adequate handles for
collection purposes. All containers must be designed for use with collection
vehicles.
   (B)   All such containers must be a minimum size of one and one-half cubic
yards and must be contracted to be emptied a minimum of once per week or more
often if garbage overflows the containers. Also, all areas surrounding the
containers must be clear and free of garbage and refuse at all times.
   (C)   All refuse containers shall be placed on sealed concrete pads.
(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008; Am. Ord. 2021-05-0840O, passed 5-11-
2021)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      Chapter
         
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
71.   ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE
         
72.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
         
73.   PARKING
         
74.   ABANDONED AND HAZARDOUS VEHICLES
         
75.   BICYCLES
         
76.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
         
77.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Administration and Enforcement
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Authority of police officers
   
70.03   Obedience to police officers
   
70.04   Application of Traffic Code to non-motorized traffic
   
70.05   Location and posting of signs
   
70.06   Restitution for emergency response
   
70.07   Automated traffic law enforcement system
Vehicle Licenses
   
70.20   License required
   
70.21   Fees
   
70.22   Conditions; transfers
   
70.23   Applications; issuance
   
70.24   Display of state registration plates and registration stickers
Vehicle Seizure and Impoundment
   
70.35   Vehicles subject to seizure and impoundment
   
70.36   Seizure and impoundment of vehicles
   
70.37   Exception to vehicle seizure and impoundment
   
70.38   Posting a bond
   
70.39   Preliminary hearing
   
70.40   Final hearing
   
70.41   Unclaimed vehicles
   
70.42   Liability for penalty and costs
Traffic Regulation Agreement for Private Property
   
70.55   Option to enter agreement
 
   
70.99   Penalty
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Words and phrases used in this Traffic Code shall, for the purposes of this
Traffic Code, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in the Illinois
Vehicle Code, as adopted in §
71.01.
(2000 Code, § 10.08.010)
§ 70.02 AUTHORITY OF POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   Officers of the Police Department or other personnel as are assigned
by the Chief of Police shall enforce all traffic laws of the city and all state
vehicle laws.
   (B)   Officers are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal
in conformity with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the
Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding
the provisions of the traffic laws.
(2000 Code, § 10.08.020)
§ 70.03 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.
   No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control
or regulate traffic.
(2000 Code, § 10.08.030) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC CODE TO NON-MOTORIZED TRAFFIC.
   Every person propelling a horse, pushcart or bicycle upon a roadway shall be
granted all of the rights, and shall be subject to all of the duties,
applicable to the driver of a vehicle, as the same are set forth in this
Traffic Code and in the Illinois Vehicle Code, except those provisions which by
their very nature can have no application.
(2000 Code, § 10.08.040)
§ 70.05 LOCATION AND POSTING OF SIGNS.
   (A)   Council shall determine where traffic control signs, including stop
signs, one-way signs, “no turn” signs and speed limit signs are necessary in
order to safeguard the public.
   (B)   After it has been determined that signs are necessary, the Chief of
Police shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs for all intersections,
one-way streets and speed limits.
   (C)   Left turn only (3:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m.): Southbound Oak Avenue at
160th Street.
(2000 Code, § 10.08.050) (Ord. 2507 § 1, passed --2001; Ord. 2007-11-0140O,
passed 11-27-2007)
§ 70.06 RESTITUTION FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSE.
   (A)   In addition to any other fine or penalty required by law, any
individual convicted of a violation of § 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
whose operation of a motor vehicle while in violation of § 11-501 or ordinance
proximately caused an incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response,
shall be required to make restitution to a public agency for the costs of that
emergency response. This restitution shall not exceed $500 per public agency
for each emergency response.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, EMERGENCY RESPONSE means any incident
requiring a response by: a police officer as defined in § 1-162 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162); a firefighter carrying on the
roles of a regularly constituted Fire Department; and an ambulance as defined
under § 4.05 of the Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Systems Act (ILCS Ch. 210,
Act 50, § 4.05).
(2000 Code, § 10.08.060) (Ord. 2418 (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417 (part),
passed --1999)
§ 70.07 AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM. A device within the city with
one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light
signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection
against a steady or flashing red signal indication in violation of § 11-306 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code (“Code”), ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306, or similar
violation of the City of Oak Forest Municipal Code.
      DISREGARDING A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. Failure to stop and remain stopped
before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal as provided for in §
11-306 of the Code.
      NO TURN ON RED. Failure to stop and remain stopped, and not proceeding to
turn right at, an intersection controlled by both a sign indicating “No turn on
red,” or other similar language, and a red signal as provided for in § 11-306
of the Code.
      RECORDED IMAGES. Images produced by the automated traffic law enforcement
system, which consist of either two or more photographs; two or more
microphotographs; two or more electronic images; or, a video recording showing:
the motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of the recording,
clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle.
      TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR. The person appointed as such through
Article 25 of the Code who shall have power to adopt, distribute and process
automated traffic law violation notices and other notices required by this
section, collect money paid as fines and penalties, operate the automated
traffic law enforcement system, and make certified reports to the Secretary of
State as required by this section.
   (B)   Violations. It shall be a violation of this section for a vehicle to
disregard a traffic control device or turn on red in violation of § 11-306 of
the Code.
   (C)   Administrative adjudication. All automated traffic law violations
described in this section will be adjudicated by a Hearing Officer pursuant to
the city’s administrative adjudication system, as set forth in §§
32.001 through
32.006 of this code.
   (D)   Defenses.
      (1)   The following may be considered defenses by the Hearing Officer for
a violation of division (B) above.
         (a)   That the motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor
vehicle were stolen before the violation occurred, and not under the control of
or in the possession of the owner at the time of the violation;
         (b)   That the driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection
when the light was red either:
            1.   In order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle; or
            2.   As part of a funeral procession.
      (2)   To demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration plates
were stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the control or
possession of the owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit
proof that a report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates
was filed with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner.
   (E)   Notice of violation.
      (1)   When the automated traffic law enforcement system records a motor
vehicle entering an intersection in violation of division (B) above, the city
shall issue a written notice of violation to the registered owner or lessee of
the vehicle, which shall be delivered by U.S. mail within 30 days after the
Illinois Secretary of State notifies the city of the identity of the registered
owner or lessee of the vehicle, and in no event later than 90 days following
the violation. The city shall only be required to notify a lessee if the
leasing company/lessor provides the lessee’s name by an affidavit and a copy of
the lease within 60 days of the notice’s issuance. If the driver information is
not provided within 60 days, the leasing company/lessor may be found liable. If
any notice to an address is returned as undeliverable, a second notice shall be
sent to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved
database of the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle. The second notice shall
be made by first class mail postage prepaid.
      (2)   (a)   A notice of violation associated with an automated traffic
law violation shall require a review and approval of the associated recorded
image by a law enforcement officer or retired law enforcement officer from the
city, who shall inspect the image and determine whether the motor vehicle was
being operated in violation of division (B) above, or whether one of the
defenses enumerated in division (D) of this section is visibly applicable upon
inspection. Upon determination that the recorded image captures a violation and
that no defense applies, the notice of violation shall be served upon the
registered vehicle owner in the manner provided for above. The Traffic
Compliance Administrator shall retain a copy of all violation notices, recorded
images and other correspondence mailed to the owner of the vehicle. Each notice
of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and
is admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation of the above-noted
statutory and local provisions and shall be prima facie evidence of a violation
subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in this section.
         (b)   Where a vehicle crosses a stop line or crosswalk but still comes
to a complete stop and does not proceed to further enter the intersection
during the red light cycle, no violation shall be issued unless one or more
pedestrians or cyclists are present.
      (3)   The notice of violation shall include the following information:
         (a)   The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State, or, if the
information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded
in a United States Post Office approved database;
         (b)   The make (only if discernable) and registration number of the
motor vehicle involved in the violation;
         (c)   The violation charged;
         (d)   The location where the violation occurred;
         (e)   The date and time of the violation;
         (f)   A copy of the recorded images;
         (g)   The amount of the civil penalty and the date by which the
penalty should be paid (21 days from the date of issuance) and a statement that
the payment of the fine shall operate at a final disposition of the violation;
         (h)   A statement that a failure to pay the civil penalty by the date
noted may result in an additional late fee being assessed against the owner or
lessee;
         (i)   The amount of the late fee;
         (j)   A statement that the failure to pay by the date specified will
result in a final determination of liability and may result in the suspension
of driving privileges for the registered owner of the vehicle;
         (k)   A statement that the recorded images constitute prima facie
evidence of a violation;
         (l)   A statement that the person may elect to proceed by paying the
fine or challenging the charge in court, by mail or by administrative hearing;
and
         (m)   A statement of how an administrative hearing may be requested.
   (F)   Hearing.
      (1)   The owner of a vehicle being operated in violation of this section
may request a hearing by the respond-by date on the notice of violation (21
days from the date of issuance), to challenge the evidence or set forth an
applicable defense.
      (2)   The notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts
contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a
violation of this section.
      (3)   The notice of violation shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in this
section.
      (4)   The owner’s failure to appear at the hearing will result in a
finding of liability.
      (5)   In the event of a failure to appear, a “findings, decision and
order” letter will be sent to the owner.
      (6)   The owner’s failure to pay the amount by the date specified in that
letter will result in a final determination.
      (7)   The owner or violator shall have 25 days following an
administrative hearing to pay any penalty imposed.
   (G)   Non-residents.
      (1)   Where the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle is not a
resident of the city but seeks to contest the merits of the alleged violation,
that person may contest the charges using the same available defenses as stated
above, but rather than attend the administrative hearing, they may submit any
and all documentary evidence to the Traffic Compliance Administrator no later
than the hearing date, together with a written statement reflecting that they
are non-residents of the city.
      (2)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall forward all timely-
submitted materials to the Hearing Officer for review and determination.
   (H)   Final determination.
      (1)   A final determination of violation liability shall occur following
failure to pay the fine, a failure to request a hearing by the respond-by date,
after a Hearing Officer’s determination of violation liability and the
exhaustion of or failure to exhaust the administrative review procedures
provided by the City Code.
      (2)   Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged
violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the
Hearing Officer’s determination shall become final upon a failure to pay the
amount owed on date provided in the “findings, decision and order” letter.
Appeal may be made to the Circuit Court of Cook County on any final
determination as provided for by the Administrative Review Act.
   (I)   Notice of determination of liability. If the registered owner fails to
pay or contest the notice of violation within 21 days a notice of determination
of liability will be sent to the owner indicating that a fine in the amount of
$100 is due to the city. The notice will also state that the owner can petition
the city to set aside the determination of liability before it becomes final.
If the owner does not pay the $100 as specified in the notice or petition the
city to set aside the determination, within 21 days, a notice of final
determination will be sent to the owner indicating that the owner has exhausted
all challenge options and the $100 fine is a debt due and owing to the city and
must be paid within 14 days. The owner will also be notified that the failure
to pay the $100 fine within 14 days will result in a late fee of $100 added to
the original fine.
   (J)   Notice of final determination. Notice of final determination shall be
sent following the final determination of automated traffic law violation
liability and the conclusion of judicial review. The notice of final
determination shall include the following information:
      (1)   A statement that the unpaid fine is a debt due and owing to the
city; and
      (2)   A warning that a failure to pay any fine due and owing to the City
of Oak Forest within 14 days may result in a petition to the Circuit Court of
Cook County to have the unpaid fine rendered as a judgment or may result in the
suspension of the person’s driver’s license for failure to pay fines or
penalties for five or more violation under this section.
   (K)   Petitions to set aside determination.
      (1)   A petition to set aside determination of an automated traffic law
violation must be filed with or mailed to the Traffic Control Administrator
within 14 days of the date of mailing of the notice of determination of
liability. The grounds for the petition are limited to:
         (a)   The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on
the date of the violation notice was issued;
         (b)   The person having already paid the fine for the violation in
question; and
         (c)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a
hearing.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the determination of
liability, the Hearing Officer shall review the petition to determine if cause
has been shown to set aside the determination. If cause has been shown, the
city shall forward the petitioner a new hearing date on which the petitioner
must appear to present his or her case. The city shall notify the petitioner of
the Hearing Officer’s decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within
14 days of the city’s receipt.
   (L)   Notice of impending driver’s license suspension.
      (1)   A notice of impending driver’s license suspension shall be sent to
the person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on five or
more violations of this section. The notice of impending driver’s license
suspension shall state the following information:
         (a)   The failure to pay the fine owing within 45 days of the notice’s
date will result in the city notifying’ the Secretary of State that the person
is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under § 6-306.5 of the
Code; and
         (b)   A statement that the person may obtain a copy of the original
ticket imposing a fine by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the
city along with a request for the copy.
      (2)   The notice of impending driver’s license suspension shall be sent
by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the
Secretary of State or, if any notice to that address is returned as
undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post
office approved database.
   (M)   Driver’s license suspension.
      (1)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator, by certified report, may
request that the Secretary of State suspend the driving privileges of an owner
of a registered vehicle who has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing
as a result of five automated traffic violations. The report shall be certified
and contain the following:
         (a)   The name, last known address as recorded with the Secretary of
State, as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease, or
as recorded in a United States post office approved database if any notice sent
under this section is returned as undeliverable, and driver’s license number of
the person who failed to pay the fine or penalty and the registration number of
any vehicle known to be registered to the person in a state;
         (b)   A statement that the report is being made by the City of Oak
Forest pursuant to this section; and
         (c)   A statement that a notice of impending driver’s license
suspension has been sent to the person named in the report at the address
recorded with the Secretary of State or at the last address known to the lessor
of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice sent under this
section is returned as undeliverable at the last known address recorded at a
United States post office approved database, the date on which the notice was
sent, and address to which the notice was sent.
      (2)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall notify the Secretary of
State whenever a person named in the certified report has paid the previously
recorded fine or penalty or whenever the municipality determines that the
original report was in error. A certified copy of the notification shall also
be given upon request aid at no additional charge to the person named therein.
      (3)   (a)   Any person receiving notice from the Secretary of State that
their driving privileges may be suspended at the end of a specified period my
challenge the accuracy of the certified report prepared by the Traffic
Compliance Administrator.
         (b)   The person shall, within seven days after having the person
challenging the report was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle or that the
person has already paid their fine for the five or more automated traffic
violations, the Traffic Compliance Administrator shall immediately notify the
Secretary of State of the error in a subsequent certified report.
   (N)   City requirements.
      (1)   No additional fee may be charged to an alleged violator for
exercising his or her right to an administrative hearing.
      (2)   The recorded image of the motor vehicle's violation is accessible
to the alleged violator at the website address provided by the automated
traffic law enforcement system vendor.
      (3)   The locations of the red light camera intersections shall be posted
on the city's website.
      (4)   The intersection equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement
system must have a yellow change interval that conforms to the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
      (5)   A statistical study shall be completed to assess the safety impact
of each automated traffic law enforcement system. This study shall be posted on
the city's website.
      (6)   A certified report shall be made to the Secretary of State whenever
a registered owner of a vehicle has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and
owing as a result of five offenses for automated traffic law violations.
(Ord. 2007-11-01410, passed 11-27-2007; Am. Ord. 2010-12-0316O, passed 12-14-
2010)
VEHICLE LICENSES
§ 70.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No owner of a motor vehicle registered with the state to a city address
within the City of Oak Forest corporate municipal limits shall use or cause or
permit any of his or her agents or employees to use any vehicle upon the
streets of the city unless the motor vehicle is licensed as provided in this
chapter and unless the city sticker is affixed to the vehicle. The sticker must
be permanently affixed to the lower right hand (passenger) side of the vehicle
windshield.
(2000 Code § 10.20.010) (Ord. 2454, § 1 (part), passed - -2000; Am. Ord. 2010-
02-0278O, passed 2-23-2010) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.21 FEES.
Passenger automobiles and recreational vehicles                             $25
Trucks
Less than 8,000 pounds -- B Plate                                           $25
8,001 to 12,000 pounds -- D Plate                                           $50
12,001 to 16,000 pounds -- F Plate                                          $75
16,001 to 24,000 pounds -- H Plate                                          $87.50
Over 24,000 lbs.                                                            $100
Trucks belonging to other taxing bodies and to churches within the          No
corporate limits which display M or CV state license plates                 charge
Buses                                                                       $87.50
Buses owned and operated by a not-for-profit organization                   $12.50
Taxicabs, limousines, ambulances, hearses                                   $25
Motorcycles                                                                 $15
Disabled veterans and P.O.W.’s which display state license plates free of No
charge                                                                      charge
Senior citizens, 65 years of age and over with proper identification and    No
vehicle registration (maximum two no-charge vehicle stickers per household) charge
Persons with disabilities, which display state PWD license plates           No
                                                                            charge
Appointed officials receiving no compensation or remuneration for services  No
                                                                            charge
Fee to transfer to another vehicle during year (maximum two transfers per   $2
household)
                                                                            No
                                                                            charge
Active military personnel; one vehicle (subject to proof of active military for the
service and the removal of the vehicle to a temporary out-of-city duty      period
station or other site)                                                      of
                                                                            active
                                                                            military
                                                                            service
 
 
Antique vehicles, those vehicles which display AV state license plates and $5
are defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102.1
Stored/inoperative vehicles, those vehicles stored and/or inoperable but   $25
licensed with the state
Housing of Vehicles. Vehicles state-registered to Oak Forest               $25
 
(2000 Code, § 10.20.020) (Ord. 2454, § 1 (part), passed - -2000; Ord. 2006-04-
0017O, passed 4-25-2006; Am. Ord. 2008-05-0182O, passed 5-13-2008; Am. Ord.
2010-02-0278O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-04-0438O, § 2, passed 4-23-2013)
§ 70.22 CONDITIONS; TRANSFERS.
   (A)   All persons or businesses that own a motor vehicle that is registered
to an address in the city must purchase and display on his or her vehicle a
city vehicle license.
   (B)   All vehicle licenses issued by the city shall be valid only for the
motor vehicle for which they are issued.
   (C)   Licenses will be valid for the period beginning July 1 and ending on
June 30 of the following year.
   (D)   If any motor vehicle has been purchased or lawfully acquired by the
applicant on or after December 15 of the current year, the license fee for the
motor vehicle for the balance of that year shall be a sum equal to one-half of
the annual license fee specified in §
70.21 above for a vehicle of that class.
   (E)   In any case where an application is made on or after July 1 of the
then current year, the license fee shall be twice the regular fee.
   (F)   If the owner of any motor vehicle licensed under this chapter sells
the same before the expiration of the license, the license may be transferred
to another motor vehicle acquired by the owner, or it may be transferred to the
new owner, upon surrender of the license and the payment of a transfer fee of
$2. Unless the license for any motor vehicle so sold is transferred within ten
days from the sale, the license shall be void. There shall be a maximum of two
transfers per household during the licensing period.
   (G)   (1)   Any person, defined as a natural person, firm, corporation,
copartnership or association shall within 30 days of establishing residency
within Oak Forest purchase a city vehicle sticker.
      (2)   Residency for a natural person shall include an individual who uses
the city as his or her principal place of abode. In the case of a firm,
copartnership, corporation or other business, the entity shall be deemed a
resident of Oak Forest if its principal place of business is located in the
city. Principal place of business shall be established by corporate charter,
Assumed Names Act registration or other documents acceptable to the City Clerk.
      (3)   If any motor vehicle has been purchased or lawfully obtained by the
applicant, said vehicle must display a vehicle license within 30 days of
purchase.
(2000 Code, § 10.20.030) (Ord. 2454, § 1 (part), passed --2000; Ord. 2729, § 1,
passed --2003; Am. Ord. 2008-05-0182O, passed 5-13-2008; Am. Ord. 2010-02-
0278O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-04-0438O, § 3, passed 4-23-2013)
§ 70.23 APPLICATIONS; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   All applications for a motor vehicle license or for a transfer thereof
shall be made in writing to the City Clerk on forms to be furnished by him or
her, which forms shall state the applicant’s name and address and the type of
motor vehicle to be licensed and which completed applications shall be
accompanied by the license fee.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant, signed by the
Mayor and attested by the City Clerk, and deliver the same to the applicant,
together with a tag or sticker to be affixed to the motor vehicle.
(2000 Code, § 10.20.040)
§ 70.24 DISPLAY OF STATE REGISTRATION PLATES AND REGISTRATION STICKERS.
   (A)   Registration plates issued for a motor vehicle other than a
motorcycle, trailer, semitrailer or truck-tractor shall be attached thereto,
one in the front and one in the rear.
   (B)   The registration plate issued for a motorcycle, trailer or semitrailer
shall be attached to the rear thereof only.
   (C)   The registration plate issued for a truck-tractor shall be attached to
the front thereof only.
   (D)   Every registration plate shall, at all times, be securely fastened in
a horizontal position to the vehicle for which it is issued so as to prevent
the plate from swinging. The plate shall be fastened at a height of not less
than 12 inches from the ground, measuring from the bottom of the plate. The
plate shall be fastened in a place and position so as to be clearly visible and
shall be maintained free from foreign materials and in a condition as to be
clearly legible.
   (E)   Registration stickers issued as evidence of renewed annual
registration shall be attached to registration plates as required by the
Secretary of State.
   (F)   No person shall operate or park, nor shall an owner permit to be
operated or parked, on any public street or highway in the city, any vehicle
required to be registered under the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code or
this Traffic Code, either:
      (1)   Without valid registration plates and registration stickers or
other proper evidence of registration, as required for that vehicle by the
Illinois Vehicle Code or the Secretary of State; or
      (2)   With cancelled, suspended, revoked or expired registration plates,
registration stickers or other proper evidence of registration as required for
that vehicle by the Illinois Vehicle Code or the Secretary of State.
(2000 Code, § 10.20.050)
VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT
§ 70.35 VEHICLES SUBJECT TO SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   A motor vehicle shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this
subchapter where the motor vehicle is used in the commission of any of the
following:
   (A)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to § 36-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012 (ILCS Ch.
720, Act 5, § 36-1);
   (B)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
§ 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501);
   (C)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a felony;
   (D)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act;
   (E)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of §§ 24-1, 24-1.5, and 24-3.1 of
the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012 (ILCS Ch. 720,
Act 5, §§ 24-1, 24-1.5, and 24-3.1);
   (F)   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to § 6-303 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303); except that vehicles shall not be
subjected to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation
(parking or moving) or due to failure to comply with emission testing;
   (G)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing or
attempting to solicit or possess a controlled substance in violation of the
Illinois Controlled Substances Act;
   (H)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license,
in violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code § 6-101 (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-
101), if the period of expiration is greater than one year;
   (I)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver's license or permit, in violation of § 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101), or operating a motor vehicle without ever
having been issued a driver's license or permit due to a person's age;
   (J)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant
has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer charges
that the driver violated §§ 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501);
   (K)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Article 16 or 16A of the Illinois
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012 (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 16
or 16A);
   (L)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission or in the
attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012;
   (M)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of § 11-503 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503):
      (1)   While the vehicle is part of a funeral procession; or
      (2)   In a manner that interferes with a funeral procession;
   (N)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Drug Paraphernalia
Act;
   (O)   Operation or use of a motor in violation of any sound amplification
system as defined in § 12-611 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 12-611) as amended; or
   (P)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of §§ 11-401,11-402,
or 11-403 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-401, 11-402,
or 11-403).
(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015; Am. Ord. 2019-12-0776O, passed 12-10-
2019)
§ 70.36 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever a police officer has a preponderance of evidence to believe
that vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this subchapter,
and none of the circumstances delineated in §
70.37 below are present, the police officer shall cause the motor vehicle to be
towed to a facility controlled by the city or its agents.
   (B)   When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify any person
identifying himself or herself as the owner of the vehicle or any person who is
found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if
there is a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right
to request a preliminary hearing as provided in the chapter.
(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015)
§ 70.37 EXCEPTION TO VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   The police officer is vested with discretion to determine if, under the
totality of the circumstances, the motor vehicle is capable of being operated
in a safe manner by either a properly-licensed owner of the motor vehicle or a
properly-licensed passenger where the owner gives permission for release of the
motor vehicle to a properly-licensed passenger within the motor vehicle. If the
police officer so concludes, then a motor vehicle shall not be impounded, but
rather be released into the custody of the owner or passenger in accordance
with the regulations and procedures specified herein.
(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015)
§ 70.38 POSTING A BOND.
   (A)   If a bond in the amount of $500 is posted with the city, the impounded
vehicle shall be released to the owner of record, upon the payment by the owner
of record of the towing and storage costs.
   (B)   If a penalty is imposed for a violation of the chapter, the bond will
be forfeited to the city provided, in the event that a violation of this
subchapter is not proven, the bond shall be returned to the person posting the
bond.
   (C)   All bond money posted pursuant to this subchapter shall be held by the
city until the City's Administrative Hearing Officer issues a decision, or, if
there is a judicial review, until a reviewing court issues a final decision.
(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015)
§ 70.39 PRELIMINARY HEARING.
   Where the owner of a motor vehicle seized under the provisions of the
chapter requests a preliminary hearing within 12 hours after the seizure of the
motor vehicle, the watch commander or any supervising officer must conduct a
preliminary hearing within 24 hours after the request for a preliminary hearing
is received by the city; provided that if the date for the hearing falls on a
Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the preliminary hearing will be held on the
next business day following the Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. For purposes
of this section, the following shall apply.
   (A)   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the preliminary hearing.
   (B)   The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay testimony will be allowed and shall be admissible.
   (C)   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the watch commander or
supervising officer determines that there is probable cause to believe that the
vehicle was used as hereinabove provided in §
70.35 above and that no driver fulfilling all of the criteria set forth in §
70.37 above was available to remove the motor vehicle from the scene of the
traffic stop, the watch commander or supervising officer shall order the
continued impoundment of the vehicles, unless the owner of the vehicle posts a
cash bond with the city in the amount of $500, plus the towing and storage
costs.
   (D)   If the watch commander or supervising officer determines that there is
not probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used as hereinabove provided
in §
70.35 above, or that an alternative driver fulfilling all of the criteria set
forth in §
70.37 above was available to safely remove the motor vehicle from the scene of
the traffic stops, then the motor vehicle shall be returned to the owner of
record of the vehicle without any penalty or other costs.
(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015)
§ 70.40 FINAL HEARING.
   (A)   Notice of hearing.
      (1)   Within 45 days after a motor vehicle is seized and impounded
pursuant to this subchapter, the city shall notify the owner of record of the
vehicle of the date, time and location of a final hearing.
      (2)   The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner of record, as shown on the records of the Illinois
Secretary of State.
      (3)   Notice by certified mail need not be given when the owner of the
vehicle has been personally served with notice in written form of the time,
date and location of the hearing.
   (B)   Requesting a hearing.
      (1)   A person whose vehicle is seized pursuant to this section may apply
for a hearing to assert that he or she or the person driving the vehicle was
not in violation of this subchapter at the time the vehicle was seized.
      (2)   The application for a hearing shall be made no later than seven
days after notice has been given either personally or by certified mail,
whichever is applicable in the given circumstance.
      (3)   The application to request a hearing shall be provided by the city
at the time notice is given.
      (4)   The bond shall be forfeited in the event a hearing is not requested
as provided for in this section.
      (5)   After an application for hearing is received by the city, a
subsequent notice shall be sent to the person that requested the hearing
notifying that person of the date, time and location of the hearing.
   (C)   Hearing. For purposes of this section, the following shall apply at an
owner's final hearing:
      (1)   Unless continued by order of the City's Administrative Hearing
Officer, the hearing shall be held within 60 days after the motor vehicle was
seized;
      (2)   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
be heard at the hearing;
      (3)   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer
determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used as
provided in §
70.35 and that no driver fulfilling all of the criteria set forth in §
70.37 was available to remove the motor vehicle from the scene of the traffic
stop, the Hearing Officer shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle
until the owner of the vehicle pays to the city a penalty in the amount of
$500, plus the towing and storage costs. The penalty and costs shall be a debt
due to the city;
      (4)   If the owner or record fails to appear at the hearing, the Hearing
Officer shall enter an order of default in favor of the city, which order shall
require the payment to the city of an administrative penalty of $500; and
      (5)   If the Hearing Officer determines that the vehicle was not used as
provided in §
70.35 above, or that the vehicle was so used but that a driver fulfilling all
of the criteria set forth in §
70.37 would have been available to safely remove the motor vehicle from the
scene of the traffic stop, then the motor vehicle shall be returned to the
owner of record of the vehicle without any penalty or other costs, or, if a
cash bond had previously been posted, the cash bond shall be returned.
(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015)
§ 70.41 UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle that is not claimed within 30 days after the
expiration of time in which the owner of record may seek judicial review of the
action of the city under this subchapter, or the time at which a final judgment
is rendered in favor of the city by a court of proper jurisdiction, or the time
at which a final administrative decision is rendered against an owner or record
who is in default, may be disposed of as an abandoned or unclaimed vehicle, as
otherwise provided by law.
   (B)   If the penalty and towing and storage costs are not paid within 80
days after a penalty is imposed pursuant to this subchapter, the vehicle shall
be deemed to be abandoned and may be disposed of in the manner provided by law
for the disposition of abandoned or unclaimed vehicles, unless a petition for
judicial review is filed with a court of proper jurisdiction. Where a petition
for judicial review of the Hearing Officer's determination is filed and pending
in a court of proper jurisdiction, the vehicle shall not be deemed to be
abandoned and shall not be sold. If the petition for judicial review is
resolved in favor of the city, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and may be
disposed of by the city if the penalty and towing and storage costs are not
paid within 30 days after the date of the court's order.
(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015)
§ 70.42 LIABILITY FOR PENALTY AND COSTS.
   (A)   The owner of record of a motor vehicle that is seized or impounded
shall be liable to the city for a penalty of $500 in addition to any fees for
the towing and storage of the motor vehicle.
   (B)   Fees for towing and storage are established by the city.
   (C)   A vehicle impounded pursuant to this subchapter shall remain impounded
until the earlier of the following events occurs:
      (1)   The penalty is paid to the city, and all towing and storage costs
are paid to the towing company;
      (2)   A bond in amount equal to the liability of the owner as herein
provided in division (A) above is posted with the city and all applicable
towing and storage costs are paid to the towing company;
      (3)   The vehicle is deemed abandoned, in which case the vehicle shall be
disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned or
unclaimed vehicles; and
      (4)   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lien
holder or any other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a
motor vehicle impounded under this subchapter until the penalty and all towing
and storage costs applicable under this subchapter have been paid in full.
(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015)
TRAFFIC REGULATION AGREEMENT FOR PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 70.55 OPTION TO ENTER AGREEMENT.
   On occasion, the city may choose to enter into traffic regulation agreements
with private property owners.
(Ord. 2006-09-0055O, passed 9-12-2006, § 1)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   In general. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this Traffic Code, for which no penalty is otherwise provided in
the following schedule of fines or elsewhere in this Traffic Code, is guilty of
a petty offense for a first and second offense and upon conviction shall be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $500; for a third or subsequent
conviction within one year after the first conviction, that person is guilty of
a Class C misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500
or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. Each occurrence during or at
which time a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues shall be deemed to
be a separate offense.
(2000 Code, § 10.08.070) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0284O, passed 3-23-2010)
CHAPTER 71: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE
Section
   
71.01   Adopted by reference
§ 71.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 5/20-204, the 1994 Illinois Vehicle Code,
that code, as amended through the date of the adoption of the 1994 replacement
pages for these codified ordinances, being Chapter 625 of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes, as amended, is adopted by reference as if set forth at length herein.
(2000 Code, § 10.04.010)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Exhibitions of speed
   
72.02   Vehicle weight limit
   
72.03   Trucks on sidewalks
   
72.04   Attaching to vehicles or trains
   
72.05   Personal use of motorized or motor- assisted vehicles
   
72.06   Personal use of low speed electric bicycles
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED.
   (A)   Motor vehicle exhibitions of speed, commonly referred to as “burning
rubber,” “peeling out” or “donuts,” and other maneuvers of speed, are declared
to be a nuisance.
   (B)   No operator of a motor vehicle shall perform a motor vehicle
exhibition of speed upon any street or highway in the city.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, STREETS AND HIGHWAYS means the entire
width between boundary lines of every way or place, of any kind, when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of
vehicular traffic.
(2000 Code, § 10.16.010) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMIT.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle over any street in the city, other
than a state route, where the gross weight of the vehicle is in excess of
10,000 pounds. On state routes, the weight limits established by state law
shall govern.
   (B)   An application may be made in certain cases to the City Clerk for
permission to drive a vehicle whose gross weight exceeds 10,000 pounds over
designated streets in the city.
   (C)   The permission provided for in division (B) above shall be granted
only if the applicant deposits with the City Clerk a bond in the sum of $5,000,
payable to the city, to pay for any damage caused by the vehicle while driving
over any city street, bridge or culvert.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to any street in the city unless a notice
of the weight limit established in this chapter is posted thereon.
(2000 Code, § 10.16.020) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 TRUCKS ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall cause, suffer, permit or allow any truck to cross any city
sidewalk without the prior approval of the Director of Public Works.
(2000 Code, § 10.16.030) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 ATTACHING TO VEHICLES OR TRAINS.
   No person shall jump upon, hitch onto, cling to or in any way attach himself
or herself to any vehicle or railroad train while the same is in motion.
(2000 Code, § 10.16.040) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed - -1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed - -1999) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 PERSONAL USE OF MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED. Includes gasoline powered engines, diesel
powered engines, electric powered engines or any combination thereof.
      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. A device 50 inches or
less in width, having a manufacturer’s dry weight of 600 pounds or less,
traveling on three or more tires, designed with a seat or saddle for operator
use, and handlebars or steering wheel for steering control, and which is
motorized or motor assisted and is not licensed for street use by the state of
Illinois.
      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED GO-CART. A device having two or more tandem
axles and a combination of wheels connected by a platform designed for sitting
which any person may ride and which is motorized or motor-assisted and is not
licensed for street use by the State of Illinois.
      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED MINI-BIKE. A device having two tandem wheels
designed to be powered by motorized or motor-assisted power upon which any
person may ride and which is not licensed for street use by the State of
Illinois.
      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED ROLLER SKATES. Devices worn on the feet with
a combination of wheels which are motorized or motor-assisted. This definition
includes devices commonly known as in-line skates.
      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED SCOOTER. A device with two or more wheels
connected by a platform with a steering handle or wheel which is designed for
standing on, or has a seat for sitting upon, and which is motorized or motor-
assisted and is not licensed for street use by the State of Illinois.
      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED SKATEBOARDS. Devices with two or more tandem
axles and a combination of wheels connected by a platform designed for standing
which are motorized or motor-assisted.
   (B)   Prohibition.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for, and no person shall use, operate, or be
in control of any motorized or motor-assisted skateboard, roller skates,
scooter, pedicycle, bicycle, mini-bike, go-cart or all-terrain vehicle, except
as to areas privately owned and authorized by the owner for motorized or motor-
assisted vehicle use.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for, and no person shall operate or propel any
motorized or motor-assisted skateboard, roller skates, scooter, pedicycle,
bicycle, mini-bike, go-cart or all-terrain vehicle upon any sidewalk, roadway,
street, public way or upon any municipal parking area within the corporate
limits of the city.
   (C)   Applicability.
      (1)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the above-
referenced devices when participating in a parade authorized by the city.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall also not apply to a motorized
or motor-assisted wheelchair or scooter which is being used to transport a
physically challenged person.
   (D)   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined as allowed by the City of Oak Forest general code penalty provision §
10.99.
(2000 Code, § 10.16.060) (Ord. 2763, § 1, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 2023-06-
0982O, passed 6-27-2023)
§ 72.06 PERSONAL USE OF LOW SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE. A bicycle equipped with fully operable pedals
and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that meets the requirements of one
of the following classes:
         (a)   CLASS 1 LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE. A low-speed electric bicycle
equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling
and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of 20
miles per hour.
         (b)   CLASS 2 LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE. A low-speed electric bicycle
equipped with a motor that may be used exclusively to propel the bicycle and
that is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of
20 miles per hour.
         (c)   CLASS 3 LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE. A low-speed electric bicycle
equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling
and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of 28
miles per hour.
      A LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE is not a moped or a motor driven cycle.
   (B)   Illinois Law, ILCS Ch. 625 Act 5, § 11-1517 contains the following:
      (1)   Each low-speed electric bicycle operating in this state shall
comply with equipment and manufacturing requirements adopted by the United
States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR 1512. Each Class 3 low-
speed electric bicycle shall be equipped with a speedometer that displays the
speed the bicycle is traveling in miles per hour.
      (2)   Beginning on or after January 1, 2018, every manufacturer and
distributor of low-speed electric bicycles shall apply a label that is
permanently affixed to the bicycle in a prominent location. The label shall
contain, in Arial font in at least nine-point type:
         (a)   A classification number for the bicycle that corresponds with a
class under § 1-140.10 of this code;
         (b)   The bicycle’s top assisted speed; and
         (c)   The bicycle’s motor wattage.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly tamper or modify the speed capability or
engagement of a low-speed electric bicycle without replacing the label required
under division (B)(2).
      (4)   Each low-speed electric bicycle operating in this state shall
comply with equipment and manufacturing requirements adopted by the United
States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR 1512. Each Class 3 low-
speed electric bicycle shall be equipped with a speedometer that displays the
speed the bicycle is traveling in miles per hour.
   (C)   Operation of low speed electric bicycles. A Class 2 low-speed electric
bicycle shall operate in a manner so that the electric motor is disengaged or
ceases to function when the brakes are applied. A Class 1 low-speed electric
bicycle and a Class 3 low-speed electric bicycle shall operate in a manner so
that the electric motor is disengaged or ceases to function when the rider
stops pedaling.
      (1)   A person may operate a low-speed electric bicycle upon any highway,
street, or roadway authorized for use by bicycles, including, but not limited
to, bicycle lanes.
      (2)   A person may operate a low-speed electric bicycle upon any bicycle
path unless the municipality, county, or local authority with jurisdiction
prohibits the use of low-speed electric bicycles or a specific class of low-
speed electric bicycles on that path.
      (3)   A person may not operate a low-speed electric bicycle on a
sidewalk.
      (4)   A person may operate a Class 3 low-speed electric bicycle only if
he or she is 16 years of age or older. A person who is less than 16 years of
age may ride as a passenger on a Class 3 low-speed electric bicycle that is
designed to accommodate passengers.
(Ord. 2023-06-0982O, passed 6-27-2023)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense.
(2000 Code, § 10.16.050B)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING
Section
Parking Generally
   
73.01   Prima facie responsibility of owner
   
73.02   Parking on sidewalks, driveways and aprons
   
73.03   Parking on parkway or private property
   
73.04   Diagonal parking; parking prohibited for street cleaning
   
73.05   Display for sale and use of vehicles for business purposes prohibited
   
73.06   Parking of boats and trailers
   
73.07   Tampering with parked vehicles
   
73.08   Snow emergencies
   
73.09   Commercial and heavy vehicles
   
73.10   Prohibited and limited parking areas; signs
   
73.11   Violations; impounding
Commuter Parking Facility
   
73.25   Definitions
   
73.26   Manner of parking; parking in areas reserved for handicapped persons
   
73.27   Handicapped permits
   
73.28   No-parking areas
   
73.29   Commercial parking uses
   
73.30   (Reserved)
   
73.31   (Reserved)
   
73.32   Enforcement by Police Department
PARKING GENERALLY
§ 73.01 PRIMA FACIE RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of any of the provisions of this
article prohibiting or restricting parking, the person in whose name the
vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for the violation and
subject to the penalty therefor.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.010)
§ 73.02 PARKING ON SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS AND APRONS.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with directions of a police officer or official traffic sign or signal, no
operator of a vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle on any sidewalk
(including partial parking), from 7:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m., except that it is
lawful to park across and perpendicular to the path of a sidewalk between the
driveway and driveway apron area of a single-family residence during the 24-
hour period following a snowfall of more than two inches.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.020)
§ 73.03 PARKING ON PARKWAY OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, or when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic, or in case of roadway construction,
excavation or repair, or within 12 hours following a snowfall of two inches or
more, or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or official
traffic sign or signal, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on a
parkway or in the area between a residence and the roadway.
   (B)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any private parking
lot or private property unless authorized by the owner or proprietor thereof.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.030) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.04 DIAGONAL PARKING; PARKING PROHIBITED FOR STREET CLEANING.
   (A)   No operator of any vehicle shall park the vehicle diagonally to the
edge of a roadway except where the diagonal parking is permitted by suitable
signs and markings.
   (B)   For the purpose of facilitating the cleaning of streets, the Director
of Public Works is authorized to erect temporary signs designating the days of
the week, the hours of the day and the part of a street in which the parking of
vehicles is prohibited during the periods and at the location designated on
those signs, as provided in division (A) above.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.040) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.05 DISPLAY FOR SALE AND USE OF VEHICLES FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Property owners within the city shall be allowed to display one
vehicle for sale on their property. Any vehicle displayed for sale must be
currently licensed, in good repair, driveable and registered at that property
address.
   (B)   Other than allowed by this section no person shall park any vehicle
within the city for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or park any vehicle
upon which merchandise is being offered to the public for sale.
   (C)   Nothing in this section is intended to nor shall restrict any licensed
car sales business within the city from conducting their business as allowed by
statute and ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.050) (Ord. 2573, § 1, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.06 PARKING OF BOATS AND TRAILERS.
   No person shall park a boat, house trailer or other trailer, or any device
designed to be towed by a motor vehicle, on any city street between the hours
of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.060) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.07 TAMPERING WITH PARKED VEHICLES.
   No person shall start or cause to be started the engine of any motor
vehicle, or shift, change, move or use the levers, brakes, starting device,
gears or other mechanism of a parked motor vehicle to a position other than
that in which it was left by the owner or driver thereof, or attempt to do so.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.070) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.08 SNOW EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle on any public street in the city at
any time within 12 hours after a snowfall of two inches or more has occurred,
unless the snow has been plowed off or otherwise removed from the street.
Council may, at its discretion, designate certain streets as snow routes. These
routes will be posted as such and will have priority in snow removal.
   (B)   In order to help ensure that all city streets can be adequately plowed
during and after snowfalls of two inches or more, the Chief of Police is
authorized to have removed from any city street any vehicle which obstructs the
operation of snow removal equipment.
   (C)   Although designated snow routes will receive primary attention during
and after snowfalls, all city streets are equally subject to this section.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.080)
§ 73.09 COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES.
   (A)   In Residence Districts.
      (1)   No person shall park any vehicle with a gross weight of over 8,000
pounds, which is required ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-815 to have a Class D or
above license, on any residential property or street in the city, except in
accordance with this section.
      (2)   Vehicles defined in division (A)(1) above may be parked in certain
specified places in residence districts, as follows.
         (a)   Carports. A carport is a detached or attached structure with a
covered roof containing one or more parking spaces and open on one or more
sides. A carport located upon a lot developed with a residential dwelling
serves a similar use as a private garage.
         (b)   Private garages. A private garage is a detached or attached
structure located upon a lot developed with a residential dwelling (or a
portion of a main residential building), used by the occupants residing upon
the premises principally for the storage of passenger vehicles and other
vehicles and equipment permitted upon the lot.
         (c)   Parking spaces. A parking space is a permanently surfaced area
of not less than 180 square feet, either within a structure or in the open,
excluding driveways, access drives and public streets, for the parking of a
vehicle.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the
parking of a vehicle on a street remains subject to the parking regulations of
this Traffic Code, the Illinois Vehicle Code and the Zoning Code of the city.
   (B)   On streets. No person shall park any vehicle that in any way is used
for commercial purposes on any street for a longer period than is necessary for
the reasonably expeditious loading and unloading of the vehicle, or for a
longer period, during daytime hours, than is necessary to complete the business
transaction which requires that the vehicle be present on any street.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.090) (Ord. 2418, (part), passed - -1999; Ord. 2417, (part),
passed - -1999)
§ 73.10 PROHIBITED AND LIMITED PARKING AREAS; SIGNS.
   (A)   Council may, from time to time, designate areas in which parking is
prohibited, or prohibited during certain hours, or limited in time, or
otherwise regulated or restricted.
   (B)   The Director of Public Works shall erect, install and maintain
suitable signs or markings, giving notice of the regulations and restrictions.
   (C)   No person shall violate or fail to comply with any sign or marking,
except that this requirement shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which
is disabled on the paved, improved or main traveled portion of a highway in a
manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in that position.
   (D)   Resident parking signs designate streets or roadways where on-street
automobile parking is limited to residents that reside on the street or roadway
where resident parking signs exist.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.100) (Am. Ord. 2024-09-1043O, passed 9-24-2024) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 73.11 VIOLATIONS; IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   Every vehicle parked in violation of any of the provisions of this
section is declared to be a nuisance which may be abated by any police officer
by removing and conveying the vehicle to the vehicle pound designated by
Council.
   (B)   Before the owner or person entitled to possession of any legally
impounded vehicle may remove the same, he or she shall furnish evidence of
ownership or right to possession and shall pay for the cost of towing or
removal to the vehicle pound and the cost of vehicle storage for each day or
fraction thereof in the pound.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.110)
COMMUTER PARKING FACILITY
§ 73.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HANDICAPPED PERSON. A person who displays a license plate on his or her
motor vehicle which has been issued to him or her by the Motor Vehicle Division
of the Secretary of State’ s office and which, on its face, indicates that the
owner and driver of the vehicle is a handicapped person and is thus entitled to
display the special license plate on his or her motor vehicle.
   PARKING SPACE. A space in the commuter parking facility for the parking of
motor vehicles, which space is identified by plainly marked stripes painted on
the surface of the paving and by being numbered.
   RESTRICTED HANDICAPPED PARKING AREA. An area in the commuter parking
facility for the parking of motor vehicles, which area is marked by signs
clearly indicating that it may be used by handicapped persons only.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.120) (Ord. 2486, § 1 (part), passed - -2000; Ord. 2006-04-
0016O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 73.26 MANNER OF PARKING; PARKING IN AREAS RESERVED FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
   (A)   No person shall park a motor vehicle in any designated parking space
in a manner that the motor vehicle protrudes over and into any other parking
space immediately contiguous to it so as to prevent the use of the latter space
by another motor vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall park a motor vehicle in a parking space which is
designated and marked for the use of handicapped persons only, unless the
vehicle is operated by a handicapped person.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.130) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.27 HANDICAPPED PERMITS.
   (A)   The Office of the City Clerk shall, upon application by any
handicapped person, issue that person a handicapped permit for a period of time
not to exceed one year.
   (B)   The permit shall be prominently displayed so that it is clearly
visible and shall be intended for use on the vehicle owned and registered to
the applicant.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.140)
§ 73.28 NO-PARKING AREAS.
   No person shall park a motor vehicle in any area within the commuter parking
facility in which parking is prohibited. A restricted area shall be plainly
marked with no-parking signs in a manner as to be clearly seen by the public.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.150) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.29 COMMERCIAL PARKING USES.
   (A)   No operator of a commercial vehicle shall drive that vehicle into the
commuter parking facility for the purpose of picking up freight from or
delivering freight to the Rock Island Railroad facility, or for any other
commercial purpose, except as provided in this section.
   (B)   Any person wishing to use the facility for those purposes shall, at
least 24 hours prior thereto, appear, by himself or herself or by his or her
authorized representative, at the Police Department, and then and there
register with the Department. At that time the registrant shall give the
following information to the Department:
      (1)   The name of the person picking up or delivering the freight;
      (2)   The type of vehicle to be used;
      (3)   The name of the driver involved; and
      (4)   The date and time of the pick-up or delivery of the freight.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.160)
§ 73.30 (RESERVED).
§ 73.31 (RESERVED).
§ 73.32 ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The Police Department shall enforce this subchapter through the issuance of
citations and the towing of vehicles that are in violation of any of the
provisions of this section. Nothing in this section is intended to preclude
concurrent enforcement as elsewhere provided in these codified ordinances.
(2000 Code, § 10.24.180) (Ord. 2486, § 1 (part), passed - -2000)
CHAPTER 74: ABANDONED AND HAZARDOUS VEHICLES
Section
   
74.01   Definitions
   
74.02   Authorization for towing
   
74.03   Pre-tow notice for abandoned vehicles
   
74.04   Pre-tow hearing procedures
   
74.05   Post-tow notice for hazardous and unlawful vehicles
   
74.06   Post-tow hearing procedures
   
74.07   Form for post-tow notice and signs
   
74.08   Form for pre-tow notice
   
74.09   Form for post-tow hearing
   
74.10   Form for owner’s permission to tow stolen vehicle
§ 74.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it
in other ordinances of the municipality, and if not defined in any other
municipal ordinance, it shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Illinois
Vehicle Code. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle parked or otherwise located on a public way:
         (a)   In a state of disrepair that it is incapable of being driven; or
         (b)   That has been unmoved for a period of at least 24 hours, and
from its condition, the period during which it has not been moved, or some
other circumstance, it appears to have been, and will be presumed to have been,
abandoned by its owner.
      (2)   A vehicle parked in a public parking lot or on private property
without the consent of the lot owner or the proprietor or agent of the
property, which person has requested that the vehicle be towed; or
      (3)   A vehicle defined as abandoned, or capable of being towed, by any
other city ordinance, and which does not fall into the categories of
“hazardous” or “unlawful” vehicles and therefor is not subject to an immediate
tow.
   HAZARDOUS VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is disabled or
cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator thereof;
      (2)   A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health or
welfare of members of the public;
      (3)   A vehicle abandoned or disabled on a public street, way or alley
that is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or that poses a potential danger
to pedestrians and other operators of vehicles; or
      (4)   A vehicle that must be moved to allow for proper municipal snow
removal from a public street, way or alley.
   OWNER. A person who holds legal title to a vehicle or the right of
possession of the vehicle.
   UNLAWFUL VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle that has been reported stolen or that is the subject of a
search and seizure by the Police Department; or
      (2)   A vehicle parked in violation of state statutes or city ordinances
which prohibit parking at the location in question or for a period of time for
which the vehicle has been parked, and where either the statute or the
ordinance authorizes the vehicle to be towed and the signs posted at the
general location note that fact.
   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street, highway or any public way, including
snowmobiles, except the devices moved by human power and devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails and tracks.
(2000 Code, § 10.36.010)
§ 74.02 AUTHORIZATION FOR TOWING.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   The towing of vehicles by the municipality, or by its approved
towing service operators on behalf of the municipality, shall be authorized
only by the Police Department and only under the circumstances provided in this
chapter.
      (2)   Towed vehicles shall be impounded at facilities designated by the
Police Department until lawfully claimed or disposed of pursuant to the
Illinois Vehicle Code.
   (B)   Towing without notice; immediate tows.
      (1)   A hazardous or unlawful vehicle may be towed without prior notice,
unless the vehicle is an unlawful vehicle which has been reported as stolen and
is not towable for some other specific reason, in which case the owner should,
when practical, be notified by telephone or other means and given the
opportunity to claim or move the vehicle in order to avoid incurring the
expenses of a police-ordered tow. However, the vehicle may be towed if the
owner permitted the tow to be made when the vehicle was reported stolen, or at
any time thereafter, on the form provided in §
74.10 below.
      (2)   Within 24 hours after towing a vehicle pursuant to this chapter, a
notice shall be sent or personally delivered to the owner of the vehicle,
thereby affording the owner the opportunity for a hearing as provided for in §§
74.05 and
74.06.
   (C)   Towing with prior notice; abandoned vehicles. Abandoned vehicles may
be towed after the mailing or delivery of prior notice and after affording an
opportunity for a hearing as provided for in §§
74.03 and
74.04 below.
(2000 Code, § 10.36.020)
§ 74.03 PRE-TOW NOTICE FOR ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Notice pursuant to this section shall be personally delivered to the
owner of the vehicle or shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail,
return receipt requested, to his or her address as indicated in the most
current registration list of the Secretary of State. The notice shall be on the
form provided in §
74.08 below. If an out-of-state vehicle is proposed to be towed, inquiry by
computer, telephone or letter shall be made of the Secretary of State of the
particular jurisdiction for the furnishing of the most current registered name
and address of the owner of the vehicle, and notice shall be mailed as provided
herein to the address furnished. However, in no case will the city be required
to delay towing more than seven days after the date of the mailing or personal
delivery of the notice if no request for a hearing has been received within
that seven-day period.
   (B)   A notice of intent to tow sticker, with the earliest date upon which
the tow may take place and the address and phone number of the police
department, shall be placed on the vehicle.
(2000 Code, § 10.36.030)
§ 74.04 PRE-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Opportunity for hearing.
      (1)   The owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle to be towed
as an abandoned vehicle shall have seven days, after the date of mailing or
personal delivery of the notice, to request, in writing, a pre-tow hearing.
      (2)   Subsequent to this seven-day period, the vehicle may be towed if
the owner has not filed a written hearing request within the seven-day period,
and any hearing rights under this chapter will be deemed waived.
   (B)   Scheduling of hearing. The pre-tow hearing shall be scheduled for a
date within 14 days of the mailing or personal delivery of the pre-tow notice.
The city shall not be required to delay towing longer than the 14-day period.
   (C)   Request for hearing.
      (1)   A request for a pre-tow hearing shall be made in person to the
office indicated on the notice.
      (2)   A request for a hearing by a person who resides more than 50 miles
from the city may be made by mail.
      (3)   Forms for the requests shall be made available by the Police
Department.
      (4)   At the time of making the request, the owner will be provided a
hearing date and time, by mail or in person, as the circumstances require.
   (D)   Appointment of Hearing Officer.
      (1)   The city shall choose an officer or employee of the city to serve
as Hearing Officer.
      (2)   In no case shall a Hearing Officer be an individual who was
involved in the initial decision to tow the vehicle.
      (3)   The Hearing Officer shall have the opportunity to require the
presence of the enforcement officer who initiated the proposed tow or any other
city personnel.
   (E)   Nature of hearing.
      (1)   The hearing shall be informal in nature and the rules of evidence
shall not apply.
      (2)   The hearing will not be determinative of, or adjudicate, any
citation relative to any vehicle.
      (3)   After receiving all relevant evidence, the Hearing Officer shall
render a written decision based upon a preponderance of the evidence as to
whether towing of the vehicle is authorized by the laws of the state or the
ordinances of the city, with a specific statutory or ordinance section cited in
the decision.
      (4)   The owner shall be provided a copy of the pre-tow hearing decision.
   (F)   Decision to tow; rates to be charged.
      (1)   If a preponderance of the evidence supports towing and compliance
with this chapter, the Hearing Officer shall direct that the vehicle be towed,
with any towing and storage costs to then be imposed upon the owner thereof.
      (2)   The fees to be charged for towing and storage services shall be not
more than the maximum rates set by the Chief of Police pursuant to §
74.05(E) below.
      (3)   The owner of the vehicle, having had such a hearing, may avoid the
towing by immediately removing the vehicle from the improper location to a
lawful location and correcting any unlawful conditions of the vehicle.
   (G)   Decision not to tow.
      (1)   If a preponderance of the evidence fails to support the towing of a
vehicle, the Hearing Officer shall direct that the vehicle not be towed.
      (2)   The city shall furnish a copy of the decision to the owner, who may
place it inside the vehicle in a location plainly visible from the outside,
such as on the dashboard or inside the rear window.
      (3)   No vehicle about which such a decision has been rendered shall be
towed by the city, unless the circumstances under which the decision was
rendered have changed.
      (4)   If at some subsequent time the municipality should wish to tow the
vehicle from the same location, it shall follow the same procedures required
for the towing of any other similarly situated vehicle.
   (H)   Retention of reports and documents; contesting decisions. All original
and copies of notices, pre-tow hearing decisions, towing reports and any
associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the Police
Department for a period of at least five years after each hearing, or after
each tow if no hearing was requested or held. The city or the owner may contest
the decision of the Hearing Officer in any manner provided by law.
(2000 Code, § 10.36.040)
§ 74.05 POST-TOW NOTICE FOR HAZARDOUS AND UNLAWFUL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Mailing or delivery of notice. Notice pursuant to this section shall
be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the
address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most current
registration list of the Secretary of State, unless the notice is personally
delivered to the owner, in which case the date of delivery, the time of
delivery and the name of the police officer making the delivery shall be noted
in the Police Department records or reports. The notice shall be on the forms
provided in §
74.07 below and shall be mailed or delivered within 24 hours of the tow, as
provided in §
74.02(B) above. If the city has towed an out-of-state hazardous or unlawful
vehicle, inquiry by computer, telephone or letter shall be made of the
Secretary of State of the particular jurisdiction for the furnishing of the
most current registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and
notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the address furnished.
   (B)   Posting of signs showing hearing rights. All approved towing service
operators shall prominently post at least one sign, with dimensions of at least
12 inches by 18 inches, indicating the opportunity and procedures for a hearing
to contest the validity of a towed vehicle. The sign, the form for which is set
out in §
74.07(A), shall be placed in locations readily visible to the public
transacting business at any towing facility. If a towing service operator
performs services for more than one city, the information for contacting the
various appropriate municipal offices can be listed in one sign, the format for
which shall be substantially similar to the form set forth in §
74.07(A).
   (C)   Requests for post-tow hearings. Requests for hearings may be made in
person at the office indicated on the notice within 15 days of the mailing or
personal delivery of the notification of tow, or release of the vehicle,
whichever occurs first; otherwise, the right to a hearing shall be deemed
waived. Requests for hearings by persons who reside more than 50 miles from the
city may be made in person or by mail received by the city within the 15-day
period.
   (D)   Release of motor vehicles. Before the owner or person entitled to
possession of any impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same, the
owner or person entitled to possession shall furnish evidence of his or her
identity, ownership of the vehicle or right to possession, shall sign a receipt
for the vehicle and shall pay the amount currently owed for towing and storage
fees to the towing service operator. The Chief of Police is authorized to
promulgate regulations as to the documents or other proof necessary to
establish these facts.
   (E)   Establishment of maximum towing and storage rates.
      (1)   The owner shall pay fees to the towing service operator for towing
and storage on police-ordered tows at rates not to exceed maximum amounts to be
administratively established by the Chief of Police and which may be revised
from time to time.
      (2)   The basic rates for the fees shall be shown in the form and sign
concerning vehicle release requirements, as set forth in §
74.07(A). However, nothing in this section is intended to prevent a competitive
towing service operator from charging less than the established maximum rates
for police-ordered tows or any other tows. In arriving at the maximum rates for
various services, the Chief shall consider the matters as the prevalent market
rates in the area for the different types of vehicles, the types of storage and
area requirements for categories as large trucks and commercial vehicles and
the relative difficulties and amount of work required to perform various types
of towing operations.
      (3)   For particularly difficult or unusual towing jobs, such as large or
serious accidents, the Chief is authorized to allow towing operators to charge
rates above those established for normal situations. Those special charges must
be based upon the cost of services provided, taking into account matters as the
man-hours and equipment time required for the job.
      (4)   A towing service operator shall fully itemize, in writing, the
details of a billing at special rates for a particularly difficult or unusual
tow and shall supply a copy of the itemized bill to the owner and to the Police
Department. Any special rates charged shall be customary in the towing industry
in the area for the nature and extent of the services provided.
      (5)   Every towing service operator and the Police Department shall make
available a copy of the complete current rate schedule and any special rate
policy established by the Chief of Police, for vehicle owners to view upon
request.
(2000 Code, § 10.36.050)
§ 74.06 POST-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Opportunity for hearing. The owner of a vehicle towed as an immediate
tow, by or pursuant to the authority of the Police Department as set forth in §
74.02 above, shall be provided an opportunity for a post-tow hearing to
determine the validity of the tow and any towing or storage charges. The
hearing will not be determinative of, or adjudicate, any citation issued
relative to any towed vehicle.
   (B)   Nature of the hearing; appointment of Hearing Officer. The nature of
the hearing and the appointment of the Hearing Officer shall be the same as set
forth in §
74.04(D) and (E).
   (C)   Scheduling of hearings. Hearings shall take place as follows:
      (1)   In those instances where a vehicle has been released upon the
deposit of the full payment currently owed for towing and storage charges, and
the owner has properly requested a hearing, the hearing shall take place within
15 days after the release of the vehicle, unless the owner requests a later
date convenient to all parties.
      (2)   In those instances where a vehicle remains impounded, the hearing
shall take place, at the option of the owner:
         (a)   On the next day after an owner’s demand for the hearing,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, if such demand is made after 3:00
p.m.;
         (b)   On the second day following the demand, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, if the unavailability of a necessary witness or evidence
creates a particular difficulty in conducting the hearing on the next calendar
day; or
         (c)   Within 15 days of the request, on a date convenient to all
parties, if acceptable to the owner.
   (D)   Conduct of hearings. The Hearing Officer shall review all evidence
presented by the vehicle owner and the Police Department or other city
employees and shall make a finding, based upon a preponderance of the evidence
presented, as to the lawful authority for the towing and storage of the
vehicle. The city must establish the authority by a preponderance of the
evidence.
   (E)   Hearing decision. For each hearing, the Hearing Officer shall complete
a post-tow hearing decision, shall attach the decision to the Police
Department’s original vehicle towing report, and shall supply a copy of the
decision to the owner by personal delivery, if the owner is present, or by
mail, if the owner isn’t present. The decision and findings shall be
substantially as stated in the form for a post-tow hearing decision, set forth
in §
74.09 below.
   (F)   Retention of reports and documents; contesting decisions. All
originals and copies of notices, post-tow hearing decisions, towing reports and
any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the Police
Department for a period of at least five years after each hearing, or after
each tow if no hearing was requested or held. The city or the owner may contest
the decision of the Hearing Officer in any manner provided by law.
   (G)   Compliance with chapter. Notwithstanding any other ordinance or
statutory provision to the contrary, any towing service operator authorized to
perform tows on behalf of the city must perform its services subject to the
provisions of this chapter. However, the towing company shall have the right to
recover the reasonable value of its services for police-ordered tows, which are
not paid by the vehicle owner, from the city. However, if a tow or the charge
for a tow is found to be illegal and the towing service operator is required to
return the charge for the tow to the owner of the vehicle, the city shall not
be liable to reimburse the operator for the towing charges.
(2000 Code, § 10.36.060)
§ 74.07 FORM FOR POST-TOW NOTICE AND SIGNS.
   (A)   The following form shall be utilized in the administration of §§
74.05 and
74.06 above for posting in towing establishments and for mailing or delivering
to owners:
NOTICE OF VEHICLE RELEASE REQUIREMENTS AND HEARING RIGHTS
   Before the owner or person entitled to possession of any impounded vehicle
shall be permitted to remove the same from custody of the Police Department or
towing service operator, he shall furnish evidence of his identity and
ownership of the vehicle and right of possession thereto, shall sign a receipt
for the vehicle, and shall pay a fee not exceeding $ _____ and for a truck or
commercial vehicle, to cover the cost of towing or removal to a vehicle pound
or authorized garage, and, in addition thereto, the cost of storage, not
exceeding $ ______ per day for a passenger vehicle of not more than seven
passengers, and $ ______ per day for a truck or commercial vehicle.
   However, higher fees may necessarily be charged in particularly difficult or
unusual towing or storage circumstances, for which rate information is
available upon request at the Police Department or towing business location. If
the owner or person entitled to possession wishes to contest the validity of
the tow, he may obtain a hearing under the conditions of either paragraph (A)
or (B) stated below:
TO OBTAIN HEARING
   (A)   If the vehicle has been released, he may, within fifteen days of the
release of the vehicle or the mailing or personal delivery to him of the
notification of the tow, whichever occurs first, request a hearing by
contacting in person the office of (Name of office, address and phone number)
Anyone residing more than fifty miles away from the City of Oak Forest may make
a request for a hearing by mail. The right to any hearing will be deemed waived
unless a written request for hearing is received by the above office within the
applicable fifteen-day period.
   (B)   If the vehicle is still impounded, he may contact the above officer
and obtain a hearing within the next day after the request, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, unless the request is made after 3:00 p.m., or
unless there are particular difficulties in having the hearing on the next day,
in which case the hearing will take place on the second day thereafter,
excluding weekends and holidays.
NATURE OF HEARING
   (A)   The hearing shall be conducted according to municipal ordinance
provisions and shall determine the validity of the impounding of the vehicle
and the imposition or refund of any towing or storage charges, but the hearing
will not determine or adjudicate any citations issued. If the Hearing Officer
sustains the validity of the tow and storage, the owner or person entitled to
possession will be required to pay all unpaid towing and storage fees before
obtaining the release of the vehicle.
   (B)   The following form shall be utilized in the administration of §§
74.05 and
74.06 for the mailing or delivery of post-tow notices to owners, including the
form set forth in division (A) above:
Post-Tow Incident Report No.
No.   ___________________
To:   _________________________________________ (name)
   _________________________________________ (address)
Date of certified or registered mailing:
_______________________________
or
Date and time of and name of person making personal delivery:
____________________________________________________
(make) ________________________ (model/year)
____________________________________________
(other identifying features) ______________________________________
(license plate number and state) __________________________________
which is impounded at: _________________________________________(name and
address of towing service operator or municipal auto pound)
   The vehicle was towed from (location) ______________ on _______________
(date) by the authority of the municipality of Oak Forest, as an unlawful or
hazardous vehicle, to wit:
(facts forming basis of tow)
_________________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________
as defined in: ___________________________________________________ (ordinance
or statutory section)
   The towing was authorized by (ordinance or statutory section ) which
provides that:__________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
   You have the rights and payment obligations as set forth in the enclosed
notice of vehicle release requirements and hearing rights.
(2000 Code, § 10.36.070)
§ 74.08 FORM FOR PRE-TOW NOTICE.
   The following form shall be utilized in the administration of §§
74.03 and
74.04 above for the mailing or delivery of pre-tow notices to owners:
Pre-Tow Incident Report No: _________________
To: ______________________________ (name)
__________________________________ (address)
Date of certified or registered mailing:
_______________________________
or
Date and time of and name of person making personal delivery:
____________________________________________________
PRE-TOW NOTICE
   You are listed as the registered owner or person entitled to possession of
the following described vehicle:
(make) ________________________ (model/year)
____________________________________________
(other identifying features) ______________________________________
(license plate number and state) __________________________________
which is impounded at: ____ (location)____________________________
in an apparently abandoned or unusable condition, to wit: (facts forming basis
of proposed tow):_____________
__________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________
as defined in (ordinance or statutory section):
_____________________________________________________
   The City of Oak Forest will tow the vehicle or cause it to be towed after
seven days from the above date of mailing or personal delivery, unless you move
the vehicle to a lawful location or request a hearing as set forth below. Any
such hearing will only concern the proposed towing and will not be
determinative of or adjudicate any parking ticket or other citation concerning
the vehicle. If the vehicle is towed, you will be required to pay all towing
and storage charges before the vehicle is released.
   The towing is authorized by (ordinance or statutory section) _____________
which provides that:
   If you wish to request a hearing on the legality of the present location and
condition of your vehicle, you must contact the office listed below and file in
person a request for such hearing within seven days of the above date of
mailing or personal delivery, unless you live more than fifty miles from the
City of Oak Forest, in which case you may mail a request for hearing that must
be received by the office listed below within seven days from the mailing or
personal delivery of this notice: ________________ (name of office, address and
phone number)
__________________________________________________________________________________________
(2000 Code, § 10.36.080)
§ 74.09 FORM FOR POST-TOW HEARING.
   The following form shall be utilized by the Hearing Officer for post-tow
hearing decisions as required in §
74.06 above:
Pre-Tow Incident Report No: ______________________
POST-TOW HEARING DECISION
   Following a hearing held after the towing of the vehicle as identified in
post-tow notice bearing the same number as the report number stated above
concerning the vehicle owned by or under the control of (name of owner)
(“owner”), the following findings and order are hereby entered, as checked in
the appropriate box and entered on the appropriate lines:
Amount previously paid by owner for towing and storage: $ __________
__   1.   Tow Authorized: Owner Responsible for All Charges. The towing and
storage of the vehicle was authorized by the following law of the State of
Illinois: ___________ or Municipal Ordinance No. ___________
and the owner is liable for the full amount of towing and storage fees incurred
to date, in the amount of: $____.
__   2.   Tow Not Authorized. There was no authorization in law for the towing
and storage, or the municipal employee causing the vehicle to be towed did not
comply with the requirements of the applicable statute or ordinance, as
follows:
________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
   The owner will not be charged for towing and storage and any amount
previously paid will be refunded by the municipality as shown here:
__   3.   Tow Authorized: Storage Partially Reimbursable. The towing of the
vehicle was authorized by State law: ___________, or Municipal Ordinance No.
____________ but the owner was caused to incur additional improper storage
charges because of improperly late notification of towing or other reasons for
which the municipality or towing company is responsible, as follows:
___________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
   Storage amount to be excused or reimbursed to owner: $ _____ Towing and
storage balance for which owner is responsible: $ ______.
__   4.   Owner Failed to Appear: No Continuance Requested. This finding
constitutes a default against the owner on the matters stated in the posttow
notice. The owner is responsible for all towing and storage charges incurred to
date, in the amount of: $ ________.
   After making the appropriate computations with the amounts stated above in
the right-hand column for any amount previously paid by the owner, and adding
or subtracting the appropriate amounts listed under paragraphs 1, 2, 3 or 4,
the final amount either owed by the owner to date or to be refunded to the
owner IS HEREBY ORDERED AS FOLLOWS:
Amount currently owed by owner: $ ______
or
Amount to be refunded to owner: $ _______
IMPORTANT FURTHER INFORMATION
   If the vehicle is presently still impounded, an order for the release of the
vehicle is attached to this decision. The owner must take possession of the
vehicle within twenty-four hours of the entry of this decision, or he may be
responsible for further storage charges.
ENTERED: __________________________ (date and time)
SIGNATURE: _________________________
      (Hearing Officer)
______________________________________
(star number)
(2000 Code, § 10.36.090)
§ 74.10 FORM FOR OWNER’S PERMISSION TO TOW STOLEN VEHICLE.
   The following form shall be used by police officers when obtaining
permission from vehicle owners to tow stolen vehicles that are recovered:
PERMISSION TO TOW STOLEN VEHICLE FORM
   I, _____________________(name of owner), am the owner of a motor vehicle
which I have reported to the Oak Forest Police Department as having been
stolen. The vehicle is described as follows: _________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
(description of the vehicle)
   I understand that the Oak Forest Police Department may transmit notice of
this vehicle theft to other police agencies which may attempt to recover the
vehicle. I understand that if the vehicle is recovered, I have the option of
requesting that the vehicle be towed to a vehicle pound location or left at the
place where the vehicle has been found. While not requiring the law enforcement
agency which finds the vehicle to do so, I do hereby grant my permission to
have the vehicle towed. I understand that if the vehicle is towed, I will be
required to pay reasonable towing and storage charges.
Dated: _______________, 20____.
_______________________________
Owner of Vehicle
(2000 Code, § 10.36.100)
CHAPTER 75: BICYCLES
Section
   
75.01   Registration required
   
75.02   Application for registration
   
75.03   Registration tags or stickers
   
75.04   Sales or transfers
   
75.05   Responsibility of rental agencies
   
75.06   Bicycle stores; records of sales
   
75.07   Destruction of manufacturer’s serial number
§ 75.01 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No person residing within the city shall operate or permit to be operated
any bicycle upon the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city, unless the
bicycle is registered as provided in this chapter and unless the city
registration tag or sticker is affixed in a prominent place to the bicycle.
(2000 Code, § 10.40.010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 75.02 APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION.
   All applications for a bicycle registration, or for the transfer thereof,
shall be made in writing to the City Clerk or his or her designee, on forms to
be furnished by the City Clerk, which shall state the make, serial number,
model and description of the bicycle to be registered, the name and residence
address of the owner of the bicycle, the signature of the owner, the owner’s
age, and, if the owner is under 18 years of age, the name and address of his or
her parent or guardian, the name and address of the person from whom the
bicycle was purchased and the date of purchase.
(2000 Code, § 10.40.020)
§ 75.03 REGISTRATION TAGS OR STICKERS.
   Upon receipt of an application for registration of a bicycle, the City Clerk
or his or her designee shall register the bicycle and deliver to the applicant
a registration tag or sticker to be affixed to the bicycle.
(2000 Code, § 10.40.030)
§ 75.04 SALES OR TRANSFERS.
   Upon the sale or transfer of any bicycle registered under this chapter, the
purchaser or transferee, within ten days of the date of the sale or transfer,
shall register the bicycle in his or her name in the manner provided for in the
case of an original registrant.
(2000 Code, § 10.40.040)
§ 75.05 RESPONSIBILITY OF RENTAL AGENCIES.
   A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the
bicycle is registered in accordance with this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 10.40.050) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 75.06 BICYCLE STORES; RECORDS OF SALES.
   Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or secondhand
bicycles shall make a report to the City Clerk of every bicycle purchased or
sold by that person, giving the name and address of the person from whom the
bicycle is purchased or to whom sold, and the make, serial number, model and
registration number, if any, of the bicycle.
(2000 Code, § 10.40.060)
§ 75.07 DESTRUCTION OF MANUFACTURER’S SERIAL NUMBER.
   No person shall destroy, remove, alter, cover or deface the manufacturer’s
serial number on any bicycle and no person shall own or have custody of a
bicycle if the original manufacturer’s serial number thereof has been
destroyed, removed, altered, covered or defaced.
(2000 Code, § 10.40.070) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 76: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Limited vehicular access
   
II.   Turning movements
   
III.   Stop and yield signs
SCHEDULE I. LIMITED VEHICULAR ACCESS.
   Vehicular access from the frontage referenced in Ord. 2125, passed 12-19-
1995, to 167th Street, Dan Ryan Expressway (1-57), Cicero Avenue and/or
Crawford Avenue/Pulaski Road, at locations other than the existing frontage
road termini, is prohibited.
(2000 Code, § 10.16.050A)
SCHEDULE II. TURNING MOVEMENTS.
   Left turn only (3:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m.): Southbound Oak Avenue at 160th
Street.
(Ord. 2007-11-0140O, passed 11-27-2007)
SCHEDULE III. STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Stop intersections. The following intersections shall be designated as
stop intersections:
                                                             DIRECTION STOPPED
                                                             N/B - Northbound
NORTH-SOUTH STREET EAST-WEST STREET         NUMBER STOP WAYS S/B - Southbound
                                                             E/B - Eastbound
                                                             W/B - Westbound
66th Court         147th Street             1                S/B
Albert Drive       Stuart Lane              3                N/B, S/B, E/B
Albert Drive       Edward Drive             2                W/B, E/B
Albert Drive       Victoria Drive           3                N/B, W/B, E/B
Ann Marie Drive    155th Sreet              1                S/B
Ann Marie Lane     Adeline Place            1                N/B
Arroyo Drive       157th Street             4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Arroyo Drive       Victoria Drive           4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Arroyo Drive       Rob Roy Drive            2                W/B, E/B
Arroyo Drive       Boca Rio Drive, Alameda  4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
                   Avenue, Forestview Drive
Barton Lane        Fieldcrest Drive         1                S/B
Becky Court        149th Street             3                S/B, W/B, E/B
Belle Street       Jessica Drive            1                S/B
Betty Ann Lane     155th Street             1                S/B
Blair Lane         Wagman Street            4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Boca Rio Drive     Catalina Avenue          1                S/B
Boca Rio Drive     151st Street             1                N/B
Bonnie Trial East  Jessica Drive            3                S/B, W/B, E/B
Bonnie Trial West  Jessica Drive            3                S/B, W/B, E/B
Bramblewood Drive  156th Place              3                S/B, W/B, E/B
Brenden Lane       Fieldcrest Drive         1                S/B
 
                                                        DIRECTION STOPPED
                                                        N/B - Northbound
NORTH-SOUTH STREET EAST-WEST STREET    NUMBER STOP WAYS S/B - Southbound
                                                        E/B - Eastbound
                                                        W/B - Westbound
Brenden Lane       Barry               1                W/B
Brenden Lane       Scott Street        1                N/B
Briar Lane         Rob Roy Drive       3                S/B, W/B, E/B
Briar Lane         Colina Avenue       1                W/B
Briar Lane         School Street       3                N/B, S/B, E/B
Briar Lane         Condado Drive       1                N/B
Brockton Lane      Fieldcrest Drive    1                S/B
Cental Avenue      158th Street        2                W/B, E/B
Cental Avenue      Christopher Drive   1                W/B
Central Avenue     Carol Belle Trail   1                W/B
Central Avenue     Independence Avenue 1                E/B
Central Avenue     Victoria Drive      1                E/B
Central Avenue     152nd Street        1                E/B
Central Avenue     LaPalm Drive        2                W/B, E/B
Central Avenue     Fern Avenue         2                W/B, E/B
Central Avenue     Scarborough Lane    1                W/B
Central Avenue     Adeline Place       1                W/B
Central Avenue     Leslie Lane         1                W/B
Central Avenue     Margie Lane         1                W/B
Central Avenue     Babette Court       1                W/B
Central Avenue     Mary Ann Court      1                W/B
Central Avenue     163rd Street        1                W/B
Central Avenue     Jessica Drive       1                W/B
Central Avenue     Ellen Court         1                W/B
Chaucer Drive      Victoria Drive      1                S/B
 
                                                          DIRECTION STOPPED
                                                          N/B - Northbound
NORTH-SOUTH STREET   EAST-WEST STREET    NUMBER STOP WAYS S/B - Southbound
                                                          E/B - Eastbound
                                                          W/B - Westbound
Chestnut Lane        151st Street        1                N/B
Church Lane          Westview Drive      1                N/B
Cicero Avenue        149th Street        2                W/B, E/B
Cicero Avenue        152nd Street        1                W/B
Cicero Avenue        153rd Street        2                W/B, E/B
Cicero Avenue        154th Street        1                E/B
Cicero Avenue        156th Street        2                W/B, E/B
Cicero Avenue        157th Street        1                E/B
Cicero Avenue        160th Street        1                E/B
Cicero Avenue        161st Street        1                E/B
Cicero Avenue        162nd Street        1                E/B
Cicero Avenue        163rd Street        1                E/B
Cicero Avenue        Knottingwood Avenue 1                W/B
Cicero Avenue        171st Street        1                W/B
Club Circle Drive    147th Street        1                S/B
Condado Drive        Chaucer Drive       1                W/B
Condado Drive        151st Street        1                N/B
Craig Drive          Henry Street        1                N/B
Craig Drive          Wagman Street       3                N/B, S/B, W/B
Craig Drive          Richard Avenue      4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Craig Drive          Lisa Lane           1                E/B
Craig Drive          Fieldcrest Drive    1                S/B
Crescent Green Drive 151st Street        1                N/B
Crescent Green Lane  151st Street        1                N/B
David Lane           Rob Roy Drive       1                N/B
 
                                                     DIRECTION STOPPED
                                                     N/B - Northbound
NORTH-SOUTH STREET EAST-WEST STREET NUMBER STOP WAYS S/B - Southbound
                                                     E/B - Eastbound
                                                     W/B - Westbound
Debra Drive        163rd Street     3                S/B, W/B, E/B
Debra Drive        Pamela Court     2                N/B, S/B
Debra Drive        Margie Lane      3                N/B, S/B, E/B
Debra Drive        Jamie Lane       1                W/B
Debra Drive        Leslie Lane      1                E/B
Debra Drive        159th Street     1                N/B
Duncan Road        Albert Drive     1                S/B
Duncan Road        James Drive      1                N/B
ElVista Avenue     147th Street     1                N/B
ElVista Avenue     Grange Road      1                W/B
ElVista Avenue     Fern Avenue      1                E/B
ElVista Avenue     LaPalm Drive     2                W/B, E/B
ElVista Avenue     Vine Street      2                W/B, E/B
ElVista Avenue     151st Street     1                S/B
Fielcrest Drive    Barry Lane       1                E/B
Forest Avenue      160th Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Forest Avenue      162nd Street     2                N/B, S/B
Forest Avenue      167th Street     1                N/B
Forest Avenue      Timber Court     3                N/B, S/B, E/B
Forest Avenue      Cypress Court    3                N/B, S/B, E/B
Forest Avenue      Sycamore Lane    3                N/B, S/B, E/B
George Brennan Hwy Arrowhead Trace  1                E/B
George Brennan Hwy Arrowhead Trace  1                E/B
George Drive       Terry Lane       4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Harbor Drive       Carriage Way     1                S/B
 
                                                     DIRECTION STOPPED
                                                     N/B - Northbound
NORTH-SOUTH STREET EAST-WEST STREET NUMBER STOP WAYS S/B - Southbound
                                                     E/B - Eastbound
                                                     W/B - Westbound
Harbor Drive       Daniels Lane     3                N/B, W/B, E/B
Harlem Avenue      153rd Street     1                WB
Harold Street      Henry Street     3                N/B, W/B, E/B
Hickory Lane       157th Street     3                N/B, W/B, E/B
Hillside Avenue    151st Street     1                N/B
Hillside Avenue    School Street    2                S/B, E/B
Holly Court        Diamond Drive    1                S/B
James Drive        Edward Drive     3                N/B, S/B, E/B
James Drive        Victoria Drive   4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
James Drive        Lancaster Lane   1                W/B
James Drive        Rob Roy Drive    1                N/B
Justamere Road     Conway Court     1                W/B
Kara Court         167th Street     1                N/B
Keating Avenue     155th Street     1                N/B
Kenton Avenue      151st Street     3                N/B, S/B, E/B
Kenton Avenue      152nd Street     3                N/B, S/B, E/B
Kenton Avenue      Waverly Avenue   1                S/B
Kenton Avenue      Waverly Avenue   1                S/B
Kenton Avenue      153rd Street     1                E/B
Kilbourne Avenue   152nd Street     4                Null
Kilbourne Avenue   Frontage Road    3                N/B, W/B, E/B
Kilbourne Avenue   166th Street     2                W/B, E/B
Kilpatrick Avenue  151st Street     3                N/B, S/B, E/B
Kilpatrick Avenue  152nd Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Kilpatrick Avenue  153rd Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
 
                                                      DIRECTION STOPPED
                                                      N/B - Northbound
NORTH-SOUTH STREET  EAST-WEST STREET NUMBER STOP WAYS S/B - Southbound
                                                      E/B - Eastbound
                                                      W/B - Westbound
Kilpatrick Avenue   155th Street     2                N/B, S/B
Kilpatrick Avenue   167th Street     1                N/B
Knottingwood Avenue Fieldcrest Drive 1                S/B
Knottingwood Avenue Milford Avenue   1                N/B
LaCrosse Avenue     151st Street     1                N/B
LaCrosse Avenue     153rd Street     1                S/B
Lamon Avenue        153rd Street     1                N/B
Lamon Avenue        154th Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Lamon Avenue        155th Street     2                N/B, S/B
Lamon Avenue        156th Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Lamon Avenue        157th Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Lamon Avenue        158th Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Landings Lane       151st Street     1                S/B
Landings Lane       Carriage Way     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
LaPalm Drive        Vine Street      1                S/B
LaPorte Avenue      151st Street     1                N/B
LaPorte Avenue      153rd Street     1                S/B
Laramie Avenue      147th Avenue     1                N/B
Laramie Avenue      148th Street     1                W/B
Laramie Avenue      149th Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Laramie Avenue      151st Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Laramie Avenue      152nd Street     1                W/B
Laramie Avenue      153rd Street     3                N/B, S/B, W/B
Laramie Avenue      154th Street     1                W/B
Laramie Avenue      156th Street     2                W/B, E/B
 
                                                     DIRECTION STOPPED
                                                     N/B - Northbound
NORTH-SOUTH STREET EAST-WEST STREET NUMBER STOP WAYS S/B - Southbound
                                                     E/B - Eastbound
                                                     W/B - Westbound
Laramie Avenue     155th Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Laramie Avenue     157th Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Laramie Avenue     158th Street     1                W/B
Laramie Avenue     160th Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Laramie Avenue     161st Street     1                W/B
Laramie Avenue     167th Street     1                N/B
Laramie Avenue     Bellaire Avenue  1                W/B
Laramie Avenue     Newport Drive    3                N/B, S/B, W/B
Laramie Avenue     Deerpath Road    3                N/B, S/B, W/B
Laramie Avenue     Greentree Road   1                W/B
Laramie Avenue     Hawthorne Road   1                W/B
Las Flores Lane    Rob Roy Drive    4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Las Flores Lane    School Street    2                N/B, S/B
Latrobe Avenue     157th Street     1                S/B
Latrobe Avenue     160th Street     2                N/B, S/B
Latrobe Avenue     159th Street     1                N/B
Laura Lane         Wagman Street    4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Laura Lane         Barry Lane       2                S/B, W/B
Lavergne Avenue    149th Street     3                N/B, W/B, E/B
LaVergne Avenue    151st Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
LaVergne Avenue    152nd Street     3                N/B, S/B, E/B
Lavergne Avenue    153rd Street     3                N/B, S/B, W/B
Lavergne Avenue    154th Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
LaVergne Avenue    155th Street     2                N/B, S/B
 
                                                             DIRECTION STOPPED
                                                             N/B - Northbound
NORTH-SOUTH STREET EAST-WEST STREET         NUMBER STOP WAYS S/B - Southbound
                                                             E/B - Eastbound
                                                             W/B - Westbound
LaVergne Avenue    156th Street             4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
LaVergne Avenue    157th Street             4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
LaVergne Avenue    158th Street             4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
LeClaire Avenue    149th Street             4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
LeClaire Avenue    151st Street             2                N/B, S/B
LeClaire Avenue    152nd Street             2                W/B, E/B
LeClaire Avenue    153rd Street             3                N/B, S/B, E/B
LeClaire Avenue    154th Street             3                N/B, S/B, E/B
LeClaire Avenue    156th Street             4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
LeClaire Avenue    157th Street             4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
LeClaire Avenue    158th Street             4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
LeClaire Avenue    159th Street             1                N/B
LeClaire Avenue    160th Street             4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
LeClaire Avenue    167th Street             1                N/B
LeClaire Avenue    Deerpath Avenue          4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
LeClaire Avenue    Hawthorne Avenue         3                N/B, S/B, E/B
LeClaire Avenue    159th Street             2                N/B, S/B
Linden Drive       Maple Drive, Maple Court 4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Linden Drive       Elm Lane                 3                N/B, S/B, W/B
Linder Avenue      147th Street             1                S/B
Lockridge Avenue   Fieldcrest Drive         1                S/B
Lockwood Avenue    155th Street             1                N/B
Lockwood Avenue    157th Street             3                S/B, W/B, E/B
Lockwood Avenue    159th Street             1                N/B
 
                                                             DIRECTION STOPPED
                                                             N/B - Northbound
NORTH-SOUTH STREET EAST-WEST STREET         NUMBER STOP WAYS S/B - Southbound
                                                             E/B - Eastbound
                                                             W/B - Westbound
Lockwood Avenue    160th Street             2                N/B, S/B
Lockwood Avenue    161st Street             2                N/B, S/B
Lockwood Avenue    167th Street             1                N/B
Lockwood Avenue    169th Street             3                N/B, S/B, W/B
Lockwood Avenue    170th Street             1                W/B
Lockwood Avenue    170th Place              1                W/B
Lockwood Avenue    Forest Court             3                N/B, S/B, E/B
Lockwood Avenue    Martha Lane              1                E/B
Lockwood Avenue    Judy Court               1                E/B
Lockwood Avenue    Kathleen Court           1                W/B
Lockwood Avenue    Jessica Drive            3                N/B, S/B, E/B
Lockwood Avenue    Harcourt Street          1                W/B
Lockwood Avenue    Nicholas Court           1                W/B
Lockwood Avenue    Christopher Drive        1                E/B
Long Avenue        149th Street             1                S/B
Long Avenue        147th Street             1                N/B
Long Avenue        151st Street             3                N/B, W/B, E/B
Long Avenue        155th Street             4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Long Avenue        157th Street             2                S/B, W/B
Long Avenue        159th Street             1                N/B
Long Avenue        160th Street             4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Long Avenue        Abbe Court               3                N/B, S/B, E/B
Long Avenue        Janet Court,162nd Street 4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Lorel Avenue       147th Street             1                N/B
Lorel Avenue       157th Street             1                S/B
 
                                                         DIRECTION STOPPED
                                                         N/B - Northbound
NORTH-SOUTH STREET EAST-WEST STREET     NUMBER STOP WAYS S/B - Southbound
                                                         E/B - Eastbound
                                                         W/B - Westbound
Lorel Avenue       159th Street         1                S/B
Lorel Avenue       162nd Street         2                W/B, E/B
Lorel Avenue       161st Street         2                N/B, S/B
Lorel Avenue       159th Street         1                N/B
Lorel Avenue       160th Street         2                N/B, S/B
Lynne Court        149th Street         1                N/B
Major Avenue       147th Street         1                N/B
Maple Drive        Forestview Drive     1                N/B
Massasoit Avenue   Fern Avenue          2                N/B, S/B
Massasoit Avenue   Grange Avenue        1                N/B
Meadowdale Drive   Aldersyde Road       1                N/B
Meadowdale Drive   Coulter Road         1                S/B
Menard Avenue      Caletta Terrace      4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Menard Avenue      147th Street         1                N/B
Michaele Drive     155th Street         1                S/B
Mission Avenue     151st Street         1                S/B
Mission Avenue     LaPalm Drive, LaPalm 4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
                   Court
Mission Avenue     149th Street         4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Moorings Lane      151st Street         1                S/B
Moorings Lane      Carriage Way         2                N/B, E/B
Natalie Drive      Central Avenue       1                W/B
Natalie Drive      155th Street         2                N/B, S/B
Natalie Drive      Ann Marie Lane       1                E/B
Natalie Drive      Adeline Place        1                E/B
 
                                                        DIRECTION STOPPED
                                                        N/B - Northbound
NORTH-SOUTH STREET EAST-WEST STREET    NUMBER STOP WAYS S/B - Southbound
                                                        E/B - Eastbound
                                                        W/B - Westbound
New England Avenue 156th Street        3                N/B, S/B, W/B
Oak Avenue         162nd Street        2                N/B, S/B
Oak Avenue         161st Street        4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Oak Avenue         160th Street        4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Oak Avenue         159th Street        1                N/B
Oak Park Avenue    156th Street        1                E/B
Oak Park Avenue    Westview Drive      1                E/B
Oak Park Avenue    Oak View Court      1                E/B
Oak Park Avenue    Ridge Point Drive   1                E/B
Oak Park Avenue    Winding Trail       1                E/B
Orogrande Drive    Victoria Drive      2                N/B, S/B
Oxford Drive       Chaucer Drive       4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Oxford Drive       151st Street        2                N/B, S/B
Oxford Drive       Vine Street         2                W/B, E/B
Park Avenue        LaPalm Drive        2                N/B, S/B
Park Avenue        Fern Avenue         3                N/B, S/B, W/B
Park Avenue        149th Street        3                N/B, S/B, W/B
Parkside Avenue    LaPalm Drive        2                N/B, S/B
Peggy Lane         Independence Avenue 1                N/B
Peggy Lane         159th Street        1                S/B
Pine Drive         Forestview Drive    3                N/B, W/B, E/B
Pine Drive         Linden Drive        2                N/B, S/B
Reynolds Lane      Independence Avenue 3                N/B, S/B, W/B
Reynolds Lane      Essex Road          1                E/B
Reynolds Lane      Stuart Lane         1                N/B
 
                                                     DIRECTION STOPPED
                                                     N/B - Northbound
NORTH-SOUTH STREET EAST-WEST STREET NUMBER STOP WAYS S/B - Southbound
                                                     E/B - Eastbound
                                                     W/B - Westbound
Ridgeland Avenue   Victoria Drive   4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Ridgeland Avenue   Catalina Avenue  3                N/B, S/B, W/B
Ridgeland Avenue   Elm Lane         1                E/B
Ridgeland Avenue   Forestview Drive 4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Ridgeland Avenue   Cedar Road       1                E/B
Ridgeland Avenue   ElMorro Lane     1                W/B
Ridgeland Avenue   151st Street     1                N/B
Ridgeland Avenue   157th Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Ridgewood Drive    151st Street     1                S/B
Rob Roy Drive      157th Street     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Rob Roy Drive      Victoria Drive   1                N/B
Rob Roy Drive      Chaucer Drive    3                N/B, W/B, E/B
Rob Roy Drive      159th Street     1                S/B
Scarborough Lane   Sussex Court     3                N/B, S/B, W/B
Scarborough Lane   147th Street     1                S/B
Scarborough Lane   Cromwell Lane    1                W/B
Spruce Lane        151st Street     1                N/B
Spruce Lane        Cedar Road       3                N/B, S/B, W/B
Sunset Court       147th Street     1                N/B
Terrace Drive      Liberty Square   1                N/B
Terrace Drive      159th Street     1                S/B
Terrace Drive      Corey Lane       3                N/B, W/B, E/B
Terry Lane         George Drive     4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Terry Lane         Richard Avenue   1                W/B
Tudor Drive        Victoria Drive   2                N/B, S/B
 
                                                           DIRECTION STOPPED
                                                           N/B - Northbound
NORTH-SOUTH STREET EAST-WEST STREET       NUMBER STOP WAYS S/B - Southbound
                                                           E/B - Eastbound
                                                           W/B - Westbound
Tudor Drive        Rob Roy Drive          1                N/B
Ventura Street     Forestview Drive       3                N/B, W/B, E/B
Walnut Road        Linden Drive           4                N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B
Walnut Road        Victoria Drive         1                S/B
Warwick Drive      Victoria Drive         1                S/B
Warwick Drive      Warwick Court, Rob Roy 1                N/B
                   Drive
Waverly Avenue     155th Street           3                N/B, S/B, E/B
Waverly Avenue     155th Place            2                N/B, S/B
Waverly Avenue     156th Street           1                E/B
Waverly Avenue     157th Street           1                W/B
Willow Lane        151st Street           1                N/B
Willowick Drive    Fieldcrest Drive       1                S/B
Willowick Drive    Lisa Lane              1                N/B
Woodland Drive     Laramie Avenue         1                E/B
 
   (B)   Yield intersections. The following intersections shall be designated
as yield intersections:
NORTH-SOUTH STREET EAST-WEST STREET NUMBER YIELD WAYS DIRECTION YIELD
Alameda Avenue     Boca Rio Drive   2                 N/B, S/B
Beth Court         Margie Lane      1                 N/B
Boca Rio Drive     Forestview Drive 2                 W/B, E/B
Boca Rio Drive     El Morro Lane    2                 W/B, E/B
Cherry Lane        Linden Drive     1                 N/B
Debra Drive        Aimee Court      1                 W/B, E/B
Hickory Lane       Linden Drive     1                 N/B
 
NORTH-SOUTH STREET EAST-WEST STREET    NUMBER YIELD WAYS DIRECTION YIELD
Hillside Avenue    Condado Drive       1                 W/B, E/B
Laramie Avenue     Aldersyde Road      1                 W/B, E/B
Las Robles Street  Forestview Drive    1                 N/B
LeClaire Avenue    Aldersyde Road      1                 E/B
Oak Road           Linden Drive        1                 S/B
Oak Road           Pine Drive          1                 E/B
Orchard Lane       Linden Drive        1                 N/B
Rob Roy Drive      Gainesborough Place 1                 W/B, E/B
Spruce Lane        Forestview Drive    1                 S/B
 
(Ord. 2008-08-0195O, passed 8-12-2008)
CHAPTER 77: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Prohibited parking
   
II.   Residential parking areas
   
III.   No parking this side of street
SCHEDULE I. PROHIBITED PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall park, stand or stop a motor vehicle in any of the
following areas: On the east side or west side of Central Avenue between 163rd
Street on the south and Margie Lane on the north.
   (B)   No person shall park, stand or stop a motor vehicle on 163rd Street
from Long Avenue to Central Avenue on either side of the street from 9:00 p.m.
to 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
   (C)   Parking shall not be permitted along 151st Street from Oak Park Avenue
to Chestnut Road within the city limits. Council shall prohibit future parking
at locations on or immediately adjacent to 151st Street as may be determined
and directed by the County of Cook to be necessary to ensure the free flow of
traffic and safety to the motoring public.
   (D)   No person shall park, stand or stop any motor vehicle on El Vista
Avenue from 151st Street to LaPalm Drive, or on Vine Street from Sunset Avenue
to Mission Avenue. Limits: "Resident Parking Only - No Parking on School Days
8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m."
   (E)   No person shall park, stand or stop a motor vehicle at 151st Street on
El Vista Avenue. Limits: "No Parking Here to Corner."
   (F)   No person shall park any vehicle between the signs posted on Mission
Avenue at 151st Street.
   (G)   No person shall park, stand or stop a motor vehicle from Waverly
Avenue to Cicero Avenue on the south side of 156th Street. Limits: "No Parking
Anytime."
   (H)   Parking shall not be permitted along Route 50 (Cicero Avenue) from
149th Street to Route 6 within the city limits. Council shall prohibit future
parking at locations on or immediately adjacent to Route 50 (Cicero Avenue) as
may be determined and directed by the state and the city to be necessary to
ensure the free flow of traffic and safety to the motoring public.
   (I)   No person shall park, stand or stop any motor vehicle on the north
side of 151st Street between Central Avenue and Long Avenue. Limits: "No
Parking Anytime."
   (J)   No person shall park, stand or stop any motor vehicle on Fawn Court.
Limits: "Resident Parking Only - No Parking on School Days - 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m."
   (K)   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within the areas and
in violation of the limits as indicated below: Area: North side of Waverly
Avenue between Cicero Avenue and 156th Street. Limits: "6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m."
   (L)   It is unlawful to park any vehicle not displaying a residential
parking permit, excluding service or delivery vehicles whose operators are
doing business with the residents living at these addresses, at the following
location: Chaucer Drive from Victoria Drive to Rob Roy Drive. Limits: "Resident
Parking Only - No Parking on School Days 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m."
   (M)   The area commonly described as the west side of Long Avenue from 151st
Street to Woodland Drive is designated as a "No Parking Area."
   (N)   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within the area and
in violation of the limits as indicated below: Area: Ann Marie and Natalie
Drives south of 155th Street. Limits: Posted signs on the side of the streets
where fire hydrants exist.
   (O)   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within the area and
in violation of the limits as indicated below: Area: From 15420/21 and Hickory
Lane to Victoria Drive. Limits: "No Parking Here to Corner -School Days Only."
   (P)   It is unlawful to park any vehicle not registered to a resident of
that street, excluding service or delivery vehicles whose operators are doing
business with the residents living at these addresses, at the following
location: Sunset Park and El Vista Avenues from LaPalm Drive South. Limits:
"Resident Parking Only - No Parking on School Days 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m."
   (Q)   No person shall park, stand or stop a motor vehicle from 12:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m. during school days on Long Avenue from Diamond Drive to 155th Street.
   (R)   It is unlawful to park any vehicle not registered to a resident of
that street, excluding service or delivery vehicles whose operators are doing
business with the residents living at these addresses, at the following
location: 5340 and 5350 West 146th Street.
   (S)   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within the areas and
in violation of the limits as indicated below: No parking here to corner on
both the East and West sides of Laramie Avenue from 16700 to Aldersyde.
   (T)   Parking shall not be permitted along the following streets:
      (1)   Oak from 159th Street to 160th Street;
      (2)   160th Street from Oak Street to Cicero Avenue;
      (3)   160th Street from Oak Avenue to Grove Avenue (north side); and
      (4)   Forest Avenue from 159th Street to 160th Street (east side).
   (U)   Pursuant to §
73.10. it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in the following location:
north side of Victoria Drive (between 5630 Victoria Drive and Chaucer Drive).
   (V)   Pursuant to §
73.10. it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle between the east exit and west
entrance at 5151 W. 149th Street commonly known as Ridge School. This will be
indicated by “No Parking” signs erected, installed and maintained by the
Director of Public Works.
   (W)   Pursuant to §
73.10, it shall be unlawful to park, stand or stop any vehicle on any of the
following streets during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m. Limits: “Resident Parking Only - No Parking on School Days 7:00 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.” This will be indicated by “No Parking”
signs erected, installed and maintained by the Director of Public Works.
Street Name From To
Street Name  From         To
Orchard Lane Victoria     Linden
Cherry Lane  Victoria     Linden
Hickory Lane Victoria     Linden
Walnut       Victoria     Linden
Pine Drive   Victoria     Linden
Oak Road     Victoria     Linden
Brianne Lane Victoria     Courtney
Courtney     Brianne Lane Pine Road
Pine Road    Victoria     155th Place
 
(2000 Code, § 10.28.010) (Ord. 2675, §§ 1, 2, passed - -2002; Ord. 2662, §§ 1,
2, passed - -2002; Ord. 2757, §§ 1, 2, passed - -2003; Ord. 2756, §§ 1, 2,
passed - -2003; Ord. 2731, § 2, passed - -2003; Ord. 2838, § 1, passed - -2004;
Ord. 2809, §§ 1, 2, passed - -2004; Ord. 2895, §§ 1, 2, passed - -2005; Ord.
2890, §§ 1, 2, passed - -2005; Ord. 2006-11-0070O, passed 11-28-2006; Ord.
2007-11–0134O, passed 11-13-2007; Ord. 2007-11-0138O, passed 11-27-2007; Am.
Ord. 2010-03-0284O, passed 3-23-2010; Am. Ord. 2018-07-0695, passed 7-24-2018;
Am. Ord. 2024-05-1027O, passed 5-14-2024)
SCHEDULE II: RESIDENTIAL PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   Establishment. The city creates certain residential parking areas.
These areas shall include the following:
      (1)   Mission Avenue between 151st Street and LaPalm Drive;
      (2)   Sunset Avenue between Vine Street and LaPalm Drive;
      (3)   Park Avenue between Vine Street and LaPalm Drive;
      (4)   Lamon Avenue from 155th Street on the south to 153rd Street on the
north;
      (5)   The area from 15300 to 15400 Kilpatrick Avenue;
      (6)   The area on Fern Avenue between Central and Major Avenues;
      (7)   The area on Chestnut Lane between 151st Street and Forestview
Drive;
      (8)   The area on Willow Lane between 151st Street and Forestview Drive;
      (9)   The area on Spruce Lane between 151st Street and Forestview Drive;
      (10)   Oak Avenue Commuter Lot Area Permit Parking Only Zone 2 weekdays
from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. on:
         (a)   Forest Avenue from 159th Street to 160th Street (west side
only);
         (b)   Forest Avenue from 160th Street to 162nd Street;
         (c)   Oak Avenue from 160th Street to 162nd Street;
         (d)   Grove Avenue from 159th Street to 160th Street;
         (e)   Lavergne Avenue (north and south of 160th to the terminus);
         (f)   160th Street from Oak to Lavergne (south side);
         (g)   160th Street from Grove Avenue to Laverne Avenue (north side);
and
         (h)   161st Street from Cicero to Forest Avenue;
      (11)   The area on Long Avenue between 151st and Diamond Drive;
      (12)   The area north of 155th Street on Ann Marie Drive, Betty Ann Lane,
Michaele Drive and Natalie Drive is designated as a residential parking permit
only area on school days from 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.;
      (13)   Creekside Drive and Crescent Lane are designated as residential
parking permit only areas on school days;
      (14)   Kara Court is designated as a residential parking permit zone;
      (15)   Latrobe from 157th Street to 160th Street; and
      (16)   158th Street from Laramie Avenue; and
      (17)   East side of Laramie Avenue from 158th to 159th and the north
property line of 15742 Laramie to 159th Street on the west side of Laramie
Avenue.
   (B)   Parking permits required.
      (1)   It is unlawful to park any vehicle not displaying a residential
parking permit in an area designated as a residential parking area in division
(A)(1) through (3) above, excluding service or delivery vehicles whose
operators are doing business with residents in such areas, between 8:00 a.m.
and 2:00 p.m. on days when school is in session at Oak Forest High School.
      (2)   It is unlawful for anyone to park any motor vehicle in an area
designated as a residential parking area in division (A)(4) through (17) above
unless it displays a parking permit.
   (C)   Permit issuance. The city shall issue one residential parking permit
for each vehicle bearing a current City of Oak Forest vehicle sticker and which
is based from a single-family dwelling on the street designated as a
residential parking permit area. The permits shall be restricted to use to the
vehicle for which the permit was issued.
   (D)   In addition, the city shall issue two residential parking permits for
visitors to any residence in the residential parking permit area. Visitors'
parking is limited to the time that the person driving the visiting vehicle is
actually in the residence or on the property being visited. Additional one-day
visitor's permits may be obtained from the city for special events. Any misuse
of any permits shall render them invalid and additional permits shall not be
issued to the person or household which originally held the same.
   (E)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any service or
delivery vehicle when used to provide services or to make deliveries to
residences within a residential parking permit area, provided that the parking
of the vehicle does not exceed the time the services or deliveries are being
made.
   (F)   Display of permits; limitations.
      (1)   All resident permits shall be displayed on or about the left side
of the front windshield of the vehicle so as to be easily visible from the
outside of the vehicle.
      (2)   The parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve a parking space
within the designated residential parking permit area. The permit shall not
authorize the standing or parking of any vehicle in such places as the
stopping, standing or parking of vehicles is otherwise prohibited. Nothing in
this chapter shall excuse the observance of any traffic regulation.
   (G)   (1)   If otherwise allowed by city ordinance the city may issue a
residential parking permit for motor vehicles owned by the resident's employer
and regularly used by the resident. Before issuance of a permit for such
vehicle, the city shall be provided the following proof:
         (a)   Vehicle ownership;
         (b)   A statement from the employer that the vehicle has been
permanently assigned to the resident for his or her use; and
         (c)   As a condition of the resident's employment the employee is
authorized or directed to keep the vehicle in the employee's possession.
      (2)   Supplemental documentation may be requested by the city. Nothing in
this provision is intended to nor shall it allow the parking of any vehicles
above a "B" classification.
   (H)   Permits shall be issued on an annual basis concurrent with the
issuance of municipal vehicle stickers.
   (I)   Permits shall be permanently displayed in the lower left hand corner
of the vehicle’s rear window.
   (J)   Misrepresentations; duplicate permits.
      (1)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to represent
that a vehicle is entitled to a parking permit authorized by this chapter when
it is not so entitled. The display of a parking permit on a vehicle not
entitled to a parking permit shall constitute a representation.
      (2)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to duplicate
or attempt to duplicate, by any means, a parking permit authorized by this
chapter. It shall also be a violation of this chapter for any person to display
on any vehicle a duplicate parking permit.
   (K)   Violation; penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in §
10.99 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
      (2)   In addition, the city expressly incorporates the provisions of the
city towing ordinances, specifically including, but not limited to,
Chapter 74.
(2000 Code, §§ 10.32.010 through 10.32.060) (Ord. 2676, § 2, passed - -2002;
Am. Ord. 2018-07-0695, passed 7-24-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-08-0700O, passed - -
2018)
SCHEDULE III: NO PARKING THIS SIDE OF STREET.
   Parking shall be prohibited on the following streets, as listed below, where
NO PARKING THIS SIDE OF STREET signs are posted.
Street Name Side of Street From To
Street Name     Side of Street From             To
Adele Lane      North          Craig Drive      Terry Lane
Barry Lane      North          Brenden Lane     Fieldcrest Drive
Barton Lane     East           Fieldcrest Drive Barry Lane
Blair Lane      East           Barry Lane       Henry Street
Brenden Lane    East           Fieldcrest Drive Scott Street
Brockton Lane   East           Fieldcrest Drive Barry Lane
El Vista Avenue East           147th Street     151st Street
Fern Avenue     South          Central Avenue   El Vista Avenue
George Drive    East           Warwick          Terry Lane
Grange Avenue   North          El Vista Avenue  Long Avenue
Harold Street   East           Richard Avenue   George Drive
Henry Street    North          Blair Lane       4884 Henry Street
Lapalm Court    North          Mission Avenue   cul-de-sac
Lapalm Drive    North          Central Avenue   Mission Avenue
Laura Lane      West           Barry Lane       cul-de-sac
Lisa Lane       North          Craig Drive      Terry Lane
Long Avenue     West           147th Street     149th Street
Mann Street     North          Craig Drive      Blair Lane
Mission Avenue  East           Grange Avenue    151st Street
Park Avenue     East           Grange Avenue    Vine Street
Richard Avenue  North          Craig Drive      Terry Lane
Roy Street      East           Richard Avenue   George Drive
Scott Street    North          Craig Drive      Blair Lane
Sunset Avenue   East           Fern Avenue      Vine Street
Terry Lane      East           16363 Terry Lane George Drive
Vine Street     North          Sunset Avenue    Mission Avenue
 
(Ord. 2019-09-0754O, passed 9-24-2019; Am. Ord. 2019-11-0765O, passed 11-26-
2019)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
         
91.   HEALTH AND SAFETY
         
92.   ALARM SYSTEMS
         
93.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
         
94.   FIRE CODES AND FIREWORKS
         
95.   ANIMALS
         
96.   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY
CHAPTER 90: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Section
Street and Bridge Construction
   
90.001   IDOT standard specifications for road and bridge construction; file
copies
   
90.002   Compliance required
   
90.003   Conflict of laws
Sidewalk Construction
   
90.015   Sidewalks required
   
90.016   Permit required
   
90.017   Permit applications
   
90.018   Permit fees
   
90.019   Grade and alignment standards
   
90.020   Variances
   
90.021   Grade and line required
   
90.022   Construction standards
   
90.023   Inspections
   
90.024   Occupancy permits
   
90.025   Waiver; payment to city in lieu of sidewalks
   
90.026   Sidewalk fund
Driveway Construction and Curb Cuts
   
90.040   Driveway required
   
90.041   Maximum numbered allowed
   
90.042   Driveway widths
   
90.043   Driveway grades and curbs
   
90.044   Connection to collector or arterial streets
   
90.045   Placement of driveway
   
90.046   Removal of parkway trees
   
90.047   Impervious surface limitation
   
90.048   Driveways over drainage ditches; culvert required
   
90.049   Culvert permit required
   
90.050   Grade and size
   
90.051   Materials
   
90.052   Installation
   
90.053   Change of grade prohibited
   
90.054   Refuse in culverts; obstructions to water flow
   
90.055   Notice to clean; cleaning by city
   
90.056   Application to existing culverts
   
90.057   Removal and replacement by city
   
90.058   Permit required
   
90.059   Concrete drives in residential areas
   
90.060   Asphalt drives in residential areas
   
90.061   Gravel drives
   
90.062   Aprons and accessways
   
90.063   Curb cuts
Excavations
   
90.070   Permit required; application and fee
   
90.071   Restoration of streets and surfaces; cash deposit
   
90.072   Supervision by Director of Public Works
Street and Sidewalk Use Regulations
   
90.085   Solicitation of funds by charitable organizations
   
90.086   Encroachments on Route 50 (Cicero Avenue)
Trees and Parkways
   
90.100   Purpose
   
90.101   Residential parkway standards
   
90.102   Tree removal permit
   
90.103   Tree determination
   
90.104   Tree species
   
90.105   Nuisance trees on private property
   
90.106   Pruning, right-of-way clearance of private trees
   
90.107   Violations of tree regulations
   
90.108   Interference with the city
Honorary Designation of Streets
   
90.120   Request
   
90.121   Process
   
90.122   Duration
   
90.999   Penalty
STREET AND BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION
§ 90.001 IDOT STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR ROAD AND BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION; FILE
COPIES.
   (A)   There is adopted by and for the city, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing construction and material specifications for streets and
other public ways in the city, that certain document known as Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the most current edition,
prepared and promulgated by the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT),
or any successor edition of the aforementioned publication.
   (B)   At least three copies of that document are on file with the City Clerk
for inspection by the public.
(2000 Code, § 12.04.010)
§ 90.002 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No person shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of the
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, as adopted in §
90.001 above, in the repair, improvement or construction of any street or other
public way in the city.
(2000 Code, § 12.04.020) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.003 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   (A)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, as adopted in §
90.001 above, and any provision of these codified ordinances, or any other
local ordinance or resolution, the provision of the Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction shall control.
   (B)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the
document and a provision of any other technical code adopted or referred to by
the city as a standard, the higher or stricter standard shall control.
(2000 Code, § 12.04.030)
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
§ 90.015 SIDEWALKS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Public sidewalks shall be installed on all new residential, commercial
and institutional construction.
   (B)   Sidewalks shall also be required where they do not exist on any
remodeling projects and where, in the determination of the Director of Public
Works, the interest of the city would require installation of the sidewalk.
   (C)   Sidewalks are required on the full street frontage of the lot and on
the side lot frontage on corner lots that border a public street.
   (D)   This section shall also apply to properties governed by the
subdivision regulations.
(2000 Code, § 12.08.010) (Ord. 2006-09-0054O, passed 9-12-2006)
§ 90.016 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall repair or install a public sidewalk without first obtaining
a written permit therefor from the City Building Department.
(2000 Code, § 12.08.020) (Ord. 2006-09-0054O, passed 9-12-2006) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.017 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for sidewalk repair or installation permits shall be made on
forms furnished by the city.
(2000 Code, § 12.08.030)
§ 90.018 PERMIT FEES.
   Fees for a sidewalk installation permit shall be in accordance with the
applicable building permit fees and inspection fees as prescribed in Title 15
of this code.
(2000 Code, § 12.08.040) (Ord. 2506 § 2 (part), passed - -2001; Ord. 2006-09-
0054O, passed 9-12-2006)
§ 90.019 GRADE AND ALIGNMENT STANDARDS.
   Applicants shall comply with the following standard provisions for sidewalk
construction:
   (A)   The minimum width shall be five feet;
   (B)   The minimum thickness shall be five inches with a two-inch sand or
stone cushion;
   (C)   The beginning distance from the property line shall be one foot;
   (D)   The grade shall follow a line sloping up and away from the top of the
curb at a slope of one-fourth inch per foot; and
   (E)   Concrete shall be subject to a 28-day compression test for a six-bag
mix; three to six percent air entrainment shall be 3,500 psi.
(2000 Code, § 12.08.060)
§ 90.020 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The city may authorize variances from standard sidewalk provisions set
forth in §
90.019 where no curb exists or when unusual topographical conditions, nature of
existing construction or similar factors would make adherence to the provisions
unreasonable.
   (B)   The variance shall only be approved by the Mayor and City Council.
(2000 Code, § 12.08.070) (Ord. 2506 § 2 (part), passed - -2001; Ord. 2006-09-
0054O, passed 9-12-2006)
§ 90.021 GRADE AND LINE REQUIRED.
   No sidewalk shall be installed unless a grade and line are established
therefor. If no grade or line is available, a sidewalk may be installed with an
appropriate permit. However, if or when the city establishes a grade and line,
the city may remove, modify or replace the sidewalk to conform to the grade and
line at the city’s expense.
(2000 Code, § 12.08.080) (Ord. 2006-09-0054O, passed 9-12-2006) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.022 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with details and specifications
in §
90.019 above.
(2000 Code, § 12.08.090) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.023 INSPECTIONS.
   All work shall be subject to inspection by the city during construction and
upon completion. A permittee shall notify the city after forms are set, and no
concrete shall be poured or further construction started until the forms are
approved by the city.
(2000 Code, § 12.08.100) (Ord. 2506, § 2 (part), passed - -2001)
§ 90.024 OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
   (A)   The requirements set forth in this chapter must be met before an
occupancy permit is issued by the city.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner may issue a temporary occupancy permit, as
provided for in the city’s Building Codes and regulations.
(2000 Code, § 12.08.110) (Ord. 2006-09-0054O, passed 9-12-2006)
§ 90.025 WAIVER; PAYMENT TO CITY IN LIEU OF SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Whenever, in the opinion of the city, the installation of a public
sidewalk would serve no public purpose, that requirement may be waived.
   (B)   If it is determined that the installation of a public sidewalk is
unnecessary, the owner shall, in lieu thereof, pay over to the city an amount
of money, which shall be equal to the current cost of construction of the
sidewalk based on the city’s most recent per lineal foot cost of sidewalk
installation times the lineal width of the subject lot.
(2000 Code, § 12.08.120) (Ord. 2506, § 2 (part), passed - -2001)
§ 90.026 SIDEWALK FUND.
   The City Treasurer shall establish a sidewalk fund. Moneys paid to the city
pursuant to §
90.025 above shall be deposited and held by the City Treasurer in the fund and
shall be disbursed from time to time for the purpose of installation,
improvement and repair of city sidewalks upon the direction of Council.
(2000 Code, § 12.08.130)
DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION AND CURB CUTS
§ 90.040 DRIVEWAY REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall be granted an occupancy permit under this chapter
without construction of an approved driveway connecting the street to any
garage or automobile storage facility constructed on the property for which an
occupancy permit is being issued.
   (B)   All driveways constructed shall be as specified by the Building
Commissioner.
(Ord. 2506 § 2 (part), passed - -2001; Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.041 MAXIMUM NUMBER ALLOWED.
   See
Chapter 160, Zoning, for requirements.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006; Am. Ord. 2021-03-0830O, passed 3-23-
2021)
§ 90.042 DRIVEWAY WIDTHS.
   See
Chapter 160, Zoning, for requirements.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-11-0362O, passed 11-22-
2011; Am. Ord. 2021-03-0830O, passed 3-23-2021)
§ 90.043 DRIVEWAY GRADES AND CURBS.
   (A)   Driveways shall be level with existing adjoining sidewalk grades.
   (B)   Where it is necessary to saw, cut or break the existing curb for the
driveway opening, the curb and gutter shall be completely removed and a new
section constructed.
   (C)   Each such driveway shall be constructed and maintained so as to permit
free and unobstructed passage in such a manner as not to interfere with the
proper drainage of the streets.
   (D)   Gradual approaches to the regular sidewalk grade shall be one inch
above the gutter slab.
   (E)   The slope of the driveway and to the approaches thereto shall not
exceed a six percent slope in any direction.
   (F)   Each such driveway shall be constructed and maintained so that its
surface, at the point of crossing any sidewalk pavement, shall be flush with
the adjoining sections of the sidewalk.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.044 CONNECTION TO COLLECTOR OR ARTERIAL STREETS.
   (A)   Driveways connecting to collector or arterial streets must provide an
on-site turn around.
   (B)   Where a lot fronts both a local street and a collector or arterial
street, no driveways shall be installed along the property line of the lot that
fronts the arterial or collector street
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.045 PLACEMENT OF DRIVEWAY.
   At no time shall any portion of a driveway be closer to a side property line
than one foot.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.046 REMOVAL OF PARKWAY TREES.
   (A)   At no time shall any parkway tree be removed to allow for the
installation or portion thereof, of any driveway; provided, however, that the
property owner may request in writing that the Mayor and City Council waive
this prohibition upon a finding of undue hardship.
   (B)   Where an undue hardship is determined, in the sole and absolute
discretion, by the Mayor and City Council, this provision may be waived, for
removal of the tree.
   (C)   The Mayor and City Council may require that the property owner:
      (1)   Reimburse the city for the current fair market value of the tree
that is removed; or
      (2)   Replace the parkway tree with the same or similar species with
approximately the same caliper width.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.047 IMPERVIOUS SURFACE LIMITATION.
   Any new driveway, or additions to an existing driveway shall conform to the
drainage requirements as set forth in §§
152.30 through
152.37 of this code.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.048 DRIVEWAYS OVER DRAINAGE DITCHES; CULVERT REQUIRED.
   No person shall construct or maintain a private drive or roadway from any
public street in the city over or across any drainage ditch now or hereafter
existing, unless he or she installs and maintains a culvert thereunder in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.049 CULVERT PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall install a culvert under any private drive or roadway unless
a permit therefor is first applied for and obtained from the Director of Public
Works.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.050 GRADE AND SIZE.
   Upon an application for a permit required by §
90.049, the Director of Public Works or the City Engineer shall forthwith
establish the grade for and prescribe the size of the proposed culvert.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.051 MATERIALS.
   Every culvert shall be of a size determined by the Director of Public Works
to be adequate to permit the free flow of water in a ditch and shall be
corrugated galvanized steel, reinforced concrete, cast iron or such other
material that meets with the approval of the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.052 INSTALLATION.
   Every culvert shall be installed in conformity with the flow of a ditch and
in a manner prescribed by the Director of Public Works so it will not impede
the normal flow of water in the ditch and so there will be no stagnant water
standing or retained behind it.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.053 CHANGE OF GRADE PROHIBITED.
   No person installing a culvert shall change the grade of the ditch in which
the culvert is being installed from the grade established and prescribed by the
Director of Public Works or the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.054 REFUSE IN CULVERTS; OBSTRUCTIONS TO WATER FLOW.
   Any person who maintains a private drive or roadway across any ditch into
premises owned or occupied by him or her shall keep the culvert thereunder
clean and free from all refuse and matter which may impede the free flow of
water in the ditch.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.055 NOTICE TO CLEAN; CLEANING BY CITY.
   (A)   If a culvert becomes plugged or clogged, the owner or occupant of the
property into which a private drive or roadway over the culvert leads shall be
notified to clean the same within 24 hours after notification. The notification
shall be made in writing and may be served by delivering the same to the owner
or occupant personally or by posting the same on the premises.
   (B)   If the owner or occupant fails to clean the culvert within 24 hours
after notification, the city shall cause the culvert to be cleaned and shall
charge all expenses of such cleaning to the owner or occupant.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.056 APPLICATION TO EXISTING CULVERTS.
   If an existing culvert under any private drive or roadway fails to comply
with this chapter, or impedes the free flow of water in the ditch in which it
is installed, the owner or occupant of the property into which the drive or
roadway leads, upon notice from the city, shall install a proper culvert in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.057 REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT BY CITY.
   Any existing culvert that has been approved as to size, material and
location by the city and any such culvert hereafter approved as to size,
material and location by the city, which subsequently is ordered to be removed
by the city, shall be removed and replaced at the sole expense of the city.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.058 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall repair or install a driveway, or any addition to an existing
driveway, without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the City
Building Department.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.059 CONCRETE DRIVES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide specifications for
materials and construction of concrete drives in all residentially zoned
districts.
   (B)   General specifications. Materials and construction for residential
drives shall conform to § 406, Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, Illinois Department of Transportation, most current edition,, or
any successor edition thereto, except as stated in divisions (C) through (E)
below.
   (C)   Materials.
      (1)   Aggregate. The stone aggregate shall conform to § 704 of the
standard specifications, except as follows:
         (a)   The gradation of the stone shall be CA6 or CA7, that is “State
Road Mix;”
         (b)   No pea gravel, chips or tunnel rock shall be allowed; and
         (c)   No slag shall be used; only limestone is permitted.
      (2)   Concrete. Concrete driveways shall be constructed with a minimum of
six sacks of cement per cubic yard. The minimum compressive strength of 4,000
psi at 28 days, maximum size aggregate of one inch, air entrainment of 6% plus
1%, maximum slump of four inches, maximum water content including moisture in
the aggregate of six gallons per sack of cement, and all concrete shall contain
a water-reducing admixture with no reduction in cement content permitted.
   (D)   Thickness.
      (1)   Aggregate base. The aggregate base shall be a minimum of two inches
thick.
      (2)   Concrete. The concrete for a driveway, other than the apron, shall
be a minimum of four inches thick with reinforcement or five full inches thick
without reinforcement. The apron shall consist of a full seven inches with no
reinforcement.
   (E)   Forms. Side forms shall be of lumber of not less than two inches
nominal thickness or steel of equal rigidity. The minimum depth of the side
forms shall be equal to the driveway thickness. No two-inch by four-inch lumber
forms shall be permitted. Forms shall be held securely in place by stakes or
braces with the top edge true to line and grade.
   (F)   Expansion joints. Expansion joints of the thickness specified below
shall consist of a premolded filler strip with the top strip placed one-fourth
inch below the surface of the driveway. One-half inch thick expansion joints
shall be provided at the junction of the driveway apron and the sidewalk and at
the junction of the driveway apron and the curb.
   (G)   Backfill. After the concrete has been cured, forms shall be removed
and the space near the edges of the driveway shall be backfilled to the
required elevation and the material shall be compacted until firm and the
surface evenly graded.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.060 ASPHALT DRIVES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide specifications for
materials and construction of asphalt drives in residentially zoned districts.
   (B)   General specifications. Materials and construction for residential
drives shall conform to § 406, Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, Illinois Department of Transportation, adopted October 1, 1983,
as amended, except as stated in divisions (C) to (E) below.
   (C)   Materials.
      (1)   Aggregate. The stone aggregate shall conform to § 704 of the
standard specifications, except as follows:
         (a)   The gradation of the stone shall be CA6, that is “State Road
Mix;”
         (b)   No pea gravel, chips or tunnel rock shall be allowed; and
         (c)   No slag shall be used; only limestone is permitted.
      (2)   Bituminous asphalt. The bituminous asphalt surface course shall be
Class 1, Mixture C, modified in accordance with §§ 406 and 704.03 of the
standard specifications, except that CA16 aggregate gradation shall be used.
The asphalt cement shall be AC WO to 120, that is a “State Fine Mix.”
   (D)   Thickness.
      (1)   Aggregate base. The crushed stone aggregate base shall be eight
inches thick.
      (2)   Bituminous asphalt surface course. The surface course shall be two
inches thick.
   (E)   Construction.
      (1)   Sub-base preparation.
         (a)   The overdig of the foundation in front of a garage door shall be
backfilled with crushed stone. No clay or black dirt shall be used as backfill.
The backfill shall be hand tamped.
         (b)   The drive area shall be cleared of all construction debris,
drywall, wood, loose clay and black dirt. Should the sub-base need to be
brought to grade, no clay backfill is allowed. Any sub-base overdig shall be
filled with stone.
         (c)   The sub-base shall be rolled and compacted to a distance of one
foot beyond the width of the drive. The sub-base must be dry, so that no sub-
base material sticks to the roller.
      (2)   Aggregate base. The crushed stone aggregate shall be placed in two
four-inch lifts, compacted after each lift. The contractor shall wet each lift
before rolling.
      (3)   Asphalt surface course.
         (a)   The asphalt surface shall be placed in one two-inch lift.
         (b)   The surface shall be rolled smooth such as to leave no roller
marks.
         (c)   Care shall be taken to hand tamp and roll next to walks and
garage apron areas.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.061 GRAVEL DRIVES.
   No existing gravel driveway shall be enlarged, altered or otherwise changed
without the property owner:
   (A)   Obtaining a permit, as required by the chapter; and
   (B)   Constructing any such enlargement, alteration or change in conformity
with the standards set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.062 APRONS AND ACCESSWAYS.
   (A)   Aprons or other accessways constructed from the edge of the pavement
of a curbed city street across public and/or private property to serve
residential, commercial or other purposes can be of asphalt, concrete or brick
paver materials. Any material installed in the apron of other than plain
concrete or plain asphalt will be installed at the owner's risk. An apron or
accessway of an alternate material such as brick paver, stamped, colored or
aggregate concrete or stamped asphalt will require a waiver from the owner
releasing and absolving the city of any responsibility or liability in
connection with the apron or accessway. The waiver must be signed by owner at
time of building permit procurement. New driveway and apron or replacement of
driveway and apron shall be of the same material.
   (B)   The concrete and any supporting material shall conform with the
concrete specifications as listed in §
90.059 above. Concrete shall not be poured prior to inspection.
   (C)   The asphalt and any supporting material shall conform with the asphalt
specifications as listed in §
90.060 above. Asphalt shall not be poured prior to inspection.
   (D)   The brick pavers and any supporting material shall conform with ASTM C
902 Standard Specification for Pedestrian and Light Traffic Paving Brick. Brick
pavers shall not be installed prior to inspection.
   (E)   Public sidewalk construction must follow §
90.015 above. Public sidewalks must be of plain concrete and separate of apron
and driveway.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006; Am. Ord. 2010-08-0303O, passed 8-10-
2010)
§ 90.063 CURB CUTS.
   (A)   No person shall cut, break or change the stoop or slope of any curb in
the city without the prior approval of the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall suffer the forfeiture of his or her building bond or bonds.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 90.070 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEE.
   (A)   No person shall make any opening, excavation or tunnel in any public
street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place in the city without
first obtaining a permit therefor.
   (B)   Applications for such a permit shall be made to the City Clerk and
shall specify the intended location and purpose of the excavation.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall immediately notify the Director of Public Works
of the application for the permit.
   (D)   The fee for the permit is $100.
   (E)   The city may waive this fee upon written request provided that the
excavation is in the best interests of the City of Oak Forest.
(2000 Code, § 12.16.010) (Ord. 2506 § 2 (part), 2001) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.071 RESTORATION OF STREETS AND SURFACES; CASH DEPOSIT.
   (A)   Each applicant shall restore a street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or
other public place, and the surface thereof, to the condition that existed
before an opening, excavation or tunnel was made.
   (B)   The applicant shall do all necessary backfilling or cause the same to
be done.
   (C)   All backfilling shall be done with care and caution and only bank or
lake sand shall be used as backfill. After the backfilling has been properly
done, any material excavated or not used shall be removed from the location of
the excavation to the places as the Director of Public Works directs.
   (D)   In restoring the street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public
place, the city may use its own employees and equipment and make reasonable
charges therefor, or it may engage the services of other persons and equipment
and charge the cost thereof to the applicant.
   (E)   Applicants not restoring a street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other
public place shall be liable for all restoration costs and shall be fined $100
per day from the date specified in written notice from the city.
(2000 Code, § 12.16.020) (Ord. 2506 § 2 (part), passed - -2001)
§ 90.072 SUPERVISION BY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   All openings, excavations, tunnels, refills and resurfacing in the city
shall be made under the supervision of the Director of Public Works.
(2000 Code, § 12.16.030) Penalty, see §
90.999
STREET AND SIDEWALK USE REGULATIONS
§ 90.085 SOLICITATION OF FUNDS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   All religious or charitable organizations seeking to solicit funds on
streets in the city must hereafter this date complete a permit application
available at City Hall or on the city's web site. This permit application must
be completed in its entirety, dated and signed by an officer of the religious
or charitable organization seeking to solicit funds in the city.
   (B)   Any religious or charitable organization seeking to solicit funds on
streets in the city must also provide a not-for-profit certificate issued by
the Attorney General of the State of Illinois, as well as a certificate of
insurance with an appropriate level of insurance as noted on the permit
application.
   (C)   The religious or charitable organization must submit the permit
application, not-for-profit certificate and certificate of insurance to the
Mayor or his or her designee. All solicitation on public roadways in the city
must comply with the following provisions:
      (1)   A soliciting person or agency shall be registered with the Illinois
Attorney General as a charitable organization, as provided by ILCS Ch. 225, Act
460, §§ 1 et seq., An Act to Regulate Solicitations and Collection of Funds for
Charitable Purposes. The soliciting person or agency must be engaged in
statewide fund raising activity and will be liable for any injuries to any
person or property during the solicitation which is causally related to an act
of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent.
      (2)   No person shall stand on a roadway for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle except after receiving a fully
executed permit from the city.
      (3)   No religious or charitable organization will be given a permit to
solicit for more than two 12- hour periods on roadways in the city in any
calendar year (January - December).
      (4)   No more than one permit shall be issued by the city for the same
date at the same intersection. Applications will be treated on a first come,
first served basis.
      (5)   Solicitations shall only be conducted at traffic control
intersections when traffic has come to a full stop during the hours of
daylight, but in no event earlier than 7:00 a.m. in the morning or later than
7:00 p.m. in the evening.
      (6)   Any person engaged in the act of soliciting on a public roadway
shall be 16 years of age or more and wear a high visibility yellow or orange
safety vest and clear identification of the organization undertaking the
solicitation.
      (7)   Solicitors may only solicit an behalf of a permitted organization
and such solicitation may only occur during a charitable solicitation event.
      (8)   Solicitors shall not approach a moving vehicle or one that does not
have a window down and an occupant has given some sign of assent to approach.
      (9)   Solicitors shall only enter the roadway while the traffic signal
for that lane is red and shall not enter the roadway while traffic is moving.
      (10)   No solicitor shall at any time enter or remain in the traveled
portion of the roadway or solicit in a manner which impedes the flow of
traffic.
      (11)   No person shall solicit in the public right-of-way at any time or
place not designated in the application permit under which the person is
conducting the solicitation.
      (12)   Any violation of the provisions of this section or extraordinarily
adverse weather conditions will constitute a reason for the city to cease all
soliciting activities.
   (D)   The permit application, not-for-profit certificate and certificate of
insurance must be submitted to the Mayor's office at least 30 calendar days
before the requested date(s) of solicitation. The city will have seven calendar
days to either approve or reject the request for solicitation.
   (E)   The provisions of this application process will encourage religious
and charitable organizations to make their plans to solicit funds on roadways
in the city well in advance of their requested date(s). It will also allow
proper processing of requests by the municipality, afford an equal opportunity
to all those religious and charitable organizations that wish to solicit funds
in the city, and promote activities that result in the safer solicitation of
funds on crowded public roadways.
(2000 Code, § 12.20.020) (Am. Ord. 2011-09-0352O, passed 9-27-2011) Penalty,
see §
90.999
§ 90.086 ENCROACHMENTS ON ROUTE 50 (CICERO AVENUE).
   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall install, place, maintain
or construct any structure that encroaches upon the state right-of-way on Route
50 (Cicero Avenue) within the limits of the city.
(2000 Code, § 12.20.030) Penalty, see §
90.999
TREES AND PARKWAYS
§ 90.100 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the proper parkway
standards and establishment of new trees, the protection and maintenance of
existing trees and the timely removal of hazardous or infectious diseased trees
on both public and private property.
   (B)   It is further intended to balance the property rights of individual
property owners with those of the overall health, safety and welfare interests
of the city. Trees enhance and preserve the air quality of the city through the
filtering effect of trees on air pollutants, reduce noise within the city
through the baffle and barrier effect of trees on the spread of noise, reduce
topsoil erosion through the soil retention effect of tree roots, reduce energy
consumption through the wind break and shade effects, provide nesting areas for
birds and other wildlife which in turn assist in the control of insects, reduce
storm water runoff and the costs associated therewith, replenish ground water
supplies and protect and increase property values.
(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)
§ 90.101 RESIDENTIAL PARKWAY STANDARDS.
   All uses which require site plan or special use approval shall install and
maintain trees along any parkway which abuts the perimeter of the property.
   (A)   The parkway shall be grass or low ground cover, except where covered
by driveway pavement. A minimum of one parkway tree per 40 feet of frontage is
required for all development.
   (B)   The use of loose stone, rock, or gravel is prohibited on public
parkways.
   (C)   Other than trees, no landscaping shall be taller than two feet.
   (D)   No tree or bush with a mature height of more than two feet shall be
planted within a distance of 33 feet of any street corner, measured from the
point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines as extended. No tree
shall be planted closer than six feet of any fire hydrant.
   (E)   Trees shall be planted on the center line of parkways or as close to
five feet from the sidewalk as possible and located so as not to interfere with
overhead wires or traffic or pedestrian safety.
   (F)   A minimum parkway width of four feet is required for trees in a
parkway.
   (G)   Wherever feasible, parkway trees shall be planted on the public
parkway and not on the private property side of the sidewalk.
   (H)   Parkway trees shall consist of shorter trees if overhead utilities
exist. Otherwise, taller trees are required as shown in the following list. No
species shall comprise more than 30% of the overall parkway tree count for new
development. A mixture of trees shall be planted whenever feasible.
   (I)   No person shall attach any object to a parkway tree.
(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)
§ 90.102 TREE REMOVAL PERMIT.
   No person shall remove or cut down any tree or shrub in any street, parkway
or other public place without first securing a permit from the Department of
Public Works. Any permit authorizing removal may be subject to such conditions
as the Director of Public Works or his or her designee may deem necessary or
appropriate to minimize damage to other trees or vegetation on a site, and may
include the installation of protective fencing.
(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)
§ 90.103 TREE DETERMINATION.
   The city shall designate a specified list of trees to be planted within the
city limits, only trees on this list have been approved. The Public Works
Director or his or her designee may from time to time allow deviation from this
list at his or her sole discretion.
(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)
§ 90.104 TREE SPECIES.
   Shade Trees Allowed in Parkways
   No Overhead Utilities
   Minimum 2.5 Caliper
   Native to Illinois
Buckeye, Ohio Aesculus glabra
Baldcypress Taxodium distichum
Catalpa Catalpa speciosa
Coffeetree, Kentucky Gymnocladus dioicus
Hackberry, Common Celtis occidentalis
Hickory, Bitternut Carya cordiformis
Hickory, Shagbark Carya ovata
Honeylocust, Thornless Gleditsia triacanthos
Horsechestnut, Common Aesculus hippocastanum
Ironwood Carpinus caroliniana
Linden, Beetree Tilia heterophylla
Maple, Black Acer nigrum
Maple, Freeman Acer x freemani
Maple, Red Acer rubrum
Maple, Sugar Acer saccharum
Oak, Black Quercus velutina
Oak, Bur Quercus macrocarpa
Oak, Chestnut Quercus prinus
Oak, Chinkapin Quercus muehlenbergii
Oak, Red Quercus rubra
Oak, Schumard Quercus shumardii
Oak, Shingle Quercus imbricaria
Oak, Swamp White Quercus bicolor
Oak, White Quercus alba
Pecan Carya illinoensis
Persimmon, Common Diospyros virginiana
Oak, English Quercus robur
Sassafras, Common Sassafras albidum
Oak, Sawtooth Quercus acutissima
Serviceberry, Allegheny Amelanchier laevis
Serviceberry, Downy Amelanchier arborea
Sourgum (Black Tupelo) Nyssa sylvatica
Pear, Callery Pyrus calleryana
Sycamore Platanus occidentalis
Serviceberry, Apple Amelanchier x grandiflora
Yellowwood Cladrastis kentukea
   Shade Trees Allowed in Parkways
   No Overhead Utilities
   Minimum 2.5 caliper
   Non-native to Illinois
Buckeye, Yellow Aesculus flava
Catalpa, Chinese Catalpa ovata
Cherry, Amur Chokeberry Prunus maackii
Cherry, Sargent Prunus sargentii
Chestnut, Chinese Castanea mollissima
Corktree, Amur Phellodendron amurense
Elm, English Ulmus procera
Elm, Homestead Ulmus x 'Homestead'
Elm, Chinese or Lacebark Ulmus parvifolia
Elm, Regal Ulmus x 'Regal'
Filbert, Turkish Corylus colunia
Ginkgo Gingko biloba
Holly, American Ilex opaca
Lilac, Japanese Tree Syringa reticulata
Linden, Bigleaf Tilia platyphyllos
Linden, American (Basswood) Tilia americana
Linden, Silver Tilia tomentosa
Lily of the Valley, Sourwood Oxydendrum arboreum
Maple, Hedge or Field Acer campestre
Maple, Miyabe Acer miyabei
Maple, Norway Acer platanoides
Maple, Purpleblow Acer truncatum
Maple, Sycamore or Planetree Acer pseudoplatanus
Maple, Tartarian Acer tataricum
Oak, English Quercus robur
Oak, Sawtooth Quercus acutissima
Pagoda-tree, Japanese Sophora japonica
Pear, Callery Pyrus calleryana
Serviceberry, Apple Amelanchier x grandilora
Serviceberry, Shadblow Amelanchier canadensis
Sweetgum, (Liquidamber sp.) Liquidambar styraciflua
   Shade Trees Allowed in Parkways
   With Overhead Utilities
   Minimum 2.5 caliper
   Native to Illinois
Buckeye, Red Aesculus x carnea
Crabapple, variety Malus
Fringetree, White Chionanthus virginicus
Ironwood Carpinus caroliniana
Viburnum, Blackhaw Viburnum prunifolium
   Shade Trees Allowed in Parkways
   With Overhead Utilities
   Minimum 2.5 caliper
   Non-native to Illinois
Dogwood, Cornelian-cherry Cornus mas
Hawthorn, Thornless Cockspur Crataegus crusgalli
(thornless)
Lilac, Pekin Syringa pekinensis
Lilac, Japanese Tree Syringa reticulata
Maple, Amur Acer ginnala
Maple, Hedge Acer campestre
Pear, Autumn Blaze Pyrus calleryana
Pear, Chanticleer Callery Pyrus calleryana
Redbud, (Northern selection) Cercis canadensis
Serviceberry, Apple Amelanchier x grandiflora
Smoketree, Common Cotinus coggygria
Viburnum, Siebold Viburnum sieboldii
Zelkova, Japanese Zelkova serrata
   Prohibited Trees
The following trees are prohibited in parkways and parking lot landscaping due
to disease potential and invasive nature.
All Ash (green, white, blue and all their varieties)
Fraxinus
Boxelder Acer negundo
Cottonwood, Eastern Populous deltoides
Tree of Heaven Ailanthus altissima
Willow Salix
Siberian Elm Ulmis pumila
Maple, Silver Acer sacchiarinum
(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)
§ 90.105 NUISANCE TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The city, in accordance with the law, shall have the right to cause the
removal of any dead, diseased, or trees that are deemed a nuisance on private
property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and
property, or harbor insects or disease which constitutes a potential threat to
other trees within the city. The city will notify in writing the owners of such
trees. Removal is the responsibility of said owners and shall be done by the
owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice
or such other time as may be agreed upon by the city and the property owner. In
the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall
have the authority to remove such trees and file a lien against the property
for the amount of the costs of removal.
(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)
§ 90.106 PRUNING, RIGHT-OF-WAY CLEARANCE OF PRIVATE TREES.
   Every owner of any privately owned tree overhanging any street or right-of-
way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not
obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear
space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners
shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous privately owned trees, or broken
or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The
city, in accordance with the law, shall have the right to prune any tree or
shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light
along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any
traffic control device or sign.
(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)
§ 90.107 VIOLATIONS OF TREE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Whoever violates this subchapter, in addition to any other fines, or
fees, shall be subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   Fines: first offense, $500; second offense, $1,000; third and
subsequent offense, $2,500.
      (2)   All violations that are committed by the same person or any firm
controlled by such person shall be counted, regardless of whether or not the
violations occur at the same time. Any finding or plea of guilty or plea of "no
contest" upon a citation shall be deemed a violation.
   (B)   Any entity or person who injures a public tree shall be held
responsible for the costs of repairs, such as pruning or cabling, if the
injured tree will not die as a result of such injuries. In cases where the tree
has been damaged beyond repair and cannot remain in the public right-of-way,
the entity or person responsible for the damage shall remove the tree and stump
at their own costs, or if the tree is an immediate hazard, the entity or person
shall pay the cost the city incurs in its removal.
   (C)   In addition to any fines that may be assessed for violation of this
section, the person shall pay to the city a sum equal to the value or partial
value of the tree lost as a result of the violation. The value or partial value
of the tree lost shall be as determined by the Department of Public Works using
the most current edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal prepared by the
Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, and edited, published and copyrighted
by the International Society of Arboriculture. Various factors used in the tree
value calculations for northern Illinois shall be obtained from the most
current edition of the Species Ratings and Appraisal Factors for Illinois
prepared by the Illinois Arborist Association. The collection of this fee shall
be used by the city for the replacement of the damaged or destroyed tree. Any
remaining funds after the damaged or destroyed tree has been replaced will be
deposited into a tree planting fund to be administered by the Director of
Public Works.
   (D)   If the entity or person cannot pay the fines and fees, a lien shall be
placed against the property.
(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)
§ 90.108 INTERFERENCE WITH THE CITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
city or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park
trees, or dead, nuisance, or diseased trees on private grounds.
(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)
HONORARY DESIGNATION OF STREETS
§ 90.120 REQUEST.
   (A)   Every request for the honorary designation of a street shall be
presented in writing to the City Clerk.
   (B)   All requests must include the following information:
      (1)   Name of the person, organization or entity to be honored;
      (2)   The humanitarian, civic, community or other reasons which make the
honor appropriate; and
      (3)   The name, address and phone number of the person submitting the
request.
   (C)   The request shall also be accompanied by either a petition signed by
occupants of at least 75 residential locations within the city or a memorandum
submitted by at least three aldermen or the Mayor.
(2000 Code, § 12.28.010) (Ord. 2632 § 1, passed --2002)
§ 90.121 PROCESS.
   After receipt and review of the application to determine compliance with the
request criteria the City Clerk shall forward the request to the City Council
for consideration and approval.
(2000 Code, § 12.28.020) (Ord. 2632, § 2, passed --2002)
§ 90.122 DURATION.
   (A)   If approved, the honorary designation shall be placed and maintained
until the end of the calendar year following approval.
   (B)   At the end of this time the honorary sign shall be removed and
delivered to the family of the honored party.
(2000 Code, § 12.28.030) (Ord. 2632 § 3, passed --2002)
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
§§
90.001 through
90.003 shall suffer the forfeiture of his or her building bond or bonds.
(2000 Code, § 12.04.040)
   (C)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of §§
90.015 through
90.026 shall suffer the forfeiture of his or her building bond or bonds.
(2000 Code, § 12.08.140)
   (D)   Whoever violated or fails to comply with any of the provisions of §§
90.040 through
90.055 shall suffer the forfeiture of his or her building bond or bonds.
(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)
   (E)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of §§
90.070 through
90.072 shall suffer the forfeiture of his or her building bond or bonds.
(2000 Code, § 12.16.040)
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
Health and Safety Regulations Generally
   
91.001   Adoption of State Department of Public Health rules and regulations by
reference
   
91.002   Regulation of contagious disease
   
91.003   Notice and report of contagious disease
   
91.004   Insect and rodent control
   
91.005   Use of utensils and towels in public places
   
91.006   Dangerous buildings and premises
   
91.007   Swimming pools
   
91.008   Barbershops and beauty salons
   
91.009   Campgrounds and facilities
   
91.010   Landlord-tenant services
   
91.011   Fireworks
   
91.012   Unwholesome food
   
91.013   Cemeteries
Lock Boxes
   
91.025   Lock boxes required
   
91.026   Specifications
   
91.027   Contents
   
91.028   Compliance of existing and new buildings
   
91.029   Current keys required
Mobile Intensive Care Unit
   
91.040   Definitions
   
91.041   Establishment of unit
   
91.042   Responsibility of probationary appointees
   
91.043   Extension of probationary period
   
91.044   Length of service
   
91.045   Management and control
   
91.046   Co-directors
   
91.047   Termination of employment
International Property Maintenance Code
   
91.060   International Property Maintenance Code
Implementation of Smoke Free Illinois Act
   
91.075   Definitions
   
91.076   Smoking prohibited in public places and places of employment
   
91.077   Exemptions
   
91.078   Designation of other no-smoking areas
   
91.079   Responsibilities of proprietors
   
91.080   Enforcement
Vacant Building and Registry Regulations
   
91.090   Declaration of policy
   
91.091   Other ordinances
   
91.092   Definitions
   
91.093   Determination
   
91.094   Appeal of determination
   
91.095   Obligation to register
   
91.096   Approval of plan
   
91.097   Authority to modify plan, right of appeal
   
91.098   Failure to comply with plan
   
91.099   Other enforcement
   
91.100   Certification
   
91.101   Boarding of buildings
   
91.102   Enforcement
   
91.999   Penalty
HEALTH AND SAFETY REGULATIONS GENERALLY
§ 91.001 ADOPTION OF STATE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH RULES AND REGULATIONS BY
REFERENCE.
   (A)   The Rules and Regulations for the Control of Communicable Diseases,
adopted July 1, 1970, as amended, of the State Department of Public Health, or
any applicable successor rules and regulations thereto, are made a part of this
chapter and shall be enforced by the City Health Commission. Where there is a
conflict between any of those rules and regulations and a provision of this
chapter, the stricter standard shall govern.
   (B)   Three copies of the rules and regulations adopted herein shall be kept
on file for public use, inspection and examination at the office of the City
Clerk.
(2000 Code, § 8.04.010)
§ 91.002 REGULATION OF CONTAGIOUS DISEASE.
   (A)   No person or thing liable to propagate cholera, smallpox, yellow
fever, diphtheria, typhoid fever or other contagious or infectious disease
shall be brought or shall come into the city without a special permit and
direction from the City Health Commissioner. Whenever it comes to the attention
of any other person that a person or thing has been brought or has come into
the city, he or she shall immediately give notice thereof to the City Health
Commissioner, a City Health Commission member, a city police officer or one of
the aldermen of the city, together with the location thereof.
   (B)   No person shall, within the city, without a permit from the City
Health Commissioner or a member of the City Health Commission, carry or remove
from one building to another any person afflicted with a contagious disease or
move from one building to another himself or herself if he or she is afflicted
with a contagious disease.
   (C)   No person afflicted with a contagious disease shall be shipped or
removed from the city to any other place, except under the charge and direction
of the City Health Commissioner or a member of the City Health Commission, and
with proper precaution against the spread of contagion.
   (D)   No person, by an exposure of any individual sick of any contagious or
infectious disease, or by an exposure of the body of a dead person, or by a
negligent act connected therewith or with respect to the care or custody
thereof, or by a needless exposure of himself or herself when sick and not
fully recovered, shall cause, contribute to or promote the spread of disease
from any such person or from any dead body.
(2000 Code, § 8.04.020) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.003 NOTICE AND REPORT OF CONTAGIOUS DISEASE.
   Anyone within the city in whose dwelling there occurs a case of cholera,
typhoid fever, diphtheria, smallpox or other contagious or infectious disease,
shall immediately notify the City Health Commissioner, a member of the City
Health Commission or a city police officer. Until instructions are received
from the Commissioner or member, no clothing or property that may have been
exposed to the infection shall be removed from the house, nor shall any
occupant of the infected dwelling change his or her residence without the
consent of the commissioner or member during the prevalence of any public
danger from the disease. All physicians or other persons who attend a person
sick with smallpox, typhoid fever, diphtheria or other disease dangerous to the
public health shall forthwith report the same to the Commissioner and the
Commissioner shall at once notify the State Board of Health of the existence of
such disease and shall cause a full report to be made to the Cook County
Department of Public Health upon the blank forms furnished for the purpose.
(2000 Code, § 8.04.030) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.004 INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL.
   (A)   The City Health Commissioner shall supervise any insect and rodent
control program instituted or maintained by the city.
   (B)   Sections ES-301.4 (Insect and Rat Control), ES-303.6 (Insect and Rat
Harborage) and ES-802.0 (Extermination) of the BOCA National Existing
Structures Code, most current edition, or any successor edition of the
aforementioned publication, are made a part of this chapter and shall be
enforced by the City Health Commission.
(2000 Code, § 8.04.040) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.005 USE OF UTENSILS AND TOWELS IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall maintain any common drinking cup, dipper or similar
utensil, for the use of more than one person, in any public hall, theater,
store or other place frequented by the public.
   (B)   No person shall maintain in or about any public lavatory or washroom
any towel for common use. The term COMMON USE, as used in this section, shall
be construed to mean by more than one person.
(2000 Code, § 8.04.050) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.006 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND PREMISES.
   (A)   No person shall permit any building, structure or place to be or
remain in such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health in any way.
Any such building, structure or place is declared to be a nuisance.
   (B)   Sections PM-301.1 (Sanitation), PM-302.1 (General), PM-303.1
(General), PM-301.4 (Weeds), PM-303.4 (Lead-Based Paint) and PM-303.5
(Accumulation of Rubbish or Garbage) of the BOCA National Property Maintenance
Code, most current edition, or any successor edition of the aforementioned
publication, are made a part of this chapter and shall be enforced by the City
Health Commission.
(2000 Code, § 8.04.060) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.007 SWIMMING POOLS.
   All public swimming pools, including, but not limited to, all pools operated
by apartment complexes, homeowners associations, condominium associations and
similar organizations, and any organization charging a fee for membership or
admittance, shall be required to pass an annual health inspection.
(2000 Code, § 8.04.070) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.008 BARBERSHOPS AND BEAUTY SALONS.
   (A)   The terms BARBER SHOP and BEAUTY SHOP, as used in this section, shall
be construed to mean a place where the hair is cut, cleansed, treated or
dressed, or the face shaved or beard trimmed, for a charge, and where, also,
manicure, chiropody or massage treatments are sometimes furnished for a charge.
The terms shall also be deemed to include hair dressing establishments commonly
patronized by women.
   (B)   Premises used for a barber shop or beauty shop shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition. No person shall permit waste materials of any
kind to accumulate therein. No person shall employ in such an establishment any
person afflicted with a venereal or contagious disease.
   (C)   No person shall use in any establishment used as a barber shop or
beauty shop any implement or tool upon the premises after the same has been
used upon a person afflicted with any skin disease without sterilizing the tool
or implement afterwards. No person shall use any towel upon any customer after
the same has been used before without having the towel sterilized and cleaned
prior to the second use.
   (D)   No person infected with any disease of the face or head shall have the
same barbered or treated in any manner in a barber shop or hair dressing
establishment in the city, nor shall any person with a hand disease be
manicured therein.
(2000 Code, § 8.04.080) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.009 CAMPGROUNDS AND FACILITIES.
   All campgrounds and facilities in the city shall maintain those sanitary
conditions set forth by state statutes, city ordinances and City Health
Commission rules and regulations.
(2000 Code, § 8.04.090) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.010 LANDLORD-TENANT SERVICES.
   (A)   No landlord shall discontinue any heat, water or sewer services
without a court order.
   (B)   Sections PM-601.1 (Heating Facilities - Residential Buildings) and PM-
601.2 (Heating Facilities - Nonresidential Structures) of the BOCA National
Property Maintenance Code, most current edition, or any successor edition of
the aforementioned publication, are made a part of this chapter and shall be
enforced by the City Health Commission.
(2000 Code, § 8.04.100) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.011 FIREWORKS.
   No person shall shoot off, fire or explode any firecrackers or fireworks of
any kind in the city. However, the Mayor may license any responsible club, body
or organization to have a fireworks display on the fourth of July and may
provide in the license such provisions as he or she deems proper to prevent
injury to persons or damage to property in connection with the fireworks
display.
(2000 Code, § 8.04.120) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.012 UNWHOLESOME FOOD.
   No person shall sell, offer to sell, dispose of or offer to dispose of, for
human consumption, any unwholesome food.
(2000 Code, § 8.04.130) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.013 CEMETERIES.
   No person shall establish, operate or maintain a cemetery within the city or
within one mile thereof. However, any cemetery lawfully established prior to
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section (Ord. 21, passed
1-16-1948) may be continued.
(2000 Code, § 8.04.140) Penalty, see §
91.999
LOCK BOXES
§ 91.025 LOCK BOXES REQUIRED.
   All properties, businesses or multifamily buildings of five units or more or
three floors or more, where common ways (hallways) are encountered or as
prescribed by the fire prevention bureau, shall be required to have lock boxes.
(2000 Code, § 8.24.010) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.026 SPECIFICATIONS.
   All lock boxes shall be of U.L. listing and shall be compatible with
existing Fire Department equipment and current master keys to keep current
uniformity, as approved by the Fire Department.
(2000 Code, § 8.24.020) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.027 CONTENTS.
   All lock boxes shall contain keys for the following:
   (A)   All entrance/exit doors, whether on the exterior or the interior of
the building;
   (B)   Mechanical and electrical rooms;
   (C)   Closet storage rooms;
   (D)   Fire alarm control panels;
   (E)   Elevator controls (where applicable); and
   (F)   Any other keys required by the fire prevention bureau.
(2000 Code, § 8.24.030) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.028 COMPLIANCE OF EXISTING AND NEW BUILDINGS.
   Existing properties and buildings must comply with the provisions of this
chapter within 12 months from the date of enactment of the ordinance codified
in this chapter. All newly constructed buildings or buildings currently under
construction must comply with the provisions of this chapter immediately.
(2000 Code, § 8.24.040)
§ 91.029 CURRENT KEYS REQUIRED.
   The owner, tenant or organization in control of a building shall have
current keys placed in the lock box by the Fire Department upon any change of
locks in the building or ownership of the premises.
(2000 Code, § 8.24.050) Penalty, see §
91.999
MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE UNIT
§ 91.040 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVANCE LIFE SUPPORT/MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE SERVICES. The initiation of
treatment of acute life-threatening conditions under the direction of a
physician authorized by law to practice medicine in the state or a person
authorized by the laws of this state to act as a qualified registered
professional nurse, by a person who has satisfactorily completed a course of
training in emergency care approved, for purposes of the State Pre-Hospital
Emergency Medical Services Act, by the State Department of Public Health and
where authorized by the Project Medical Director, Approved Advanced Life
Support System.
   BASIC LIFE SUPPORT SERVICES. The rendering of basic emergency care,
including, but not limited to, airway management, cardiopulmonary
resuscitation, control of bleeding and splinting of fractures.
   CERTIFIED PARAMEDIC. A paramedic who is certified by both the resource
hospital and the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
   EMERGENCY. Any condition which, if not corrected, will cause death,
permanent disability or deterioration of an individual’s condition.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-AMBULANCE (EMT-A). A person who has
successfully completed a course of instruction in basic life support services,
as required, and who is certified by the State Department of Public Health.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC (EMT-P). A person who has
successfully completed a course of instruction in advanced life support/mobile
intensive care services, approved by the State Department of Public Health, and
who is certified by the department. An EMT-P is qualified by training and
education to perform advanced life support/mobile intensive care services,
including, but not limited to, mechanical resuscitation, fluid resuscitation
and electrical and pharmacological resuscitation procedures, under the
provisions of the State Pre-Hospital Emergency Medical Services Act.
   PRE-HOSPITAL EMERGENCY SERVICES. Emergency care initiated by an advanced
life support/mobile intensive care system prior to arrival at a hospital and
the continuation of such emergency services by advanced life support/mobile
intensive care system personnel as may be necessary until the responsibility
for the care of the patient is assumed by the medical personnel of a hospital
emergency department or other facility within the hospital to which the patient
is first delivered by the personnel.
   RESOURCE HOSPITAL. A hospital which is designated as such by the area-wide
Hospital Emergency Services Committee, State Department of Public Health
(Division of Emergency Medical Services and Highway Safety), has total
responsibility for training of both hospital and field paramedic personnel,
monitors all medical direction transmission within the network, nominates field
personnel for state certification and recertification, assumes medical control
at both hospital and field levels, maintains records and data pertaining to the
program’s function, and ensures conformity with all local, state and federal
rules, regulations and standards related to mobile intensive care operation.
(2000 Code, § 8.28.010)
§ 91.041 ESTABLISHMENT OF UNIT.
   There is established in and for the city a mobile intensive care unit whose
membership shall consist of certified emergency medical technicians-paramedics
and emergency medical technicians-ambulance from the Fire Department, both
regular and paid-on-call.
(2000 Code, § 8.28.020)
§ 91.042 RESPONSIBILITY OF PROBATIONARY APPOINTEES.
   All individuals who are appointed by the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners to a probationary status within the Fire Department must be
advised that during their respective probationary period they are required to
become state certified paramedics through the then established resource
hospital with which the city is associated, and those individuals shall comply
with the requirement prior to the termination of their probationary period.
Advertisements for examination shall include this provision.
(2000 Code, § 8.28.030)
§ 91.043 EXTENSION OF PROBATIONARY PERIOD.
   The probationary period of a firefighter/ paramedic may be extended by the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners upon the written recommendation of the
Fire Chief. Cumulative extensions shall not exceed six months.
(2000 Code, § 8.28.040)
§ 91.044 LENGTH OF SERVICE.
   A firefighter/paramedic will be required to remain a certified paramedic and
shall continue to serve until relieved for good cause by the Chief with the
approval of the Board. Preference for the relief shall be given to those who
have served ten years.
(2000 Code, § 8.28.050)
§ 91.045 MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL.
   (A)   The management, supervision and control of the mobile intensive care
unit is hereby vested in the Chief, who shall be responsible for the
government, efficiency and good conduct of the members thereof and who shall be
considered the head of the unit.
   (B)   The Chief shall have sole control and command over all persons
connected with the unit program of the city. He or she shall have full power to
prescribe and enforce rules and regulations for the government of the members
of the unit, which shall not be inconsistent with the ordinances of the city,
the laws of the state or the rules and regulations promulgated by the mobile
intensive care unit resource hospital.
(2000 Code, § 8.28.060)
§ 91.046 CO-DIRECTORS.
   The Chief, in his or her capacity as administrator of the mobile intensive
care unit program, shall appoint directors who are certified paramedics within
the unit and who shall carry out the directives of the Chief.
(2000 Code, § 8.28.070)
§ 91.047 TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   If a firefighter/paramedic is not certified during his or her
probationary period or an extension thereof, he or she shall be terminated.
   (B)   If a firefighter/paramedic is not recertified as required by the
resource hospital, then his or her base salary shall be immediately decreased
by 20% until he or she has completed ten years of service in his or her
respective department, after which he or she shall be restored to the then
current base salary.
(2000 Code, § 8.28.080)
INTERNATIONAL  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 91.060 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. The City of Oak Forest adopts the 2018 International
Property Maintenance Code and Referenced Standards and Appendix A, as published
by the International Code Council as the Property Maintenance Code of the City
of Oak Forest.
   (B)   Amendments to the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code.
      (1)   Section 101.1 Title. [Name of Jurisdiction] Insert: The City of Oak
Forest.
      (2)   Section 103.5 Fees. [Jurisdiction to insert appropriate schedule]
Insert: The minimum charge shall be four hundred dollars ($400).
      (3)   Section 112.4 Failure to Comply. [Amount] [Amount] Insert: One
hundred dollars ($100), seven hundred fifty dollars ($750).
      (4)   Section 302.4 Weeds. [Height in Inches] Insert: 7".
      (5)   Section 304.14 Insect Screens. [Date to Date] Insert: From April 15
through November 1.
      (6)   Add Section 507.2 Drainage Discharge. No sump pump or downspout
discharge shall adversely affect adjacent properties. Sump pumps shall
discharge to a point no closer then ten feet (10') to any property line.
Downspouts shall discharge no closer than three feet (3') to any side yard
property line and ten feet (10') from any front or rear yard property line.
   (7)   Section 602.3 Heat Supply. [Date to Date] Insert: From September 15
through June 1.
   (8)   Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. [Date to Date] Insert: From
October 1 through June 1.
(2000 Code, § 8.32.010) (Ord. 2874, § 1, passed - -2005; Am. Ord. 2019-03-0723,
passed 3-12- 2019)
IMPLEMENTATION OF SMOKE FREE ILLINOIS ACT
§ 91.075 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BAR. An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages
for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than 10% of
its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises. BAR includes,
but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, adult
entertainment facilities and cabarets.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or
her services for a non-profit entity.
   EMPLOYER. A person, business, partnership, association or corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust or non-profit entity that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
   ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or
partially enclosed with:
      (1)   Solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways; or
      (2)   Solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways,
that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation,
lobbies and corridors.
   ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA. Any sports pavilion, stadium,
gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink,
bowling alley or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational or
other events.
   GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES. Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the
Illinois Gaming Council Rules of the Illinois Administrative Code.
   GAMING FACILITY. An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of
gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of
accruing business revenue.
   HEALTHCARE FACILITY. An office or institution providing care or treatment of
diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other medical,
physiological or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes,
homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists and all specialists
within these professions.
   HEALTHCARE FACILITY. Includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms,
semi-private rooms, and wards within healthcare facilities.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any area under the control of a public or private
employer that employees are required to enter, leave or pass through during the
course of employment, including, but not limited to entrances and exits to
places of employment, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances,
exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area
where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and
classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private
residence or home-based business, unless used to provide licensed child care,
foster care, adult care or other similar social service care on the premises,
is not a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT.
   PRIVATE CLUB.
      (1)   A not-for-profit association that:
         (a)   Has been in active and continuous existence for at least three
years prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 95th General
Assembly, whether incorporated or not;
         (b)   Is the owner, lessee or occupant of a building or portion
thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times;
         (c)   Is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social,
patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary
gain; and
         (d)   Only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation.
      (2)   For purposes of this definition, PRIVATE CLUB means an organization
that is managed by a Council of directors, executive committee, or similar body
chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a
constitution or both to govern its activities, and has been granted an
exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. §
501.
   PRIVATE RESIDENCE. The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a
hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodation, hospital, nursing home or assisted living facility shall not be
considered a private residence.
   PUBLIC PLACE. That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to
the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or
in part by private persons or entities, the State of Illinois, the City of Oak
Forest, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged
for admission, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances, exits,
windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where
smoking is prohibited. A PUBLIC PLACE does not include a private residence
unless the private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster
care or other similar social service care on the premises. A PUBLIC PLACE
includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail stores,
offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries,
museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing
homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting
rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places,
private clubs, gaming facilities, all government-owned vehicles and facilities,
healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service
establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas,
public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars,
taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than 75%
of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and
breakfast or other similar public accommodation that are rented to guests, but
excludes private residences.
   RESTAURANT. An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee
shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands and private and public school cafeterias,
that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or employees, and a
kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises for
serving elsewhere. RESTAURANT includes a bar area within the restaurant.
   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail establishment that derives more than 80% of
its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants or herbs and cigars,
cigarettes, pipes and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related
smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental. RETAIL TOBACCO STORE does not include a tobacco department or
section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type
of liquor, food or restaurant license.
   SMOKE or SMOKING. The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling or exhaling of
any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs or any other
lighted smoking equipment.
(Ord. 2008-02-0154O, passed 2-12-2008)
§ 91.076 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any public place or
place of employment within the City of Oak Forest.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any place designated
as a “No Smoking Area,” as provided in §§
91.078 and
91.079 below.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for an employer to knowingly permit smoking in
any enclosed area in any place of employment.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or lessee in
control of a public place to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in
the public place.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or lessee in
control of a public place to fail to post signage or remove ash trays, as
provided in §
91.079.
(Ord. 2008-02-0154O, passed 2-12-2008) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.077 EXEMPTIONS.
   The prohibitions on smoking set forth in this subchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms; provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited under the
provisions of this subchapter. Not more than 25% of the rooms rented to guests
in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where smoking is permitted. The
status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add
additional nonsmoking rooms;
   (B)   Private vehicles, not including public transportation facilities or
government vehicles;
   (C)   Private residences or dwelling places except when used as a child
care, adult day care, health care facility, or any other home-based business
open to the public;
   (D)   Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term care
facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is
permitted; or
   (E)   Any public place or place of employment that is a tobacco dealer,
whose principal business is the sale of retail of tobacco and tobacco-related
products; provided that smoke generated by smoking on the premises of the
tobacco dealer does not infiltrate into enclosed areas where smoking is
otherwise prohibited; and no food or liquor license has been granted.
(Ord. 2008-02-0154O, passed 2-12-2008)
§ 91.078 DESIGNATION OF OTHER NO-SMOKING AREAS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, any employer, owner,
occupant, lessee, operator, manager or other person in control of any public
place or place of employment may designate a non-enclosed area of the public
place or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking
is also prohibited, provided that the employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall
conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in §
91.079 below.
(Ord. 2008-02-0154O, passed 2-12-2008)
§ 91.079 RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROPRIETORS.
   Each owner, lessee, occupant, employer or other person in control of a
public place or a place of employment shall be responsible for all the
following:
   (A)   Post conspicuous signs no smaller than five inches by seven inches in
enclosed areas and the entrance or vestibule to the public place, place of
employment or the building wherein they are located, as the case may be,
bearing the text “No Smoking” or the international “No Smoking” symbol, which
consists of a pictorial representation of a cigarette enclosed in a circle with
a bar across it. Those signs shall also be posted outside of the main entrance
to the public place or place of employment, shall reference the 15-foot buffer
zone in which smoking is prohibited, and contain the telephone numbers of the
designated enforcement authorities noted in this subchapter, in addition to the
telephone number and website designated by the Illinois Department of Public
Health for registering complaints;
   (B)   Remove ash trays or other similar containers intended for the deposit
of tobacco ash, cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products from public
places;
   (C)   Request any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited
to refrain from smoking, and if the person continues to smoke, request the
person to leave; and
   (D)   Notify employees regarding the requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2008-02-0154O, passed 2-12-2008) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.080 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be enforced by the City of Oak Forest Police
Department.
   (B)   Notice of the provisions of this subchapter shall be given to all
applicants for a business license in the City of Oak Forest.
   (C)   Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this subchapter
may initiate enforcement by contacting the City of Oak Forest Police
Department.
   (D)   An employer, owner, lessee, manager, operator or employee of an
establishment regulated by this subchapter shall inform persons violating this
subchapter of the appropriate provisions thereof and request that the violator
cease smoking in a prohibited area and, if the person continues to smoke,
request the person to leave.
(Ord. 2008-02-0154O, passed 2-12-2008)
VACANT BUILDING AND REGISTRY REGULATIONS
§ 91.090 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare by enactment of this subchapter which:
      (1)   Establishes a program for identification, registration, and
regulation of buildings which are or become vacant on and after the effective
date of this subchapter.
      (2)   Determines the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings.
      (3)   Provides for administration, enforcement, including abatement of
public nuisances, and imposition of penalties.
   (B)   This subchapter shall be construed liberally to effect its purposes.
(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 91.091 OTHER ORDINANCES.
   This subchapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other
applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations which prescribe
standards other than are provided herein, and in the event of conflict, the
most restrictive shall apply.
(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 91.092 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated or clearly indicated by the context, the
following terms shall, for the purpose of this subchapter, have the meanings
indicated in this section.
   BOARDED BUILDING. A building which has had, in a manner intended to be
temporary or permanent, any or all openings, which openings are windows or
doors which were present for the purpose of light, ventilation or egress, some
material whether opaque, solid or transparent, affixed to such openings, from
the interior or exterior of the building, for the purpose of securing or
preventing access or damage to the building or its components.
   BUILDING. Any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering
any occupancy.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING. A building defined as a dangerous building in §
91.006, as it may be amended. Such buildings are public nuisances.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Community Development or his or her designee.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   PERSON. Includes a corporation, a partnership, or other entity as well as an
individual.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structure thereon.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Includes the following:
      (1)   The physical condition, or uses of any building regarded as a
public nuisance at common law, under the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or under
this code;
      (2)   Any physical condition, use or occupancy or any building or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not
limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences
or structures;
      (3)   Any building which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities;
      (4)   Any building designated by the Director as unsafe for human
habitation or use;
      (5)   Any building which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or
manifestly unsafe or insecure as to endanger life, limb or property;
      (6)   Any building which is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish
or garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds;
      (7)   Any building that is dangerous, in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration or decay; faulty construction; open or vacant and the doors,
windows, or other openings are boarded up or secured, by any means other than
conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new
construction of similar type; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide
shelter, in danger of collapse or failure and dangerous to anyone on or near
the premises; or
      (8)   Any building defined as a dangerous building by §
91.006, as it may be amended.
   UNOCCUPIED BUILDING. A building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual
presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises,
including buildings ordered vacated by the Director pursuant to authority
granted to him by this Code. In determining whether a building is UNOCCUPIED,
the Director may consider these factors, among others:
      (1)   A building at which substantially all lawful residential or
business activity has ceased.
      (2)   The percentage of the overall square footage of occupied to
unoccupied space or the overall number of occupied and unoccupied units shall
be considered.
      (3)   The building is substantially devoid of contents. The condition and
value of fixtures or personal property in the building are relevant to this
determination.
      (4)   The building lacks utility services, i.e., water, sewer, electric
or natural gas.
      (5)   The building is the subject of a foreclosure action.
      (6)   The building is not actively for sale as part of a contractual
agreement to sell the building, the building lacks "for sale", "for rent" or
similar signage.
      (7)   The presence or recurrence of uncorrected code violations.
   VACANT BUILDING.  
      (1)   A building or portion of a building which is:
         (a)   Unoccupied and unsecured;
         (b)   Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means;
         (c)   Unoccupied and a dangerous structure;
         (d)   Unoccupied and condemned by the Director pursuant to applicable
provisions of this Code;
         (e)   Unoccupied and has multiple code violations;
         (f)   Unoccupied and the building or its premises has been the site of
unlawful activity within the previous six months;
         (g)   Condemned by the Director and unlawfully occupied; or
         (h)   Unoccupied for over 90 days and during which time the Director
has issued an order to correct public nuisance conditions and same have not
been corrected in a code compliant manner; or
         (i)   Unoccupied for over one year.
      (2)   VACANT BUILDING does not include: unoccupied buildings which are
undergoing construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and which are in
compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations,
and for which construction, renovation or rehabilitation is proceeding
diligently to completion.
(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 91.093 DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Within 60 days after the effective date of this subchapter, the
Director shall evaluate all buildings in the city he believes to be unoccupied
on the effective date of this subchapter and make a determination for each as
to whether the building is a "vacant building" within the meaning of §
91.092. The Director may determine that a building which meets any of the
criteria set forth in §
91.092 is not to be regulated under this subchapter for a stated period, if
upon consideration of reliable, substantiated and sufficient evidence, he or
she determines that regulation of the building under this subchapter would not
serve the public health, welfare, and safety and makes written findings in
support of his decision. The determination shall be in writing and shall state
the factual basis for the determination. For buildings the Director determines
to be "vacant buildings", he shall, within seven days of making that
determination, send notice of his written determination with the factual
findings to the last taxpayer of record listed on the most recent Cook County
tax roll. Said notice of determination shall be sent first class United States
mail, with proper postage prepaid. Failure of delivery shall not excuse a
person from complying with this chapter. The Director may personally serve or
cause personal service of the notice of determination. Any person making such
service shall execute an affidavit attesting to the facts of service. The
Director shall maintain an affidavit of such mailing for each notice of
determination sent.
   (B)   The notice shall specify a date and time on which the owner shall
allow for a code compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant building
to determine the extent of compliance with city property, building codes,
health, fire, water and sewer codes. The owner shall pay the $500 inspection
fee to the city within 30 days of the inspection. An unpaid fee shall be a lien
upon the premises.
   (C)   The notice shall contain a statement of the obligations of the owner
of a building determined to be a vacant building, a copy of the registration
form the owner is required to file pursuant to §
91.095, and a notice of the owner's right to appeal the Director's
determination.
(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 91.094 APPEAL OF DETERMINATION.
   (A)   An owner of a building determined by the Director to be a vacant
building as provided for in this subchapter may appeal that determination to
the City Administrator. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with
the City Administrator within 15 days of the date of mailing of the notice of
determination. The filing of an appeal stays the owner's obligation to register
his building as required by §
91.095. The appeal shall contain a complete statement of the reasons the owner
disputes the Director's determination, shall set forth specific facts in
support thereof, and shall include all evidence the owner relies upon to
support the appeal. The City Administrator shall decide the appeal on the basis
of facts presented by the owner in his or her written appeal and the Director's
written determination.
   (B)   The burden is upon the owner to present sufficient evidence to
persuade the City Administrator that had the evidence been known to the
Director at the time the Director made the determination, the Director would
more likely than not have determined that the subject building was not a
"vacant building" within the meaning of this subchapter.
   (C)   The City Administrator shall send written notice of his decision to
the owner within ten days of his or her receipt of the appeal. The City
Administrator may, but is not required to, seek additional information from the
owner. The City Administrator may, upon written notice thereof to the owner,
take no more than ten additional days, to decide the appeal if he or she
determines that such additional time is required for consideration of the
appeal.
   (D)   An owner who wishes to challenge applicability of this subchapter to
his or her building without the Director's determination having been made,
shall set forth specific facts to support nonapplicability in a writing to the
Director. In the event the Director determines that the subject building is a
"vacant building", the owner shall have the right to appeal the Director's
determination to the City Administrator as provided for herein.
(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 91.095 OBLIGATION TO REGISTER.
   The owner of a building who knows, or from all the facts and circumstances
should know, that his or her building is or has become a "vacant building"
within the meaning of this subchapter after the effective date of this
subchapter or the owner of a building, which the Director determines at any
time to be a "vacant building", or the owner of a building whose appeal from
the Director's determination has been denied by the City Administrator shall
take the actions provided for in this section within 15 days after either the
date of the Director's notice of determination or occurrence of the facts which
would cause a reasonable person to believe that the building was a "vacant
building", or denial of the appeal, whichever is applicable. Registration does
not exonerate the owner from compliance with all applicable codes and
ordinances, including this subchapter, nor does it preclude any of the actions
the city is authorized to take pursuant to this subchapter or elsewhere in this
Code.
   (A)   Registration requirements.
      (1)   (a)   Register the building with the Director of Community
Development, on a form provided by the Director and pay the $200 annual
nonprorated vacant building registration fee. The form shall include, as a
minimum, the name, street address, and telephone number of the owner; the case
name and number of any litigation pending concerning or affecting the building,
including bankruptcy cases; and the name, street address, and telephone number
of all persons with any legal interest in the building or the premises. The
form shall require the owner to identify a natural person 21 years of age or
older who maintains a permanent address in Cook County, Illinois, to accept
service on behalf of the owner with respect to any notices the Director sends
pursuant to this subchapter or service of process in any proceeding commenced
to enforce any provision of this subchapter, and file with the Director on the
registration form, the name, address, telephone number, of said person. A
street address is required. A post office box is not an acceptable address.
         (b)   The form shall state that the owner, by affixing his or her
signature, is advised that the city will not issue real estate transfer tax
stamps without city inspectors having first conducted an interior inspection
for code compliance.
      (2)   Renew the vacant building registration each year on the anniversary
date of the first filing for the time the building remains vacant and pay the
required $200 annual fee.
      (3)   File an amended registration within 15 days of any change in the
information contained in the annual registration. A new registration is
required for any change in ownership whatsoever.
   (B)   Notice; inspection.
      (1)   The form shall require the owner to indicate his or her "acceptance
of notice by posting" consenting to service of notices sent or required to be
sent, pursuant to this subchapter, by posting on the building if the owner
fails to renew the registration if required, or maintain as current with the
Director the information required regarding the person designated to accept
notice and service of process.
      (2)   The owner shall allow for a code compliance inspection of the
interior of the vacant building and shall pay the $500 fee therefor within 30
days of the inspection. Such inspection will determine the extent of compliance
with city property, building codes, health, fire, water and sewer codes. The
city shall send the inspection report to the owner within 30 days.
   (C)   Insurance. Obtain liability insurance and maintain such insurance for
as long as the building is vacant, and file evidence of such insurance with the
Director, as follows: $500,000 for a vacant residential building of one to
three units; $750,000 for a vacant residential building of four to 11 units;
$1,000,000 for a vacant residential building of 12 to 48 units; $2,000,000 for
a vacant residential building of more than 48 units; and $2,000,000 for a
vacant manufacturing, industrial, storage, or nonresidential commercial
building.
   (D)   Vacant building plan. At the time a building is registered as required
herein, the owner shall submit a vacant building plan. The Director may
prescribe a form for the plan. If the owner fails to submit the plan as
provided for by this subchapter, the Director may determine the plan. The plan
shall contain the following as a minimum:
      (1)   A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings
which are boarded up or otherwise secured by any means other than conventional
methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction or
similar type. The proposed repair shall result in openings being secured by
conventional methods used in the design of the building or by methods permitted
for new construction of similar type with board removed. Boarding shall be
accomplished with materials and methods described by the Director and available
from the Director. The owner shall maintain the building in an enclosed and
secure state until the building is reoccupied or made available for immediate
occupancy. If the owner demonstrates that securing of the building will provide
adequate protection to the public, the Director of Community Development may
waive the requirement of an enclosure.
      (2)   For buildings and premises thereof which are determined by the
Director as being or containing public nuisances, as defined in §
91.092, then the vacant building plan shall contain a plan of action to remedy
such public nuisance(s).
      (3)   A time schedule identifying a date of commencement of repair and
date of completion of repair for each improperly secured opening and nuisance
identified by the Director.
      (4)   When the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, then the
owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition.
      (5)   A plan of action to maintain the building and premises thereof in
conformance with this subchapter.
      (6)   A plan of action, with a time schedule, identifying the date the
building will be habitable and occupied or offered for occupancy or sale. The
time schedule shall include date(s) of commencement and completion of all
actions required to achieve habitability. No plan which provides for compliance
with this chapter or, which will not, as determined by the Director, achieve
such compliance, within three months, in the case of a vacant boarded building,
and one year, in the case of a vacant, unboarded, and code compliant building
will be approved.
      (7)   All premises upon which unoccupied or vacant buildings are located
and the exteriors shall at all times be maintained in compliance with this
Code.
      (8)   Exterior lighting according to standards established by the
Director and available from the Director.
   (E)   Security guard service. On written notice of the Director, provide
bonded, licensed, and insured security guard service at the building between
the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Such service to remain in place until the
Director gives written notice that the service is no longer required. Such
service shall be required when the Director makes a written determination that
the vacant building constitutes a fire hazard, is otherwise dangerous to human
life or the public welfare, involves illegal or improper use, occupancy, or
maintenance, under such conditions that boarding and securing the building are
insufficient to prevent the actual or threatened harm.
   (F)   Signage. Affixed to any building which is boarded, no smaller than two
feet by two feet and compliant with the city's sign regulations, Chapter 160 of
this Code, and providing the following information: The name, address, and
telephone number of the owner, and in addition, for buildings which are the
subject of a foreclosure action, the name, address, and telephone number of the
plaintiff and the plaintiff's attorney, if any, in the foreclosure action. The
sign must be placed so that its message is legible from the public way.
(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)
Penalty, see § 91.999
§ 91.096 APPROVAL OF PLAN.
   (A)   Review building plan. The Director shall review the proposed vacant
building plan in accordance with the standards below. The Director shall send
notice to the owner of the vacant building of his determination.
   (B)   Standards for plan approval. In considering the appropriateness of a
vacant building plan, the Director shall include the following in his or her
consideration and shall make written findings as to each:
      (1)   The purposes of this subchapter and intent of the City Council to
minimize the time a building is boarded or otherwise vacant.
      (2)   The effect of the building and the proposed plan on adjoining
property.
      (3)   The length of time the building has been vacant.
      (4)   The presence of any public nuisances on the property.
      (5)   The likelihood that the plan or portion(s) thereof will prevent or
ameliorate the condition it is designed to address.
(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 91.097 AUTHORITY TO MODIFY PLAN, RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   The Director shall, upon notice to the vacant building owner, have the right
to modify the vacant building plan by modifying the dates of performance, the
proposed methods of action, or by imposing additional requirements consistent
with this subchapter he or she deems necessary to protect the public health,
safety, or welfare.
(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 91.098 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH PLAN.
   Failure to have an approved plan within 30 days of filing the registration
form or failure to comply with the approved plan shall constitute a violation
of this subchapter subjecting the owner of the building to penalties as
provided in this subchapter and to any remedies the city may avail itself of as
provided for herein and elsewhere in this Code, including, but not limited to,
an action to compel correction of property maintenance violations.
(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)
Penalty, see § 91.999
§ 91.099 OTHER ENFORCEMENT.
   The registration of a vacant building shall not preclude action by the city
to demolish or to take other action against the building pursuant to other
provisions of this subchapter, this code, or other applicable legislation.
(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 91.100 CERTIFICATION.
   A certificate of code compliance for vacant buildings issued by the
Community Development Department and payment in full of all fees imposed
pursuant to this subchapter are required prior to any occupancy of a vacant
building.
(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 91.101 BOARDING OF BUILDINGS.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city that boarding is a temporary solution to
prevent unauthorized entry into a vacant building and that boarded buildings
are a public nuisance. A vacant building may not remain boarded longer than
three months unless an extension of that time is part of a plan approved by the
Director.
   (B)   A vacant building which is unboarded and code compliant and for which
boarding is determined by the Director on the basis of police reports, citizen
complaints, and other information of other type considered reliable by
reasonable persons, to not require boarding to prevent unauthorized entry may
not remain vacant for more than one year without an approved plan for
occupancy, sale, demolition, or other disposition of the building.
(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)
Penalty, see § 91.999
§ 91.102 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city may enforce this subchapter in its administrative
adjudication system or through the court system.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the city from immediately
condemning as provided for in this Code a building or taking other immediate
action upon a determination that the building is a public nuisance or poses an
imminent danger to the occupants of the building, or the public, health, safety
and welfare.
(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §§
91.025 through
91.029 shall be fined $150 for the first offense and $300 for the second
offense.
      (2)   Whoever fails to place the required keys inside his or her lock box
shall be fined $100.
(2000 Code, § 8.24.060)
   (C)   (1)   Any person who shall violate §
91.076(A) or (B) shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $100
for a first violation and $250 for any subsequent violations within one year.
Each day in which a violation of §
91.076(A) or (B) occurs constitutes a separate and distinct violation.
      (2)   Any person who shall violate §
91.076(C) or (D) shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $500
upon conviction for the first violation and $750 for each subsequent conviction
stemming from a violation within one year of the initial violation of §
91.076(C) or (D). Each day in which a violation of §
91.076(C) or (D) occurs constitutes a separate and distinct violation.
      (3)   Any person who shall violate §
91.076(E) shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $250 for each
violation. Each day during which a violation of §
91.076(E) continues beyond the specified time for correction shall constitute a
separate punishable offense, although owners, operators, managers or other
controllers of public places and places of employment shall be given a
reasonable time to come into compliance with §
91.076(E) following issuance of a notice of violation, but that period shall
not, in any event, exceed one week.
      (4)   In addition to the fines established by this division (C),
violation of §§
91.075 through
91.080 by a person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a public
place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any
permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation
occurred.
      (5)   Violation of §§
91.075 through
91.080 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by an
action in the Circuit Court for injunctive relief, or other means provided for
by law, including hearing cases, finding liability and imposing the above-noted
fines via the administrative adjudication system, and the city may take action
to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement.
      (6)   Charges of municipal code violations shall be heard and adjudicated
by a hearing officer in accordance with the provisions governing the city’s
administrative adjudication system.
(Ord. 2008-02-0154O, passed 2-12-2008)
   (D)   (1)   Any person found to have violated any provision of §§
91.090 through
91.102 shall be subject to a minimum fine of $100 per day per violation to a
maximum of $750 per day per violation, in addition to any other legal or
equitable remedies available to the city. Such other remedies include, but are
not limited to, injunctive relief, application to a court of competent
jurisdiction for a receiver, demolition, or condemnation, contracting for the
repair or purchase of the premises, or foreclosure of any lien the city may
have thereon.
      (2)   A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day on
which such person or persons shall violate the provisions of §§
91.090 through
91.102.
(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)
CHAPTER 92: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Alarms required
   
92.03   Authorization required; application
   
92.04   Fees
   
92.05   License for alarm equipment supplier
   
92.06   Notice to Police or Fire Departments of alarm installation
   
92.07   Inspection and maintenance of alarm devices
   
92.08   Dial alarm receiving equipment
   
92.09   Local alarms
   
92.10   Responsibility to answer alarms
   
92.11   Determination to be public nuisance
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM DEVICE. Any local alarm, dial alarm, direct alarm, holdup alarm, fire
alarm or trouble alarm installed as defined herein, which purpose is to give
notice of a criminal act, fire emergency, medical emergency or other emergency
which may require police or fire response.
   ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIERS. Any person who sells, leases, maintains,
monitors, or installs automatic protection devices, local alarms, police
alarms, fire alarms, dial alarms and direct alarms.
   ALARM USER. A person who uses one or more police or fire alarm devices which
may require police  or fire response, and a person who contracts for or
receives service or maintenance with respect to an alarm device from an alarm
equipment supplier.
   ALARM USER PERMIT. A permit required for an alarm user to operate an alarm
device which may require police or fire response.
   COMMERCIAL BUILDING. A building designed to contain or contains a commercial
business.
   DIAL ALARM.  Any police or fire alarm device which is a telephone device or
telephone attachment that automatically or electronically selects a telephone
line connected to a receiving alarm station and reproduces a prerecorded
message to report a criminal act or other emergency requiring police response.
   FALSE ALARM. The activation of any police or fire alarm device by other than
a forced entry, attempted forced entry, unlawful entry, or actual hold-up or
attempted robbery, fire or medical emergency on the premises.
   INSTALLATION. Any police or fire alarm device or aggregation of any police
or fire alarm devices installed on or within a single building or on or within
more than one building or area adjacently located on a common site at a
specific location.
   LOCAL ALARM. Those alarms that sound audibly on the premises whether or not
connected to any receiving station by any means and sounding on the premises
where the alarm is connected.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING STRUCTURE. A building containing three or more
dwelling units as defined in §
151.165 of this code.
   OWNER. The person or legal entity that owns a commercial or multi-family
dwelling building, whether occupied by a tenant or not.
(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 92.02 ALARMS REQUIRED.
   (A)   All commercial buildings and multi-family dwelling structures are
required to have a functional, properly maintained and monitored fire alarm
system.
   (B)   All required fire alarm systems and automatic fire detection systems
shall be supervised by a central station, proprietary station or remote station
in accordance with NFPA 72.
   (C)   In the event the building is vacant, the owner is responsible and
required to have a fire alarm device system as defined in this code.
(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011; Am. Ord. 2018-08-0699O, passed 8-28-2018)
§ 92.03 AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   No alarm system user shall operate an alarm system without first
obtaining a permit therefor as provided in this section. The permit shall be
renewable on an annual basis by May 1 of each year.
   (B)   The alarm user applying for the authorization required by this section
shall complete an application form as provided by the city. The form shall
contain at minimum his or her name, the address of the residence or business in
or upon which the alarm system has been or will be installed, his or her
telephone number, the type of alarm system (burglar, panic, hold-up, etc.), the
alarm business selling, installing, monitoring, inspecting, responding to and/
or maintaining the alarm system and the name and telephone number of at least
two other persons who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who are
authorized to respond to an alarm signal and who can open the premises in which
the system is installed.
   (C)   No alarm system user, after having an authorization revoked, shall
fail to disconnect his or her alarm system.
   (D)   At the discretion of the Fire or Police Chief, failure to apply for or
renew an alarm permit may be grounds not to respond to an alarm activation.
(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 92.04 FEES.
   (A)   Any structure with an alarm device must be registered with the city on
an annual basis by May 31 of each year. There is no cost for the registration.
   (B)   False alarms.
      (1)   For the first two false alarm responses in a 12-month period, no
fee shall be charged, unless the city can show willful and wanton misconduct on
the part of the alarm user or his/her employees and/or agents.
      (2)   For the third false alarm response within a 12-month period, a fee
of $25 shall be charged.
      (3)   For the fourth false alarm response within a 12-month period, a fee
of $200 shall be charged.
      (4)   For the fifth false alarm response and for each and every
succeeding false alarm within a 12-month period, a fee of $300 shall be charged
for each response.
(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011; Am. Ord. 2011-04-0336O, passed 4-26-2011)
§ 92.05 LICENSE FOR ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER.
   No person shall engage in, carry on or conduct the business of being an
alarm equipment supplier, as hereinabove defined, within the city, unless he or
she is licensed to do so by the state pursuant ILCS Ch. 225, Act 447, Art. 10,
Private Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor, and
Locksmith Act of 2004.
(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 92.06 NOTICE TO POLICE OR FIRE DEPARTMENTS OF ALARM INSTALLATION.
   (A)    No police or fire alarm device installation is to be made in the
city, whether residential or commercial, unless there is on file with the
Police or Fire Department an alarm user permit for police response or the Fire
Department for a fire, trouble, or medical emergency response. The alarm user
permit will be supplied by the Police or Fire Department upon request.
   (B)   It will be the responsibility of the alarm equipment supplier to
obtain the original information required on the alarm user permit. It will be
the responsibility of the alarm user to keep the information updated. Failure
to supply information for the alarm user permit or failure to keep the
information on the permit current shall be grounds for the revocation of alarm
user permit, and other penalty as provided herein.
(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 92.07 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF ALARM DEVICES.
   (A)   For the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the
Police Chief, Fire Chief or designee, shall have the authority to enter any
premises in the city in or upon which any alarm system subject to this chapter
is located, to inspect the installation and/or operation of such alarm system.
If such inspection reveals any violation of the provisions of this chapter or
if in the opinion of the inspecting officer that the alarm is detrimental to
the safety of the user, a written report detailing such violation shall be
promptly sent to the Police or Fire Chief. If the Police or Fire Chief agrees
with the written report, the owner, lessee or other person responsible for the
alarm system in violation will be notified. Such notification shall require
that corrections be made within five days after date of notice of the
violation.
Failure to comply shall result in the disconnection of the alarm at the
location of the violation, revocation of alarm user permit, and other penalty
as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Each alarm user shall employ the services of an alarm equipment
supplier which has licensed employees and supplies and equipment so located as
to be able to respond to a request for repair or adjustment of the alarm
system.
(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 92.08 DIAL ALARM RECEIVING EQUIPMENT.
   No automatic protection devices known as dial alarms installed after the
effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (Ordinance
2011-01-0325O) by any person on premises of any kind in the city shall be keyed
to any police emergency trunk line or to any line used by the police or fire
for either emergency purposes or for general information from the Police or
Fire Departments.
(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 92.09 LOCAL ALARMS.
   (A)   No person shall have a local alarm on any building, place or premises
in the city without first obtaining authorization therefor from the Police or
Fire Chief.
   (B)   Local alarms shall not make a sound similar to that of sirens on
emergency vehicles or of civil defense warning systems. Owners of such local
alarms shall maintain the alarms and turn the audible signal off at the request
of the Police or Fire Department or an officer thereof. The continued sounding
of those local alarms for more than ten minutes after the appropriate agency
has responded is declared to be a violation of this section.
   (C)   Alarms affixed to vehicles of any type are not classified as local
alarms and are exempt from this section.
(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 92.10 RESPONSIBILITY TO ANSWER ALARMS.
   When an alarm has been activated at a business or private residence and the
police and/or fire respond, the owner or his or her representative shall be
present at such location after being requested to do so by the Police or Fire
Department or alarm equipment supplier responsible for making such
notification. Response will be as soon as possible but shall not exceed one
hour from time of request. Refusal to respond or excessive response time shall
constitute grounds for revocation of alarm user permit and a fine.
(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 92.11 DETERMINATION TO BE PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   The Police or Fire Chief may determine an alarm to be a public
nuisance or adverse to the safety of the public based on a violation within
this chapter. Upon such determination, the Police or Fire Chief shall notify
the alarm user of such fact and require that the alarm user take reasonable
steps to eliminate the problem as soon as possible but not to exceed five days
after receipt of such notice.
   (B)   If the alarm user fails to take reasonable steps to eliminate the
problem, then the Police or Fire Chief shall issue written notice to the alarm
user, by first class mail, of his or her intent to revoke the alarm user
permit. The alarm user permit may be revoked for:
      (1)   Failure to pay false alarm fees;
      (2)   Failure to complete or renew an alarm permit;
      (3)   Failure to respond to alarms when summoned by the Police or Fire
Department;
      (4)   Excessive or prolonged noise caused by local alarms.
   (C)   If the city finds it necessary to revoke an alarm permit or refuse to
respond to an alarm without a valid alarm user permit, the city shall incur no
liability for such action.
(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)
CHAPTER 93: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Declaration
   
93.03   Curfew imposed
   
93.04   Additional orders
   
93.05   Duration
   
93.06   Notice
   
93.07   Powers not impaired
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIVIL EMERGENCY.
      (1)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual
force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power
to execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of law;
or
      (2)   Any natural disaster or human-made calamity, including a flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the city,
resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to
such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
   CURFEW. A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering,
standing or motoring upon any alley, street, public property or vacant premises
within the city, except officials of any governmental unit and persons
officially designated to duty with reference to a civil emergency.
(2000 Code, § 8.12.010)
§ 93.02 DECLARATION.
   Whenever a civil emergency exists, the Mayor shall declare the existence of
the emergency by means of a written declaration setting forth the facts which
constitute the emergency.
(2000 Code, § 8.12.020)
§ 93.03 CURFEW IMPOSED.
   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, he or she may order a
general curfew applicable to the general geographical areas of the city or to
the city as a whole as he or she deems advisable, and applicable during such
hours of the day or night as he or she deems necessary in the interests of the
public safety and welfare.
(2000 Code, § 8.12.030)
§ 93.04 ADDITIONAL ORDERS.
   After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor may also, in the
interest of public safety and welfare:
   (A)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns and
private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating
liquor and beer is permitted;
   (B)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer;
   (C)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away of
gasoline or other flammable or combustible liquid products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
   (D)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearm or ammunition of any kind; and/or
   (E)   Issue such other orders as are immediately necessary for the
protection of life and property.
(2000 Code, § 8.12.040)
§ 93.05 DURATION.
   The proclamation authorized by this section shall be effective for 48 hours,
unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor indicating that the
civil emergency no longer exists. The Mayor shall have the power to re-proclaim
the existence of a civil emergency at the end of each 48-hour period during the
time that the civil emergency exists.
(2000 Code, § 8.12.050)
§ 93.06 NOTICE.
   Upon issuing the proclamation authorized by this section, the Chief of
Police shall notify the news media serving the city and shall cause three
copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be
posted at three public places to be determined by the Chief at such time.
(2000 Code, § 8.12.060)
§ 93.07 POWERS NOT IMPAIRED.
   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair the powers granted to
the Police Department and the Fire Department in these codified ordinances.
This section shall be construed together with other provisions of these
codified ordinances and other ordinances of the city now in effect for the
safety and welfare of the residents of the city.
(2000 Code, § 8.12.070)
CHAPTER 94: FIRE CODES AND FIREWORKS
Section
Fire Prevention Code
   
94.01   Fire apparatus access roads (fire lanes)
   
94.02   Fire lane schedule
International Fire Code
   
94.35   Adoption of code
   
94.36   Amendments to Fire Code
   
94.37   Referenced Codes and Standards
   
94.38   Fire protection systems
   
94.39   Reserved
   
94.40   Spiller pay requirement
   
94.41   Reserved
Fireworks
   
94.55   Title
   
94.56   Definitions
   
94.57   Fireworks prohibited
   
94.58   Fireworks display permit; application
   
94.59   Smoking by operator at fireworks display prohibited
   
94.60   Disposal of unfired fireworks
   
94.61   Parental liability
   
94.62   Advertising restrictions
   
94.63   Seizure of fireworks
 
   
94.99   Penalty
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 94.01 FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS (FIRE LANES).
   (A)   Definition. For purposes of this subchapter the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROAD. Road that provides fire apparatus access from
a fire station to a facility, building or portion thereof. This is a general
term inclusive of all other terms such as fire lane, public street, private
street, parking lot lane and access roadway.
   (B)   Fire apparatus access roads, in accordance with the 2018 International
Fire Code, Chapter 5, Section 503 and clearly marked as NO PARKING - FIRE LANE
as required in Section 503.3, are established as listed in the Fire Lane
Schedule set forth in §
94.02.
(2000 Code, § 8.16.120) (Am. Ord. 2008-07- 0190O, passed 9-9-2008; Am. Ord.
2019-03- 0726O, passed 3-12-2019; Am. Ord. 2019-04- 0729O, passed 4-9-2019; Am.
Ord. 2019-06- 0738O, passed 6-11-2019; Am. Ord. 2019-08- 0751O, passed 8-27-
2019)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Parking shall be prohibited in the areas of the property or street listed
below where NO PARKING - FIRE LANE signs are posted. All fire lane signage
shall comply with Section D.103.6, Signs, of the International Fire Code.
LOCATION FIRE LANE DETAILS
LOCATION                           FIRE LANE DETAILS
5610 to 5616   159th Street        As Posted
5511 to 5545   159th Street        As Posted
5424 to 5570   159th Street        As Posted
15801 to 15841 Central Avenue      As Posted
15240          Cicero Avenue       As Posted
15301          Kilpatrick Avenue   As Posted
15311          Kilpatrick Avenue   As Posted
15301          Knox Avenue         As Posted
15311          Knox Avenue         As Posted
15312          Knox Avenue         As Posted
15302          Kenton Avenue       As Posted
15310          Kenton Avenue       As Posted
15530 to 15548 Cicero Avenue       As Posted
15150 to 15158 Cicero Avenue       As Posted
5300           155th Street        As Posted
4816           157th Street        As Posted
4820           157th Street        As Posted
4823           157th Street        As Posted
15701          Lamon Avenue        As Posted
15644          Cicero Avenue       As Posted
16936          Forest Avenue       As Posted
5217           149th Street        As Posted
14700          Central Avenue      As Posted
14710          Central Avenue      As Posted
14720          Central Avenue      As Posted
14730          Central Avenue      As Posted
15201          Central Avenue      As Posted
5151           149th Street        As Posted
5544           147th Street        As Posted
14950          Laramie Avenue      As Posted
5900           159th Street        As Posted
5904           159th Street        As Posted
5701 to 15037  Vine Street         East side of street
5808           Chaucer Drive       to Condado Drive, north side of street
5800           151st Street        As Posted
5931           School Street       As Posted
5003           159th Street        As Posted
5009           159th Street        As Posted
5013           159th Street        As Posted
5017           159th Street        As Posted
5049           159th Street        As Posted
15831          LeClaire Avenue     As Posted
15841          LeClaire Avenue     As Posted
15859          LeClaire Avenue     As Posted
15928          LeClaire Avenue     As Posted
15938          LeClaire Avenue     As Posted
6000           159th Street        As Posted
6535           Victoria Drive      As Posted
15601          Central Avenue      As Posted
4100           Wagman Street       As Posted
5700           Albert Drive        As Posted
15624          Central Avenue      As Posted
              Kilbourne Avenue    from 167th Street to Frontage Road - west
                                   side of street
              154th Street        from Cicero Avenue to Lavergne Avenue
              157th Street        from Laramie Avenue to Long Avenue
              Kilpatrick Avenue   from 167th Street south 75 feet and then
                                   east 300 feet - south side of street
              160th Street        from LeClaire Avenue to Laramie Avenue
5411 to 5417   159th Street        from Debra Drive east - along the south
                                   property line - for parking lot access
              155th Street        from Central Avenue to Cicero Avenue -
                                   north side of street
              James Drive         from Central Avenue to Rob Roy Drive -
                                   north side of street
5641           James Drive         to Central Avenue - south side of street
              Craig Drive         from Fieldcrest Drive to Henry Street -
                                   east side of street
4100           Wagman Street       to Craig Drive - north side of street
4384           Henry Street        to Terry Lane - north side of street
              Independence Avenue from Central Avenue to Reynolds Lane -
                                   south side of street
              Peggy Lane          from Independence Avenue to 159th Street -
                                   east side of street
15725          Independence Court  to Independence Avenue - east side of street
              152nd Street        from Central Avenue to Chaucer Drive -
                                   north side of street
              Leslie Lane         from Central Avenue to Debra Drive -
                                   north side of street
              Corey Lane          from Reynolds Lane to Terrace Drive
              Lake Drive          from Independence Avenue to 158th Place
              158th Place         from Lake Drive to Terrace Drive
              Ann Marie Lane      from Adeline Place to Natalie Drive - south
                                   side of street
              Natalie Drive       from Park District parking to 155th Street -
                                   east side of street
              Natalie Drive       from Adeline Place to Park District parking
                                   - west side of street
              Central court       As Posted
              Walden Court        As Posted
              Sussex Avenue       As Posted
              Cromwell Lane       As Posted
              Linder Court        As Posted
              Scarborough Court   As Posted
4142           167th Street        As Posted
              Club Circle Drive   As Posted
              153rd Street        from Kilpatrick Avenue east to Kenton Avenue
                                   - south side of street
15325 to 15227 Kilpatrick Avenue   East side of street
              Long Avenue         from 151st Street to 155th Street - west
                                   side of street
              Reynolds Lane       from Corey Lane to Independence Avenue
15351 to 15359 70th Court          As posted east side of street
 
(Ord. 2019-08-0750O, passed 8-27-2019; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0756O, passed 10-8-
2019; 2020-01- 0779O, passed 1-14-2020; Am. Ord. 2025-02-1060O, passed 2-11-
2025)
INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
§ 94.35 ADOPTION OF CODE.
   The city adopts the 2018 International Fire Code and Referenced Standards
and all Appendices as published by the International Code Council, as the Fire
Code of the City of Oak Forest.
(2000 Code, § 8.40.010) (Ord. 2914 § 1, passed - -2005; Am. Ord. 2012-04-0377O,
passed 4-24-2012; Am. Ord. 2019-04-1729O, passed 4- 9-2019)
§ 94.36 AMENDMENTS TO THE FIRE CODE.
   Amendments to the 2018 International Fire Code.
   Section 101.1. [Name of Jurisdiction]
      Insert: City of Oak Forest.
   Section 110.4. [Offense, Dollar Amount, Number of Days]
      Insert: violation of Fire Code, $500.00.
   Section 112.4. [Dollar Amount, Dollar Amount]
      Insert: $500.00, $750.00.
   Section 307.4.3. Portable outdoor fireplaces
      Insert: No exceptions.
   Section 308.1.4. Open-flame cooking devices
      Insert: Exceptions:
         • Single-family dwelling.
         • Where balconies and decks are protected by an automatic fire
sprinkler system.
   Section 507.5.1 Where Required:
      Remove 400 feet, insert 300 feet, no exceptions.
   Add Section 901.11. Resetting Fire Alarm Systems. Upon activation of a fire
alarm system, the system shall not be reset (restored to a secured or a
clear condition) by any person until a representative from the Fire Department
is on the scene and directs the system to be reset.
   Add Section 901.12. Silencing Fire Alarm Systems. Upon activation of a fire
alarm system, the system shall not be silenced (alarm devices shut off) by any
person until a representative of the Fire Department is on the scene and
directs the system to be silenced.
   Section 901.4.6.2.  Marking on Access Door. Provide an outside access door
to the sprinkler riser valve room and fire pump room. Door must have label with
4" letters that read "Fire Sprinkler Room."
   Add Section 903.4.2. Add to end of section: An audible appliance shall be a
10 inch, 120VDC alarm bell, provided above the Fire Department connection.
Add Section 903.4.2.1. Exterior Appliances. A red 75cd, weather-proof strobe
light shall be provided above the Fire Department connection. The strobe shall
be supervised by the fire alarm system and shall only operate upon water flow
activation.
   Add Section 903.4.2.3. Test Valves. Fire sprinkler system inspectors test
valves shall be accessible at all times and located no more than 6 feet above
the finished floor. On multiple riser systems, test valves shall be marked as
to which riser and area it tests.
   Add Section 903.4.3. Floor Control Valves. Indicating control valves and
water flow switches shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser
on each floor in multiple- story buildings and shall be clearly labeled for
firefighters to use.
   Add Section 903.4.4. Automatic Sprinklers. When a building has numerous
rooms protected by the zoned sprinkler system, the Fire Department may require
additional smoke detectors for a more rapid means to identify the location of
smoke or fire.
   Add Section 905.3.9. Warehouse Storage. In all warehouse storage exceeding
50,000 square feet and where storage exceed 12 feet high, provide inside 2½
inch fire hose valves with 1½ inch reducer to a 1½ inch connection. Locate the
valves at each door entrance to the warehouse and/or storage area. Provide
additional 2½ inch fire hose valves so that no portion of the warehouse and/or
storage area is more than 120 foot maximum travel distance to a fire hose
valve. Show the location of all obstructions and/or racks on the drawing.
   The fire hose valves system piping shall be:
      • A separate riser piping system.
      • The 2½ inch valves shall be supplied by a minimum 4 inch with 2½ inch
drops to each valve.
      • Where system pressures exceed 100 psi provide potter reduced pressure
field adjustable type valves.
   Section 907.2 Where required - new buildings and structures [after section
of this code] Insert: Where automatic sprinkler protection installed in
accordance with section 903.1.3 or 903.1.2 is provided and connected to the
building fire alarm system, automatic heat detection required by this section
shall not be required. Fire alarm panels shall have single button silence and
reset functions. A remote full function annunciator panel may be required by
the fire code official. A document box shall be installed in a location that is
in close proximity of the main fire panel. The box will be Red in color, at
least 10 inches wide by 10 inches tall and contain a copy of the fire alarm and
fire sprinkler (if applicable) plan. The box will be labeled as "FD Documents".
The plan may be condensed and laminated.
   Add Section 907.5.2.3.4. Multi-tenant Group M. In single story, multi-tenant
Group M building shall be "ring by tenant" activated by the fire sprinkler
system flow switch for each space, manual and
automatic fire detection and shall include on outside, weatherproof, clear
strobe over the entrance to each tenant space as directed by the Fire
Department. All outside strobes shall be 75cd minimum.
   Add Section 912.3. Connections. Where a system allows, Fire Department
connections shall be a 5 inch StorzTM connection with a Knox-boxTM locking cap
and a 30-degree downturn.
   Add Section 913.4.2. Fire Sprinkler System. Fire pump test header. Provide a
supervised OS&Y control valve on all fire pump test headers. Provide an outside
test header on fire pump installations.
   Section 1003.1. Applicability. Insert at end of section: The provisions of
Chapter 34 of the International Building Code shall not be used to eliminate
the installation requirements for exit signs and means of egress illumination
sytems.
   Section 1008.3.3. Rooms and Spaces. Insert: 6. All rooms containing the
building's fire sprinkler, standpipe riser, and fire alarm control panel(s).
   Section 1103.5.3. [DATE BY WHICH SPRINKLER SYSTEMS MUST BE INSTALLED]
   Insert: as determined by AHJ.
   Section 1204.2.1.1. Pathways to Ridge.
      Insert (after pathways) ALL.
   Section 1204.2.1.2. Setbacks to Ridge.
      Insert: Eliminate everything after "occupying" and insert: Any roof
areas, a setback of not less than 36" wide is required on both sides of a
horizontal ridge.
   Section 1204.3.1. Perimeter Pathways.
      No exceptions.
   Section 1204.5. Buildings with Rapid Shutdown.
      After "permanent" insert: and reflective.
   Section 5605. Manufacture, Assembly, and Testing of Explosives, Explosive
Materials and Fireworks are Prohibited. Exceptions:
   • The hand loading of small arms ammunition prepared for personal use and
not offered for resale.
   • Pyrotechnic special effects application in accordance with NFPA 495 and
NFPA 1126.
   Section 5704.2.9.6.1. Storage of Class I & II liquids in above-ground tanks
outside of buildings is prohibited.
   Section 5706.4.4. Storage of Class I & II liquids in above-ground tanks
outside of buildings is prohibited.
   Section 5806.2. Storage of flammable cryogenic liquids in stationary
containers is prohibited.
   Section 6104.2. Remove 2000 gallons. Insert 1000 gallons.
(2000 Code, § 8.40.020) (Ord. 2914 § 2 (part), passed - -2005; Am. Ord. 2019-
04-0729O, passed 4-9-2019; Am. Ord. 2019-06-0739O, passed 6-11-2019)
§ 94.37 REFERENCED CODES AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those listed
in the International Fire Code, 2018, Chapter 80 and such codes and standards
shall be considered part of the requirement of this code to the prescribed
extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between the provisions
of this code and the referenced standards, the most stringent provision shall
apply. All of NFPA 2018 edition is adopted in its entirety.
   (B)   The listed NFPA editions are commonly referenced in the International
Fire Code and are adopted in their entirety.
NFPA 10, 2018  NFPA 25, 2017
NFPA 13, 2016  NFPA 33, 2016
NFPA13D, 2016  NFPA 72, 2016
NFPA 13R, 2016 NFPA 96, 2017
NFPA 14, 2016  NFPA101, 2018
NFPA 15, 2017  NFPA 110, 2016
NFPA 16, 2015  NFPA 111, 2013
NFPA 20, 2016  NFPA 1123, 2018
NFPA 22, 2018  NFPA 1124, 2018
NFPA 24, 2016   
 
(Ord. 2019-07-0743O, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 94.38 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Approved automatic sprinkler systems are required in all new buildings
and structures except detached garages and sheds and except that, in single-
family residential structures, N.F.P.A. 13D requirements for automatic
sprinklers are amended to provide that bathrooms of less than 80 square feet
and closets of less than 55 square feet are not required to have sprinklers.
Provide for at least one dry sprinkler head in any attached garage.
   (B)   Should an addition of 75% or more of the floor area of the original
single family residential building install automatic sprinklers in any part of
the existing building which shares a common wall or common floor/ceiling with
the addition, the primary resident will qualify for an incentive of 50% of the
total cost of the purchase and installation of the automatic fire sprinkler
system up to a maximum of $3,000. The resident will need to provide a copy of
their tax bill showing principle residency and proof that three quotes were
obtained to the City Administrator in order to qualify for the incentive.
   (C)   Any single family home that installs automatic sprinkler heads will
qualify for an incentive of $100 per head with a maximum incentive of $300.
Proof of a paid bill and proof of an inspection by the city's Building
Department will need to be provided to qualify for the incentive.
   (D)   Retro-fit of any existing assembly occupancies of Class A-2 of the
lounge, nightclub, restaurants, taverns, bars and banquets halls that have an
occupancy of 200 or more and live entertainment are required to install
automatic sprinklers within two years of passage of this subchapter. A change
in ownership does not relieve the responsibility of this requirement.
   (E)   (1)   All manufactured homes, commonly known as mobile homes,
trailers, installed from the date of passage of these amendments shall have
automatic sprinklers installed.
      (2)   This would include any new or used units.
(2000 Code, § 8.40.050) (Ord. 2914 § 3 (part), passed - -2005; Ord. 2006-07-
0044O, passed 7-11-2006; Am. Ord. 2014-01-0482O, passed 1-14-2014; Am. Ord.
2015-08-0554O, passed 9-22-2015; Am. Ord. 2019-04-0729, passed 4-9-2019)
§ 94.39 RESERVED.
§ 94.40 SPILLER PAY REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person causing or permitting a hazardous material incident may be
responsible for any and all of the following:
      (1)   Reimbursement in full for any and all costs incurred by the city in
connection with the operation, maintenance and staffing required to respond to
such hazardous material incident at the rates indicated in §
32.099(G);
      (2)   Reimbursement in full for any and all costs incurred by the city
for equipment and materials used, damaged, lost, spent, destroyed or rendered
irreparable in connection with a hazardous material incident; and/or
      (3)   Assumption of any and all liability and costs of any cleanup or
removal resulting from a hazardous material incident, including but not limited
to any independent clean-up contractor necessitated by the hazardous material
incident.
   (B)   The Fire Department/City Administrator shall prepare and forward to
the person or persons causing or permitting a hazardous material incident, a
bill for the total costs and expenses incurred for which such person or persons
are responsible pursuant to this section; provided, however, any cost in
connection with any independent clean-up contractor shall be billed directly by
the contractor. Payment of the total bill shall be made within 30 days of
receipt. Any bill or portion thereof remaining unpaid after 30 days of receipt
shall accrue interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of one and one-half
percent per month, or any fraction of a month.
(2000 Code, § 8.40.070) (Ord. 2914 § 3 (part), passed - -2005; Am. Ord. 2018-
04-06890, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 94.41 RESERVED.
FIREWORKS
§ 94.55 TITLE.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Oak Forest
Fireworks Ordinance.”
(2000 Code, § 8.36.010) (Ord. 2461 § 1, passed - -2000)
§ 94.56 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Chief of the Fire Department or higher designee.
   FIREWORKS. Includes any explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or an audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by combustion,
explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include the following:
      (1)   Firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs or other
devices of similar construction;
      (2)   Any fireworks containing any explosive compound; or
      (3)   Any tablets or other devices containing any explosive substance or
containing combustible substances producing visual effects.
   FIREWORKS. Shall not include the following:
      (1)   Auto flares;
      (2)   Snake or glow worm pellets;
      (3)   Smoke devices;
      (4)   Trick noisemakers known as “party poppers,” “booby traps,”
“snappers,” “trick matches,” “cigarette loads” and “auto burglar alarms;”
      (5)   Sparklers. The term SPARKLERS means a wire or stick coated with
pyrotechnic composition which may not exceed 100 grams per item, that produces
a shower of sparks upon ignition. The term SPARKLERS shall not include other
sparking devices including but not limited to items commonly known as
“fountains,” “spinners,” “wheels” or similar devices, the sale and use of which
is expressly prohibited;
      (6)   Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, other devices in which paper or
plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths grams or less of explosive
compound are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand cannot come
in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; or
      (7)   Toy pistol caps or plastic caps which contain less than twenty-five
hundredths grams of explosive mixture.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Oak Forest.
   POLICE. Any Oak Forest police officer.
(2000 Code, § 8.36.020) (Ord. 2461 § 2, passed - -2000)
§ 94.57 FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall possess, store, offer for sale, expose for sale,
manufacture, sell at retail, use or explode any fireworks except as provided in
this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 8.36.030) (Ord. 2461 § 3, passed - -2000) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.58 FIREWORKS DISPLAY PERMIT; APPLICATION.
   (A)   The applicant for a fireworks display permit shall submit an
application to the Fire Department at least 15 days in advance of the date of
the proposed fireworks display.
   (B)   Only persons or entities which operate fairs, amusement parks, outdoor
recreational facilities, governmental entities or persons or entities
authorized to use governmental property for a fireworks display may apply for a
fireworks display permit.
   (C)   The application shall state the date or dates of the fireworks
display, the location of the fireworks display and provide information about
the method of explosion, number, type and size of the fireworks to be displayed
as reasonably required by the Fire Department to determine the fire safety
precautions minimally necessary to protect the public and the safety measures
to be used to protect the public. The applicant shall state the name of the
fireworks display operator.
   (D)   Every permittee shall have and maintain adequate liability insurance
with minimum limits of $1,000,000 bodily injury and property damage, combined
single limit, naming the city, its officers, employees and agents as additional
insureds. That insurance shall indemnify and defend the city, its officers,
employees and agents against all claims, liability loss, damages or expenses,
whether caused by or contributed to by the negligence of the city, its
officers, employees or agents. The insurance shall provide that the city
receive written notice 30 days prior to any cancellation, nonrenewal or
material change in the policy. Proof of the insurance shall be submitted to the
Fire Department.
   (E)   The Fire Department shall approve and issue a fireworks display permit
to a person or entity if the applicant meets the conditions of this chapter for
a permit and the Fire Department determines that the location and character of
the proposed display is not in violation of any federal, state or county law or
ordinance or rule or regulation and is not a hazard to property and will not
endanger any person and the operator of the fireworks display is competent to
handle the display based upon the operator’s experience and reputation for
safety.
(2000 Code, § 8.36.040) (Ord. 2461 § 4, passed - -2000)
§ 94.59 SMOKING BY OPERATOR AT FIREWORKS DISPLAY PROHIBITED.
   No person in charge of or working in connection with any public display of
fireworks shall smoke at any time during which the public display is going on
or in the vicinity of materials to be used for the display.
(2000 Code, § 8.36.050) (Ord. 2461 § 5, passed - -2000) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.60 DISPOSAL OF UNFIRED FIREWORKS.
   Unfired fireworks and trash remaining after a public display of fireworks
for which a permit is issued shall be immediately disposed of in an approved
safe manner.
(2000 Code, § 8.36.060) (Ord. 2461 § 6, passed - -2000)
§ 94.61 PARENTAL LIABILITY.
   A parent, foster or family-operated group home, parent or legal guardian of
a minor who consents to the use of fireworks by the minor who is under the age
of 18 years of age is liable for damages caused by the minor’s use of the
fireworks, and in addition shall be subject to the penalty provided below.
(2000 Code, § 8.36.070) (Ord. 2461 § 7, passed - -2000)
§ 94.62 ADVERTISING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall advertise fireworks within the corporate limits of the
city on any sign or billboard located within the city, or by handbills or
circulars distributed within the city.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit sending solicitations or advertisements
solely to persons possessing a public display permit under §
94.58 above.
(2000 Code, § 8.36.090) (Ord. 2461 § 9, passed - -2000) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.63 SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS.
   The police shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense
of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, manufactured,
stored, possessed or held in violation of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 8.36.100) (Ord. 2461 § 10, passed - -2000)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   The imposition of one penalty for any violation of §§
94.01 through
94.20 shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All offenders
are required to correct or remedy the violations or defects within a reasonable
time. When not otherwise specified, a separate offense shall be deemed
committed each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained.
      (2)   The application of the penalty set forth in §
94.01 shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions.
(2000 Code, § 8.16.210)
   (C)   Persons who shall violate a provision of §§
94.35 through
94.41 or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
violation of fire codes, punishable by a fine of not more than $500. Each day
after that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(2000 Code, § 8.40.030) (Ord. 2914 § 2 (part), passed - -2005)
   (D)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
94.55 through
94.63 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $750. Each day that a
violation of §§
94.55 through
94.63 continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
(2000 Code, § 8.36.080) (Ord. 2461 § 8, passed - -2000)
CHAPTER 95: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions; Administration
   
95.01   Short title
   
95.02   Definitions
   
95.03   Animal Control Officer and assistant; positions established; Commission
created
   
95.04   Duties of Animal Control Officer
   
95.05   Animal control facility
   
95.06   Moneys kept by City Treasurer
   
95.07   License required; certificate of inoculation
   
95.08   Display of tags
   
95.09   Removal of tags
   
95.10   Inoculation of domestic animals
   
95.11   Exhibition of certificates of inoculation upon request
Prohibitions; Rules for Keeping
   
95.25   Release of domestic animals
   
95.26   Animals at large; impounding
   
95.27   Notice of impounding; issuance of citation
   
95.28   Redemption of impounded animals
   
95.29   Destruction of unredeemed animals
   
95.30   Impounding of dogs or animals which have bitten people
   
95.31   Certain animals prohibited
   
95.32   Number of domestic animals to be kept
   
95.33   Animal rescuer
   
95.34   Feral cat colony
   
95.35   Breeding
   
95.36   Housing and sanitation; removal of excrement
   
95.37   Proximity of animal houses to residences, churches or schools;
prohibited structures
   
95.38   Inspections
   
95.39   Diseased animals
   
95.40   Dead animals
   
95.41   Destruction of animals; responsibility of owners
   
95.42   Pet shops and kennels
   
95.43   Veterinary hospitals
   
95.44   Cruelty to animals
   
95.45   Animal fights
   
95.46   Hunting
   
95.47   Peace disturbance
   
95.48   Animals prohibited on streets
   
95.49   Dangerous animals running at large
   
95.50   Destruction of dangerous animals
   
95.51   Disposition of dogs or other animals deemed nuisances
   
95.52   Vicious dogs
   
95.53   Canine unit exemption
   
95.54   Wild animals
 
   
95.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION
§ 95.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Oak Forest Animal
Control Code of 2013.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.010) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any living vertebrate, domestic or wild, not including man.
   ANIMAL CONTROL COMMISSION ("COMMISSION"). An available non-profit or
volunteer corporation, association or group, recognized by the Mayor and known
and operating within the city, able and willing to work in partnership with Oak
Forest Animal Control to advocate for and provide rescue and re-homing of
unclaimed and abandoned local animals.
   ANIMAL RESCUER.  Any person that volunteers for the care and welfare of
abused or neglected animals.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises, within or without the city, designated by
Council for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals under authority of
this chapter.
   AT LARGE. Any domestic animal when it is off the property of its owner or
not restrained by a competent person by a leash or chain when not on the
property of its owner or keeper.
   CAT. Includes all animals of the feline family (Felis Catus).
   COMPETENT PERSON. A person who is physically and mentally capable of
managing and controlling a domestic pet which is his or her responsibility
while off the premises of the owner or keeper thereof.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any individual animal anywhere other than upon the
property of the owner or custodian and unmuzzled, unleashed or unattended by
its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical
injury or death to a person or a companion animal or a dog that, without
justification, bites a person and does not cause serious physical injury.
   DOG. Includes all animals, regardless of sex, of the canine species (Canis
Familiaris).
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal, except a farm or dangerous animal, which has
been domesticated so as to live and/or breed in a tame condition as a household
pet or guardian. For the purpose of this chapter, ferrets, pot-bellied pigs and
rabbits are determined to be DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   FEED. The offering, giving or attempting to give food or non-food items to
wild animals.
   INOCULATION. The injection, subcutaneously or otherwise, as approved by the
Department of Agriculture, of canine antirabic vaccine approved by the
Department.
   KENNEL. Any person engaged in the business of breeding, buying, selling or
boarding cats or dogs.
   OWNER. A person having a right of property of an animal, or who keeps or
harbors an animal, or who has a dog or other animal in his or her care, or who
acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about
any premises occupied by him or her.
   RESTRAINT. An animal that is controlled within a closed vehicle being driven
or parked on the streets, or that is within the property limits of the owner or
keeper or contained by a fence, a kennel or a leash or chain of sufficient
strength to control the dog or other animal.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed
veterinarian for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of
animals.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal living in a natural, undomesticated state or that is
generally naturally occurring as undomesticated in the city such as raccoons,
skunks, coyotes, squirrels, etc.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.020) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2016-08-0615O, passed 8-
9-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 95.03 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER AND ASSISTANT; POSITIONS ESTABLISHED; COMMISSION
CREATED.
   (A)   There is established the position of Animal Control Officer, who shall
be under the direction of the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   There is established the position of assistant to the Animal Control
Officer, who shall be under the direction of the Animal Control Officer.
      (1)   The position of assistant to the Animal Control Officer shall be an
unpaid, volunteer position filled as necessary and in such numbers as needed,
as determined by the Animal Control Officer. The assistant shall be appointed
by the Director of Public Works.
      (2)   The assistant to the Animal Control Officer shall primarily be
responsible for assisting in the care of animals in the custody of the city and
for such other associated duties as the Animal Control Officer shall direct.
      (3)   The assistant shall sign a waiver and release of liability,
acknowledging that the city has no responsibility for any injury, disease or
sickness of any kind that may occur due to the assistant’s responsibilities.
   (C)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to identify and appoint an appropriate
Animal Control Commission capable of the rescue and care of lost or abandoned
animals and provide such designation to the city's Animal Control Officer. The
function and role of any such designated Commission is to partner
and collaborate with the Animal Control Officer in the rescue and re-homing of
unclaimed and abandoned local animals, consistent with such responsibilities as
may be further set forth in this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.030) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2016-08-0615O, passed 8-
9-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 95.04 DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   (A)   Under the direction of the Director of Public Works, the Animal
Control Officer shall have the full power of enforcement of this chapter or any
part thereof.
   (B)   The Animal Control Officer shall have full authority to issue a
citation or summons, sign formal complaints against violators and appear in
court as an agent on behalf of the city for the purpose of enforcement of this
chapter. The Public Works Department shall notify the Animal Control Officer of
all complaints involving domestic animals running at large.
   (C)   Whenever any domestic animal running at large is apprehended it shall
be taken to the kennel as is, from time to time, designated by the city and a
record shall be made of its description and its license tags, if any. If it is
licensed, a reasonable attempt will be made by the Animal Control Officer to
locate the owner thereof and inform him or her of the animal’s apprehension.
   (D)   The Animal Control Officer shall remit to the city all moneys
collected by it for dog licenses, impounding fees and boarding fees, and shall
also submit a bill for the boarding of all unclaimed animals which are brought
to the kennel pursuant to this chapter.
   (E)   Any animal so impounded shall not be held more than 96 hours. The care
of any such domestic animal shall continue to be provided by the city during
the entire 96-hour period. At the expiration of such period, the Animal Control
Officer will consult and collaborate with the Animal Control Commission
regarding the assumption of the care, custody and control of the animal. The
Animal Control Officer will cooperate with the designated Commission at the end
of any such 96-hour impoundment period and allow the Commission to assess and
evaluate the animal. The Commission has no obligation to accept the transfer of
the animal and shall notify the Animal Control Officer in writing if they will
not accept the animal. The Animal Control Officer is then authorized to move
forward and make appropriate decisions under the provisions of this chapter. If
the Commission determines to accept the animal, all responsibilities for the
care, custody and control of the animal will then be transferred to and be
assumed by the Commission with no further obligation, involvement, or
responsibility on the part of the city or the Animal Control Officer. All
decision making thereafter regarding the animal rests with the Commission,
including placement and disposition of the future care or custody of the
animal.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.040) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2016-08-0615O, passed 8-
9-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 95.05 ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY.
   The city shall provide or contract to provide a suitable place for the
impounding of domestic animals. The Commission designated to work with the city
and Animal Control Officer shall be allowed the access to and use of this
facility for the care of animals under the custody and control of the
Commission, provided there is available space.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.050) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2016-08-0615O, passed 8-
9-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 95.06 MONEYS KEPT BY CITY TREASURER.
   All moneys received and paid out pursuant to this chapter shall be kept in a
separate account by the City Treasurer under the budget of the Public Works
Department.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.060) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
§ 95.07 LICENSE REQUIRED; CERTIFICATE OF INOCULATION.
   (A)   No person shall own or keep a dog or domestic cat in the city without
first obtaining a license therefor.
   (B)   The license shall be obtained from the City Clerk by reporting to the
City Clerk’s office annually, within 30 days after July 1 each year, the
person’s name and address and the name, breed, color and sex of each and every
dog and domestic cat owned or kept by such person.
   (C)   The person shall pay to the City Clerk or his or her duly authorized
representative $5 as an annual license fee for each such dog and domestic cat,
and each such license shall expire on June 30 next following its issuance.
   (D)   No such license shall be issued unless the owner presents a
certificate of inoculation for rabies from the County Health Department.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.070) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.08 DISPLAY OF TAGS.
   Every owner or keeper of a dog shall cause the dog to wear a collar or
harness and shall affix thereto a city license tag and a rabies control
inoculation tag.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.080) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-2-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
§ 95.09 REMOVAL OF TAGS.
   No person, without the consent of the owner or keeper, shall remove a
license tag for which a license has been obtained.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.090) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.10 INOCULATION OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   The requirements for inoculation of domestic animals is contained within the
Cook County Code of Ordinances Chapter 10 and adopted by this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.100) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
§ 95.11 EXHIBITION OF CERTIFICATES OF INOCULATION UPON REQUEST.
   Upon the request of the Public Works Department Animal Control Officer, at
any reasonable time, the owner or keeper of any unmuzzled dog or cat shall
exhibit his or her certificate, issued under §
95.10 above, showing the inoculation against rabies of any dog or cat owned or
controlled by him or her.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.140) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
PROHIBITIONS; RULES FOR KEEPING
§ 95.25 RELEASE OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   No person, other than a duly authorized employee or agent of the city, shall
untie any domestic animal that is in an enclosure or on the premises of its
owner or keeper or take or release any such domestic animal from the enclosure
or premises.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.150) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.26 ANIMALS AT LARGE; IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   No competent person shall cause, allow, permit or suffer a domestic
animal to be at large in the city. Any domestic animal shall be deemed to be at
large when it is off the property of its owner or keeper or not restrained by a
responsible person by a leash or chain when not on the property of its owner or
keeper.
   (B)   Employees and officers of the city, who are designated for the purpose
by the Director of Public Works, shall notify the Animal Control Officer of the
city as to any domestic animal found running at large or unlicensed in the city
contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the
city.
   (C)   When domestic animals are found running at large or unlicensed, the
dogs or other animals may be impounded at the discretion of the employees, but
the employees may cite the owner of the domestic animals to answer a charge of
violating a provision of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.160) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.27 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING; ISSUANCE OF CITATION.
   In case of impounding, and where the owner or keeper of a domestic animal is
disclosed by any tax or license tag worn by it, or is otherwise known to the
officers impounding the same, the Public Works Department shall at once give
notice by mail or other means to the owner or keeper, informing him or her of
the impounding of his or her domestic animal, and may cite the owner or keeper
to answer a charge of violating a provision of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.170) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
§ 95.28 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any domestic animal impounded under this chapter, except such as may
have bitten any person as specified in §
95.30 below, shall, unless sooner redeemed, be held for 72 hours in order to
afford an opportunity to the owner or keeper thereof to redeem the same.
However, in cases where there have been three or more tickets issued to the
animal’s owner or keeper in the preceding 12-month period for animals at large,
the Animal Control Officer or the Director of Public Works’ designee shall have
the authority to immediately transport the animal to an approved animal
facility other than the City of Oak Forest facility.
   (B)   Any such owner or keeper shall be required to pay all fees associated
with the impounding and release of the animal to the impounding facility.
      (1)   If the owner of the domestic animal reclaims the same, he or she
shall pay the kennel an impounding fee of $20 and a boarding fee of $20 per day
for every day the dog or other animal is so impounded.
      (2)   Additionally, if the dog or cat is not licensed, the owner shall
acquire a license before the dog or cat is released to him or her.
   (C)   No dog or cat shall be released without having been inoculated for the
current calendar year, or in accordance with the requirement of the Department
of Agriculture. Upon payment of the required charges, the dog shall thereupon
be released to the owner or keeper.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.180) (Ord. 2429, § 1 (part), passed - -1999; Ord. 2568, § 1,
passed - -2001; Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-03-
0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 95.29 DESTRUCTION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS.
   Any impounded domestic animal which is not redeemed within 96 hours, and is
not transferred to a designated Animal Control Commission, may be humanely
destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the Animal Control Officer.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.190) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2016-08-0615O, passed 8-
9-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 95.30 IMPOUNDING OF DOGS OR ANIMALS WHICH HAVE BITTEN PEOPLE.
   (A)   Whenever any animal bites any person, the owner of the animal or
anyone having knowledge of the bite shall immediately notify the Police
Department or Animal Control Officer.
   (B)   Any animal which has bitten or otherwise injured any person so as to
cause an abrasion of the skin shall be immediately taken, impounded and kept
separated from animals for ten days. If the animal has not been currently
inoculated, the animal shall be taken to a licensed veterinarian for proper
examinations and observations.
   (C)   If, during the examinations and observations in division (B) above,
the animal develops symptoms of illness; a veterinarian shall be called to
diagnose its condition. If the symptoms disclosed are such as to indicate the
presence of rabies, such animal shall be destroyed in such a manner as to
preserve intact the head, which shall thereupon be detached and immediately
sent to the diagnostic laboratory of the Department of Agriculture.
   (D)   If a tranquilizer gun or taser is used to apprehend a stray or vicious
animal, which cannot be captured by normal means, the city and/or its agents
shall not be held responsible if the animal succumbs as a result of the use of
the tranquilizer gun or taser.
   (E)   If, at the expiration of ten days, no symptoms of rabies have
developed in the animal so impounded, the same may be redeemed by the owner
upon payment of the redemption fees and charges specified in §
95.28 above. After having been notified that his or her dog has bitten or
otherwise injured any person, the owner or keeper thereof shall not, under any
circumstances, permit the animal to be at large unless securely muzzled.
   (F)   Any expense incurred in the handling of any animal under this section
shall be borne by the owner or keeper. No owner or keeper shall sell or give
away or otherwise dispose of any dog or other animal that is known to have
bitten a person, until it is released as required by law.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.200) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
§ 95.31 CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall keep any mule, ass, bovine, goat, sheep, poultry, fowl, or
any other non-domestic animal in the city. Horses and ponies are permitted if
the property is zoned Residential Estate.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.210) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.32 NUMBER OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS TO BE KEPT.
   No person shall keep or maintain more than a total of three adult domestic
animals in, on or around a single-family dwelling, apartment, home or domicile
within the city. However, this shall not apply to licensed kennels, pet shops,
animal rescuers or a licensed veterinary hospital or clinic.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.220) (Ord. 2599 § 1, passed --2002; Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O,
passed 9-28- 2010; Am. Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am.
Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.33 ANIMAL RESCUER.
   (A)   The city will allow up to two additional dogs to be housed with an
animal rescuer.
   (B)   To qualify as an animal rescuer, a person must submit an application
to the City Clerk.
   (C)   This application must include the following:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The applicant and applicant’s address must be registered with a
national agency as an animal rescue facility;
      (3)   Proof that all dogs housed at the address are current with all
shots and vaccinations;
      (4)   Proof that all dogs residing at the address are registered with the
city as well as display current state and county tags; and
      (5)   A written consent to allow the increase in dogs from all neighbors.
For purposes of this section, NEIGHBOR means all properties that immediately
abut the property.
   (D)   Upon receipt of the application, the city shall conduct a review of it
records and make any investigations to determine whether there have been any
past violations of the Animal Control Code and that the applicant’s location is
suitable for housing any additional pets.
   (E)   Violations of the Animal Control Code shall be a sufficient basis to
deny any application.
   (F)   If municipal approval is granted, the applicant shall consent to and
allow unscheduled Animal Control Officer inspections of the location.
   (G)   The failure of any applicant to remain current with all licenses,
shots, vaccinations and registry, as well as to fully comply with city
ordinance shall result in a revocation of the animal rescuer designation.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.220) (Ord. 2599 § 2, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O,
passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am.
Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 95.34 FERAL CAT COLONY.
   (A)   The city may enter into agreements with organizations designated by
the Cook County Animal Control office as participating in a feral cat colony
program in efforts to reduce the feral cat population.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to provide food, water or shelter to
a colony of free-roaming cats, unless:
      (1)   The colony is a managed colony, registered with approved sponsor;
and
      (2)   Feral cat colony caretakers shall be entitled to maintain and care
for feral cats by providing food, water, shelter and other forms of sustenance,
provided that the feral cat colonies are registered with a Cook County approved
sponsor, and that the feral cat colony caretaker takes all appropriate and
available steps to meet the terms and conditions of this section.
   (C)   Feral cat colonies are exempt from §
95.32.
   (D)   All persons maintaining a feral cat colony shall follow all rules and
regulations as established by the Cook County Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10,
Article IV Managed Care of Feral Cats.
(Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part),
passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 95.35 BREEDING.
   No person shall keep or maintain any animal for breeding purposes within the
city without the consent, in writing, of all property owners and persons living
within 500 feet each way from the place where it is proposed to breed the
animals.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.230) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.36 HOUSING AND SANITATION; REMOVAL OF EXCREMENT.
   (A)   Every owner shall provide domestic animals with adequate space and
housing and shall keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition and free from
filth, offal or other refuse.
   (B)   No competent person shall appear with an animal upon public ways,
within public places or upon the property of another, absent that person’s
consent, without some means for the removal of excrement, nor shall any person
fail to remove any excrement deposited by such animal. This section shall not
apply to a blind person while walking his or her guide dog.
   (C)   No person shall allow his or her animal to run at large and deposit
excrement upon public ways, within public places or upon the property of
another.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.240) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.37 PROXIMITY OF ANIMAL HOUSES TO RESIDENCES, CHURCHES OR SCHOOLS;
PROHIBITED STRUCTURES.
   (A)   No separate structure or enclosure used for the housing of domestic
animals shall be erected or maintained closer than 25 feet from any residential
unit or closer than 100 feet from any church or school. Such a structure or
enclosure shall otherwise comply with applicable building, zoning, health and
sanitation ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state.
   (B)   No person shall build or erect, or cause to be built or erected, any
stable, barn, shed or other structure to be used for the keeping, confining or
housing of any animal that is not permitted in the city, as set forth in §
95.31 above.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.250) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
§ 95.38 INSPECTIONS.
   Separate space and housing used for more than three dogs or animals shall be
subject to inspection at reasonable times and hours by the Health Commissioner
or the Animal Control Officer.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.260) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
§ 95.39 DISEASED ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall permit, suffer or allow a domestic animal afflicted
with a contagious or infectious disease to run at large or to be exposed in any
public place whereby the health of human or beast may be affected.
   (B)   No person shall ship or remove a diseased animal from the premises of
the owner thereof, except under the supervision of competent authority as
designated by the Director of Public Works.
   (C)   It is the duty of the competent authority as designated by the
Director of Public Works to secure the disposition of any diseased animal and
the treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread
of the contagion or infection, except in cases where the State Veterinarian is
authorized to act.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.270) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.40 DEAD ANIMALS.
   No person, being the owner of a dead animal, shall allow the animal to
remain for more than 12 hours within the city limits without being buried.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.280) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.41 DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS; RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS.
   (A)   It is not the obligation of the city, upon an owner’s request, to pick
up a dog or other animal for the purpose of destroying it.
   (B)   That obligation rests solely with the owner.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.290) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
§ 95.42 PET SHOPS AND KENNELS.
   In addition to the provisions for housing and sanitation contained in this
chapter, pet shops and kennels shall comply with other ordinances and state
statutes now in full force and effect and any ordinance or statute amendatory
or supplementary thereto pertaining to the licensing and maintenance of pet
shops and kennels.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.300) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
§ 95.43 VETERINARY HOSPITALS.
   In addition to the provisions for housing and sanitation contained in this
chapter, veterinary hospitals shall comply with other ordinances and state
statutes now in full force and effect and any ordinance or statute amendatory
or supplementary thereto pertaining to the licensing and maintenance of
veterinary hospitals.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.310) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
§ 95.44 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the city in any way.
   (B)   Any person who inhumanely beats, tortures, starves, poisons, overloads
or abandons any animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section.
   (C)   No owner or person shall confine any animal in a motor vehicle in a
manner that places the animal in a life or health threatening situation by
exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold. In order to protect the
life and safety of an animal, an animal control officer, law enforcement
officer, or fire personnel who has reason to believe that this section is
violated shall have the authority to enter such motor vehicle by any reasonable
means under the circumstances, after making reasonable effort to locate the
owner or person.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.320) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.45 ANIMAL FIGHTS.
   No person shall instigate, cause or procure any dog fight, prize fight, cock
fight or any other public or private fighting between animals.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.330) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.46 HUNTING.
   (A)   No person shall kill, take or wound, or attempt to kill, take or
wound, with any shotgun, rifle, pistol, revolver, air gun or other firearm, or
a bow and arrow, any wild bird, wild game or wild animal in the city.
   (B)   No person shall hunt, pursue, harass or disturb in any manner any wild
bird, wild game or wild animal in the city with a loaded shotgun, rifle,
pistol, revolver, air gun or other firearm, or a bow and arrow, with the intent
to use the same in the city.
   (C)   This section does not apply to any officer of the law while in the
performance of his or her duty, or to persons lawfully summoned by an officer
to assist him or her while those persons are so engaged in assisting the
officer.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.340) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.47 PEACE DISTURBANCE.
   No person shall keep any dog, whelp, bitch or other animal shut in or tied
up in any yard, house or other place, which animal, by barking, howling or
other noise, disturbs the peace and quiet of any family, individual or
neighborhood.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.350) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.48 ANIMALS PROHIBITED ON STREETS.
   (A)   No person shall ride, lead or drive, or cause to be ridden, led or
driven, on any public thoroughfare, parkway or shoulder of a road in the city,
any horse, pony, cattle, pig, goat or sheep.
   (B)   Animals may be ridden, led or driven along bridle paths and across
animal crossings as so designated and approved by the Mayor and Council.
   (C)   Animals may be ridden, led or driven along a designated parade route
if they are direct participants in a parade approved by the City Clerk’s office
and if a parade permit has been issued.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.360) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
§ 95.49 DANGEROUS ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   No person, being the owner thereof, shall knowingly suffer, permit or allow
any dangerous, unruly, fierce or mischievous animal to run at large to the
danger, annoyance or damage of any other person or property.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.370) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.50 DESTRUCTION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   Members of the Police Department and the Animal Control Officer are
authorized to destroy any dangerous animal of any kind when it is necessary for
the protection of any person or property.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.380) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
§ 95.51 DISPOSITION OF DOGS OR OTHER ANIMALS DEEMED NUISANCES.
   Any dog or other animal which, in any manner, continually disturbs the quiet
of any person or neighborhood, or destroys or injures any animal, plant, shrub
or other property that is not on the premises of its owner or keeper, is
declared to be a nuisance, and the dog or other animal shall be taken up and
impounded and may be redeemed or disposed of in the manner provided for in §§
95.28 through
95.30 above.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.390) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
§ 95.52 VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      VICIOUS DOG. A dog falling within any of the following categories:
         (a)   Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack unprovoked, to cause injury to or otherwise threaten the safety of human
beings or domestic animals;
         (b)   Any dog which, because of its vicious propensity, is capable of
inflicting injury, serious physical harm or death to humans, and which would
constitute a danger to human life or property if it were not kept in the manner
required by this chapter;
         (c)   Any dog which, without provocation, attacks or bites, or has
attacked or bitten, a human being or domestic animal; or
         (d)   Any dog owned or harbored primarily, or in part, for the purpose
of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting.
   (B)   Declaring a dog “vicious.” If the Animal Control Officer or a public
works supervisor has reason to believe that a dog falls within any of the
categories that would render it vicious, they shall investigate the
circumstances to determine whether the dog falls within the definition of
“vicious dog” as provided in this section. In the event that, following
investigation, the Animal Control Officer or public works supervisor determines
that the dog is a vicious dog, as defined in this section, they may declare
that the dog is vicious in accordance with this section.
   (C)   Notice of vicious dog declaration.
      (1)   Within seven days of a determination by the Animal Control Officer
or public works supervisor that a dog is vicious, the officer making the
determination shall notify the dog’s owner, if known, in writing, of the
declaration.
      (2)   This notice shall identify the requirements and conditions for
maintaining a vicious dog as set forth in this section.
      (3)   If the owner is unknown or cannot be located, the dog may be
immediately impounded.
      (4)   If the owner’s address is known, but the owner cannot be located,
the notice shall be posted on the owner’s property or sent by certified mail to
the owner’s last known address.
   (D)   Hearing on vicious dog declaration. The known owner of a vicious dog
shall have the opportunity to have a hearing on the declaration in accordance
with the following procedures:
      (1)   The owner of a dog that has been declared vicious in accordance
with this section shall have the right to file a written request for a hearing
to contest the declaration. Such a request must be filed with the Director of
Public Works within seven days after the owner received notice of the vicious
dog declaration. In the event that the owner fails to file a written request
for a hearing within the requisite seven-day period, or fails to appear at a
scheduled hearing, the owner will be deemed to have waived the right to a
hearing on the declaration. In that situation, the dog shall be deemed vicious
and the owner shall be required to comply with all of the requirements and
conditions for maintaining a vicious dog as set forth in this section;
      (2)   Within seven days of the receipt of a written request for a
hearing, or as soon thereafter as is practical, a hearing shall be scheduled
and conducted by the City Administrator or his or her designee. The hearing
will be informal and strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The owner and
the city may be represented by counsel, present oral and written evidence, and
cross-examine witnesses;
      (3)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall issue a written
decision within seven business days after the conclusion of the hearing. The
owner shall be mailed a copy of the written decision. The decision of the City
Administrator or his or her designee shall be final; and
      (4)   In the event that the City Administrator or his or her designee
upholds the vicious dog declaration, the owner shall comply with all of the
requirements and conditions for maintaining a vicious dog as set forth in this
chapter.
   (E)   Requirements for keeping a vicious dog. In order to keep or permit a
vicious dog within the corporate limits of Oak Forest, the owner of a vicious
dog shall be required to act in accordance with the following.
      (1)   Confinement.
         (a)   All vicious dogs shall be securely confined indoors or in an
enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the owner.
         (b)   The pen or structure must have minimum dimensions of five feet
by ten feet, and must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides.
         (c)   If no bottom is secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded
into the ground no less than two feet.
      (2)   Leash/muzzle. The owner of a vicious dog shall not allow the dog to
go outside its kennel, pen or structure, unless the dog is muzzled, restrained
by a chain or leash not more than four feet long, and under the physical
control of a person.
      (3)   Signs.
         (a)   The owner of a vicious dog shall display a clearly visible
warning sign, in a prominent place on his or her premises, indicating that
there is a vicious dog on the premises.
         (b)   The sign must be legible from the public streets or
thoroughfares upon which the owner’s property adjoins.
         (c)   The owner shall also display a sign with a symbol warning
children of the presence of a vicious dog.
         (d)   Exact or similar signs shall be posted on the dog’s kennel, pen
or enclosed structure.
      (4)   Insurance.
         (a)   The owner of a vicious dog must maintain public liability
insurance providing a minimum amount of $500,000 of coverage, insuring the
owner for any damage or personal injury which may be caused by his or her
vicious dog.
         (b)   Upon a declaration that a dog is vicious, the owner of a vicious
dog must provide proof to the City Clerk that the owner possesses the required
insurance.
         (c)   Upon request of the city, the owner may be required to present
proof of insurance, upon occasion, demonstrating that the owner is maintaining
the insurance.
      (5)   Notice of change of status. The owner of a vicious dog shall notify
the city’s Animal Control Officer or the Public Works Department immediately
upon learning that the vicious dog is unconfined or on the loose, or if the dog
has attacked a human being or domestic animal.
      (6)   Notice of change of ownership.
         (a)   If the owner of a dog declared to be vicious pursuant to this
section sells, gives away or otherwise transfers custody or ownership of the
vicious dog, the owner shall, within three days of the sale or transfer,
provide the city’s Animal Control Officer or Public Works Department with the
name, address and telephone number of the vicious dog’s new owner or custodian.
         (b)   The owner shall notify the new owner or custodian of the dog’s
designation as a vicious dog.
         (c)   If the new owner or custodian resides or keeps the dog within
the corporate limits of the City of Oak Forest, the owner shall inform the new
owner or custodian of the requirements and conditions for keeping a vicious dog
as established in this chapter.
   (F)   Order for impoundment and destruction. The Animal Control Officer,
police watch commander, or public works supervisor may order the impoundment
and destruction of a dog upon occurrence of one of the following:
      (1)   The dog has attacked, bitten, injured or killed a human being or
domestic animal;
      (2)   The dog has been declared to be vicious pursuant to this section
and the owner has failed to comply with the requirements and conditions for
keeping a vicious dog in accordance with this section; or
      (3)   The dog poses a threat of serious harm to the public health or
safety.
   (G)   Notice of impoundment or destruction. Within seven days of an
impoundment, the officer ordering the impoundment or destruction of a dog shall
notify the dog’s owner, if known, in writing, of the impoundment or
destruction.
   (H)   Hearing on impoundment or destruction. The known owner of a vicious
dog shall have the opportunity to have a hearing on the impoundment or
recommended destruction in accordance with the following procedures.
      (1)   The owner of a dog that has been impounded pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall have the right to file a written request for a
hearing to contest the impoundment.
         (a)   Such a request must be filed with the Public Works Director
within seven days after the owner received notice of the impoundment.
         (b)   In the event that the owner fails to file a written request for
a hearing within the requisite seven-day period, or fails to appear at a
scheduled hearing, the owner will be deemed to have waived the right to a
hearing on the impoundment.
         (c)   In that situation, the Director of Public Works may order the
destruction of the dog or take any other steps he or she deems necessary to
protect the public health or safety from the potential danger posed by the dog.
      (2)   Within seven days of the receipt of a written request for a
hearing, or as soon thereafter as is practical for the city administration, a
hearing shall be scheduled by the city. The hearing shall be conducted by the
City Administrator or his or her designee. The hearing will be informal and
strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The owner and the city may be
represented by counsel, present oral and written evidence, and cross-examine
witnesses.
      (3)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall issue a written
decision within seven business days after the conclusion of the hearing. The
owner shall be mailed a copy of the written decision. The decision of the City
Administrator shall be final.
      (4)   After considering all of the relevant evidence presented at a
hearing in accordance with this division, the City Administrator or his or her
designee may order the destruction or continued impoundment of the dog, or may
release the dog to its owner conditional on the owner complying with the
requirements for keeping a vicious dog as established in this section, and
conditional on the owner complying with any other requirements that the
Director of Public Works deems necessary to protect the public health or safety
from the potential danger posed by the dog.
   (I)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Dogs used by the Police Department or a law enforcement agency;
      (2)   Dogs that have injured a person, or the property of a person, who
was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises of the dog’s
owner; and
      (3)   Dogs that have injured a person, or the property of a person, who
was teasing, taunting, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog.
   (J)   Dog fighting prohibited. No person shall possess, harbor or maintain
the care or custody of any dog for the purpose of dog fighting, nor shall any
person train, torment, badger, bait or otherwise use any dog for the purpose of
fighting or for the purpose of causing or encouraging the dog to attack human
beings or domestic animals.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.400) (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
§ 95.53 CANINE UNIT EXEMPTION.
   Trained police dogs utilized by an official law enforcement agency and
assigned to a sworn peace officer as part of a canine team/unit shall be exempt
from all provisions of this chapter as well as any applicable provision of any
other chapter of this code.
(Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part),
passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 95.54 WILD ANIMALS.
   (A)   The city provides animal control services for wild animals on public
and private property if the animal is sick or injured or poses a threat to
human safety.
   (B)   Removal of wild animals that do not pose an immediate threat must be
done by a State of Illinois licensed private wildlife removal service.
   (C)   No person on public or private property shall attract or feed wild
and/or stray domestic animals, including but not limited to stray cats, stray
dogs, seagulls, geese, skunks, raccoons, squirrels or deer within the city
limits. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit persons from feeding birds on
their private property using bird feeders or other receptacles. This section
shall not apply to an Animal Control Officer in the performance of his or her
official duties or to state and/or federal wildlife officials in the
performance of their official duties.
(Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part),
passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
(2000 Code, § 6.04.410) (Ord. 2417 (part), passed - -1999; Ord. 2429 § 1
(part), passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28- 2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-
27-2018)
CHAPTER 96: CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY
Section
Chronic Nuisance Property Abatement
   
96.01   Violation
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Procedure
   
96.04   Judicial remedies
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY ABATEMENT
§ 96.01 VIOLATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any property within the city to become or
remain a chronic nuisance property in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or person in charge to:
      (1)   Suffer or permit a property to become a chronic nuisance property;
and
      (2)   Allow a property to continue as a chronic nuisance property.
   (C)   Each day on which a violation of the chapter continues shall be
considered a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 2019-06-0741O, passed 6-25-2019)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police of the City of Oak Forest or his
designee.
   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY. Property upon which three or more nuisance
activities have occurred within a 12-month period as a result of any three
separate factual events that have been independently investigated by any law
enforcement agency.
   CONTROL. The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract, or govern
conduct that occurs on that property.
   NUISANCE ACTIVITIES. Any of the following activities, behaviors, or conduct,
as defined by federal, state of city ordinance:
      (1)   Disorderly conduct as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1.
      (2)   Unlawful use of weapons as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-
1 et seq.
      (3)   Mob action as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 25-1.
      (4)   Discharge of a firearm as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 24-1.2
and 24-1.5.
      (5)   Gambling as defined by ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1.
      (6)   Possession, manufacture, or delivery of controlled substances as
defined by ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 401 et seq.
      (7)   Public indecency as defined by ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-9.
      (8)   Assault or battery or any related offenses as defined in ILCS Ch.
720, Act 5, §§ 12-1 et seq.
      (9)   Sexual abuse or related offense as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5,
§§ 12-15 et seq.
      (10)   Prostitution as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 11-14 et seq.
      (11)   Criminal damage to property as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§
21-1 et seq.
      (12)   Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in ILCS
Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq.
      (13)   Criminal housing management as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §
12-5.1.
      (14)   Structure unfit for human occupancy as defined in the city's
Property Maintenance Code.
      (15)   Unsafe structure as defined in the city's Property Maintenance
Code.
      (16)   Unlawful structure as defined in the city's Property Maintenance
Code.
      (17)   Multiple and serious violations of the city's Property Maintenance
Code continuing after disposition of a housing court complaint for those
violations.
      (18)   Activity that constitutes a violation of a felony or Class A
misdemeanor pursuant to a federal or Illinois statute.
   OWNER. Any person, partnership, land trust, or corporation having any legal
or equitable interest in the property. OWNER includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   A mortgagee in possession in who is vested:
         (a)   All or party of the legal title to the property;
         (b)   All or part of the beneficial ownership and the rights to the
present us and enjoyment of the premises.
      (2)   An occupant who can control what occurs on the property.
      (3)   Any person acting as an agent of an owner as defined herein.
   PERMIT. To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or
expressly assent of agree to the doing of an act.
   PERSON. Any natural person, association, partnership, corporation, or other
entity capable of owning, occupying, or using property in the city.
   PERSON IN CHARGE. Any person in actual or constructive possession of a
property, including but not limited to, an owner, occupant of property under
his or her ownership or control.
   PROPERTY. Any real property, including land and that which affixed,
incidental, or pertinent to land, including but not limited to, any premises,
room, house, building, or structure, or any separate part or portion thereof,
whether permitted or not.
(Ord. 2019-06-0741O, passed 6-25-2019)
§ 96.03 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   When the Chief of Police of the city receives one or more police
reports documenting the occurrence of a nuisance activity on or within a
property, the Chief of Police shall independently review such reports to
determine whether they describe nuisance activities.
   (B)   Upon such finding, the Chief shall:
      (1)   Notify the person in charge in writing that the property is in
danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the
following information:
         (a)   The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the property;
         (b)   A statement that the Police Department has information that the
property may be a chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the
nuisance activities that may exist or that have occurred;
         (c)   Service shall be made either personally of by first class mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested, address to the person in charge at
the address of the property believed to be a chronic nuisance property, or such
other place which is likely to give the person in charge notice of the
determination by the Chief of Police;
         (d)   A copy of the notice shall be served on the taxpayer of record
at such address as shown on the tax rolls of the county and/or the occupant, at
the address of the properly if these persons are different from the person in
charge, and shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage
prepaid;
         (e)   The failure of any person to receive notice that the property
may be a chronic nuisance property shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the
proceedings under this chapter.
   (C)   Should the person in charge fail to prevent the property from becoming
a chronic nuisance property, the Chief of Police or his designee may commence
proceedings to abate the nuisance conditions. The city shall have the right, in
its sole discretion, to pursue nuisance abatement proceedings either in the
Circuit Court of Cook County, or through administrative adjudication of
building and housing violations, as provided in this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2019-06-0741O, passed 6-25-2019)
§ 96.04 JUDICIAL REMEDIES.
   (A)   In the event the city pursues a judicial abatement remedy and in the
event that a court determines a properly to be a chronic nuisance property, the
court may order that the property be closed and secured against all use and
occupancy for a period of not less than 30 days, but not more than 180 days or
the court may employ any other remedy deemed by it appropriate to abate the
nuisance.
   (B)   In addition to the remedy provided in division (A) above, the violator
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $750 per day,
payable to the City of Oak Forest, for each day the owner or his agent had
actual knowledge that the property was a public nuisance properly and permitted
the property to remain a public nuisance property.
   (C)   In determining what remedy or remedies to employ, the court may
consider evidence of other conduct that has occurred on the property,
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   The disturbance of neighbors;
      (2)   The occurrence of other nuisance on or from the property;
      (3)   The property's general reputation and/or reputation of persons in
or frequenting the property.
   (D)   The court may authorize the city to physically secure the property
against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do so within the time
specified by the court. In the event that the city is authorized to secure the
property, all costs reasonably incurred by the city to affect the closure shall
be made and assessed as a lien against the property and debt to the city. As
used herein, COSTS mean those costs actually incurred by the city for the
physical securing of the property.
   (E)   The Building Department employee effecting the closure shall prepare a
statement of costs, and the city shall thereafter submit said statement to the
court for its review. If no objection to the statement is made within the
period described by the court, a lien in said amount may be recorded against
said property.
   (F)   Any person who is assessed the cost of closure and/or civil penalty by
the court shall be personally liable for the payment there of to the city.
(Ord. 2019-06-0741O, passed 6-25-2019)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
111.   FOOD AND BEVERAGE
         
112.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE
         
113.   ADVERTISING AND MERCHANDISING
         
114.   AMUSEMENTS
         
115.   ELDER CARE
         
116.   CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS
         
117.   LODGING
         
118.   COMMERCIAL RETAIL AND SERVICE PROVIDERS
         
119.   GARAGE AND RUMMAGE SALES
         
120.   PET SHOPS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Business Licenses Generally
   
110.001   Applicability of chapter
   
110.002   License or permit required
   
110.003   Applications
   
110.004   Forms
   
110.005   Signatures
   
110.006   Inspections and investigations
   
110.007   Fees
   
110.008   Issuance of licenses and permits to persons indebted to city
   
110.009   Assignment and transfer of licenses and permits
   
110.010   Revocation and suspension of licenses and permits
   
110.011   Posting of licenses and permits
   
110.012   Termination of licenses and permits; notice and late fees
   
110.013   Change of location of licensed business; notice
   
110.014   Businesses as nuisances
   
110.015   Right of entry for inspection
   
110.016   Identification of trucks
   
110.017   Maintenance of premises; comfort facilities
   
110.018   Periodic inspections
Weights and Measures
   
110.030   Scales required
   
110.031   False weights and measures
Contractor Registration
   
110.045   Definitions
   
110.046   Subcontractors
   
110.047   Registration fees
   
110.048   Compliance required
   
110.049   Bonds
   
110.050   Insurance
   
110.051   Electrical and plumbing contractors
   
110.052   Registration
Foreign Fire Insurance Companies
   
110.065   Compliance required; liability
   
110.066   Payments to city
   
110.067   Annual report to city
   
110.068   Administration by Illinois Municipal League; Fire Insurance Tax
Bureau
Grease Trap Sludge Removal and Transportation Licenses
   
110.080   Grease trap sludge defined
   
110.081   Maintenance of traps required; use of dissolving agents
   
110.082   Discharging sludge into sewers prohibited
   
110.083   Transportation or acceptance of sludge; manifests and licenses
required
   
110.084   Licenses required
   
110.085   Application for licenses
   
110.086   Sludge manifests
   
110.087   Inspection of facilities and equipment
   
110.088   Expiration of licenses; renewals
   
110.089   Revocation of licenses
   
110.090   License to be personal privilege; right to amend or repeal chapter
House Movers
   
110.105   License required; fee
   
110.106   Bond
   
110.107   Insurance
   
110.108   Planking of streets and sidewalks
   
110.999   Penalty
BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
§ 110.001 APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.
   This subchapter shall govern the licensing of the various trades, businesses
and professions in this Title XI, except to the extent that the same is
governed by other provisions in this title.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.010)
§ 110.002 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate any business or establishment, or engage in any
business, activity or occupation, for which a license fee is provided in this
business regulation title, without having first obtained a license or permit
for the business, activity or occupation.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.020) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.003 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications for licenses and permits required by this business
regulation title shall be made in writing to the City Clerk, who is the
Business License Commissioner of the city, upon forms provided by him or her.
   (B)   Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the license or
permit desired, the location to be used, if any, and the square footage of the
premises to be used by the licensee, and each application shall contain such
additional information as may be required by this business regulation title or
requested by city officials.
   (C)   No license or permit shall be issued until the applicant has furnished
all information requested by the City Clerk or other municipal official and
until all other city ordinances are complied with.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.030)
§ 110.004 FORMS.
   Forms for all licenses and permits issued under this business regulation
title and applications therefore shall be prepared and kept on file by the City
Clerk.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.040)
§ 110.005 SIGNATURES.
   Each license or permit issued under this business regulation title shall
bear the signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk in the absence of any
provision to the contrary.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.050)
§ 110.006 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit, in those cases where
the ordinances of the municipality necessitate an inspection or investigation,
the City Clerk shall, before the issuance of the permit or license, refer the
application to the proper officer for the investigation or inspection within 48
hours of the time of the receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making
the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, in writing, within
ten days after receiving the application. The Health Commissioner shall make
inspections of all premises in regard to compliance with sanitation
regulations; the Fire Chief shall make inspections in regard to compliance with
fire regulations; and the Building Commissioner shall make or cause to be made
inspections in regard to compliance with ordinances relating to the
construction of buildings or other structures. All investigations, except where
otherwise provided, shall be made by the Chief of Police or by some other
officer designated by the Mayor.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.060)
§ 110.007 FEES.
   (A)   All fees and charges for licenses and permits shall be paid in advance
to the City Clerk at the time the application therefor is filed. Business
licenses shall be issued annually, and fees shall be based on a full year rate,
which shall cover the whole year or any portion of the license period for which
application is made.
   (B)   Except where otherwise provided in this business regulation title, the
annual license or permit fee for a business, activity, occupation or profession
shall be computed as follows.
      (1)   Base license fee $50; plus
      (2)   Annual occupancy inspection fee:
Annual Inspection Fees for Certification of Occupancy
(Includes Costs of Annual Oak Forest Fire Inspection)
Square Footage Annual Fee
Annual Inspection Fees for Certification of Occupancy
(Includes Costs of Annual Oak Forest Fire Inspection)
Square Footage   Annual Fee
0 to 500         $5
501 to 1,000     $10
1,001 to 1,500   $15
1,501 to 2,000   $20
2,001 to 3,000   $30
3,001 to 4,000   $45
4,001 to 5,000   $55
5,001 to 6,000   $65
6,001 to 7,000   $95
7,001 to 8,000   $125
8,001 to 9,000   $150
9,001 to 10,000  $185
10,001 to 15,000 $235
15,001 to 20,000 $310
20,001 to 30,000 $375
30,001 and over  $550
 
      (3)   Additional fees detailed in the Municipal Code:
Oak Forest Municipal Code Fees Annual Fee Notes
Oak Forest Municipal Code Fees    Annual Fee Notes
Bowling alley                     $100       City agreement
Carnivals                         various    (negotiated)
Cigarette and tobacco dealer      $100       plus square footage city agreement
Circuses                          various    (negotiated)
Day care center                   $100
Dry cleaner (plant)               $100       for each plant
Motel - Class I                   $50        plus $5 each lodging unit
Motel - Class II (extended stay)  $500       plus $50 each lodging unit
Hotel - Class I                   $30        plus $5 each lodging unit
Hotel - Class II (extended stay)  $300       plus $50 each lodging unit
House mover                       $100
Limousine                         $100       for first vehicle plus $100 each
                                             additional vehicle
Mobile home park                  $100       plus $20/trailer
Nursing home                      $100
Outdoor advertising               $100       each billboard
Residential rental housing (1 to  $100
24 dwelling units)
Residential rental housing (25 or $200
more dwelling units)
Scavenger                         $200       each vehicle
Sludge removal /transportation    $200
Taxi cabs                         $100       each vehicle plus square footage
Towing operator                   $100       each vehicle
Young adult entertainment         $1,000
occupancy to 100
Young adult entertainment         $5,000
occupancy to 200
Young adult entertainment         $10,000
occupancy to 300
Young adult entertainment         $20,000
occupancy to 600
 
      (4)   Fees for coin operated devices, gasoline stations, and
miscellaneous fees:
Coin Operated Devices Annual Fee Notes
Coin Operated Devices               Annual Fee Notes
Juke box                            $100
Dart/video/all amusements           $100
Electronic poker, ‘21’ and the l$500
Snack and candy                     $50
Pop and coffee                      $50
Tobacco                             $100
Transfer fee                        $4         per machine per transfer
Miscellaneous
Ice cream truck                     $35
Christmas trees sales               $35
Gas Station
Pumps                               $100       plus $10/ea. nozzle
 
      (5)   Business registration fee: $50.
      (6)   As to any of the businesses housed in a commercial building where
state law has preempted local authority, and are subject to an annual fire
inspection by the Oak Forest Fire Department, the City of Oak Forest shall
require an annual business registration administrative fee of $50. This charge
will be used to reimburse the city for municipal costs associated with the
annual fire inspection and to confirm the business is in full compliance of
state laws.
   (C)   In computing square footage, the entire building floor area and any
adjacent storage or display area shall be included. The license or permit fee
based on square footage entitles the licensee to one building. An additional
license or permit shall be obtained for any other business or place of business
conducted at the same address, under the same roof or on the same property of
the licensee.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.070) (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 110.008 ISSUANCE OF LICENSES AND PERMITS TO PERSONS INDEBTED TO CITY.
   No license or permit shall be issued to any person who owes money to the
city in the form of any unpaid assessment or who is in any other way indebted
to the city, until the person discharges his or her indebtedness then due to
the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.080)
§ 110.009 ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   No license or permit granted under this business regulation title shall be
assigned or transferred, unless otherwise expressly authorized.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.090) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.010 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   Any license or permit issued under this business regulation title may be
revoked by the Mayor or the Business License Commissioner at any time for any
violation by the licensee or permittee of any ordinance relating to the license
or permit. The revocation shall be in addition to any fine imposed. However, no
such license or permit shall be revoked or suspended except after a public
hearing by the Mayor or the Business License Commissioner, with reasonable
notice to the licensee served by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, at least seven days prior to the hearing, at the last known place of
business of the licensee, and after an opportunity to appear and defend. The
notice shall specify the time and place of the hearing and the nature of the
charges. The finding of the Mayor or the Business License Commissioner shall be
predicated upon competent evidence. However, in cases involving food
establishment violations, or where there is imminent danger to the safety or
health of the public, no public hearing is necessary in order to revoke or
suspend any license or permit.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.100)
§ 110.011 POSTING OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   Every licensee conducting a business in the city shall keep the license or
permit therefor posted in a prominent place on the premises used for the
business.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.110)
§ 110.012 TERMINATION OF LICENSES AND PERMITS; NOTICE AND LATE FEES.
   (A)   All annual licenses and permits shall terminate on December 31, where
no provision to the contrary is made.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall mail to all licensees of the city a statement of
the time of expiration of the license or permit held by the licensee, if it is
an annual one, three weeks prior to the date of the expiration. However,
failure to send out the notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it,
shall not excuse the licensee from a failure to obtain a new license or permit,
or a renewal, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operation without a
license or permit.
   (C)   If a business license is not renewed before January 1, a $50 late fee
shall be added to such license or permit.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.120) (Am. Ord. 2015-10-0562O, passed 10-27-2015)
§ 110.013 CHANGE OF LOCATION OF LICENSED BUSINESS; NOTICE.
   The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted
act, may be changed, provided that ten days’ notice thereof is given to the
City Clerk. The new location must be in compliance with these codified
ordinances and all other ordinances of the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.130)
§ 110.014 BUSINESSES AS NUISANCES.
   No business shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in
fact.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.140) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.015 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION.
   (A)   Whenever an inspection of a business or of a premises used for or in
connection with the operation of a business or occupation is provided for, or
is reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with any ordinance, the licensee
or the person in charge of the premises shall admit thereto, for the purpose of
making the inspection, any authorized officer or employee of the municipality.
   (B)   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is necessary to
ensure conformity with any ordinance, the licensee shall give, to any
authorized officer or employee of the municipality requesting the same,
sufficient samples of the material or commodity for the analysis.
   (C)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Mayor or
the Business License Commissioner may revoke any license or permit if the
licensee refuses to permit any officer or employee to make an inspection or to
take an adequate sample of a desired commodity, or interferes with the officer
or employee while in the performance of his or her duty. However, no license or
permit shall be revoked for the cause unless written demand is made upon the
licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the municipality,
stating that the inspection or sample is desired.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.150)
§ 110.016 IDENTIFICATION OF TRUCKS.
   Any truck used in the conduct of any business or occupation licensed under
this business regulation title shall bear thereon, in legible characters, the
name and address of the operator of the business.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.160)
§ 110.017 MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES; COMFORT FACILITIES.
   The public portion of the premises of all businesses and occupations
licensed under this business regulation title shall be kept in a clean, orderly
and sanitary condition. The Chief of Police, the Fire Chief and the Health
Commissioner are authorized to make inspections to determine that the premises
are maintained in accordance with this section. All licensees shall provide
toilet and lavatory facilities for employees.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.170)
§ 110.018 PERIODIC INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Fire inspections. The premises of all businesses licensed under this
business license title shall be inspected periodically by the Fire Chief to
ensure that the premises are maintained so that fire exits and other means of
ingress and egress to the premises are not blocked so as to hinder egress from
the premises. The Chief shall also determine that fire extinguishers and the
general condition of the premises are maintained in accordance with the Fire
Prevention Code.
   (B)   Building inspections. The premises of all licensed businesses shall be
inspected periodically by the Building Commissioner to ensure that the premises
have not become unsafe for the public or employees of the licensee.
(2000 Code, § 5.02.180)
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
§ 110.030 SCALES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every person selling or offering for sale any service commodity,
produce or article of merchandise sold by weight shall keep and maintain, in a
conspicuous place on his or her premises, scales suitable for weighing the
commodity, produce or article of merchandise, and shall, whenever requested by
a buyer and in the buyer’s presence, weigh the commodity, produce or article of
merchandise.
   (B)   Whenever meat, poultry or other articles of merchandise sold by weight
and prepared or wrapped in advance of being sold by a retailer are being
offered for sale, an accurate computing scale of adequate capacity shall be
placed or set not more than 30 feet from the prepackaged display counter or
service area. A prominent and conspicuous sign shall be placed on or adjacent
to the computing scale, which sign shall read “for customer use”, in a type
size not less than two inches in height. Where the prepackaged merchandise is
marked with weight expressed in the standard avoirdupois pound and decimal
fractions thereof, a conversion chart showing the correlation between the
decimal fractions and common fractions of the avoirdupois pound, in a type size
not less than 12 point, shall be prominently and conspicuously displayed.
(2000 Code, § 5.66.010) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.031 FALSE WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.
   (A)   No person shall sell, offer for sale or keep for the purpose of sale,
any commodity in a quantity or enumeration of less weight or measure than that
represented upon the sale or offer for sale by the vendor or his or her agent
or employer. No person shall sell or offer for sale any commodity in any
receptacle having a smaller capacity than is represented at the time of the
offer or sale. No person shall sell or offer for sale any article of dry or
liquid measurement in other than the legal type of measure required therefor.
   (B)   No person weighing or measuring any commodity for sale by dry, liquid,
lineal or superficial measurement, by any unit of enumeration used in
determining or measuring quantity or by weight, shall falsify the measure or
weight of the commodity by representing the measure or weight of the same to be
either more or less than the true measure or weight thereof.
   (C)   No person performing services upon any commodity, who determines the
charge for the services according to the measure or weight of the commodity
upon which the services are performed, shall falsify the measure or weight of
the same by representing the measure or weight to be more than the true measure
or weight thereof.
   (D)   No person shall deliver to a purchaser or prospective purchaser any
commodity in a quantity or enumeration of less weight or measure than that
offered for sale.
(2000 Code, § 5.66.020) Penalty, see §
110.999
CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION
§ 110.045 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTOR.  A person engaging in the business of any of the building or
related trades set forth in this subchapter.
   DEVELOPER. A person who has ownership or control over a parcel or tract of
land which is or is intended to be the site of two or more buildings and who
will, in accordance with city ordinances, improve or develop the land with the
installation of any one or more of the following: streets, curbs, sanitary
sewers or storm sewers. A DEVELOPER may also be a building contractor, but he
or she shall be required to have only the developer’s registration.
   GENERAL CONTRACTOR. A person engaging in the business of contracting or
hiring one or more trade contractors to perform the service of the trade
contractor.
(2000 Code, § 5.14.010)
§ 110.046 SUBCONTRACTORS.
   Any person doing business as a subcontractor shall be construed as being
engaged in the business of a building contractor for which a registration is
required by this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.14.020)
§ 110.047 REGISTRATION FEES.
   (A)   Annual registration fees for contractors, effective January 1, 1990,
shall be as follows:
1.    Carpenter contractor                $100
2.    Concrete or cement contractor       $100
3.    Drain layer                         $100
4.    Excavating contractor               $100
5.    Fence contractor                    $100
6.    Heating and ventilating contractor  $100
7.    Lathing contractor                  $100
8.    Mason (brick or stone) contractor   $100
9.    Painting or decorating contractor   $100
10.    Plaster contractor                 $100
11.    Roofing contractor                 $100
12.    Sewer contractor                   $100
13.    Tile contractor                    $100
14.    Landscape contractor               $100 plus the bond required by §
                                             110.049
15.    General contractor                 $350
16.    Developer, commercial and residenti$750
17.    Underground sprinkler contractor   $100 plus the bond required by §
                                             110.049 
 
   (B)   Current registration fees shall remain in full force and effect prior
to January 1, 1990.
(2000 Code, § 5.14.030)
§ 110.048 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   All building contractors shall comply with all ordinances relating to the
construction of buildings or other structures, streets, sidewalks and
pavements, and with all laws or ordinances pertaining to or regulating the
activities engaged in.
(2000 Code, § 5.14.040) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.049 BONDS.
   (A)   All contractors registered under this subchapter, except plumbing
contractors registered by the State of Illinois, shall file with the City
Clerk, and keep in force during the registration period, a letter of credit or
bond in the amount of $10,000, with financial institutions or sureties to be
approved by the corporate authorities, conditioned to indemnify the city and
hold it and its elected and appointed officers, employees, attorneys,
consultants and volunteers harmless from any loss, damage, claim or liability
arising out of or resulting from the conduct or operation of the business or
the doing or failure to do any act in connection therewith.
   (B)   Subcontractors must be separately bonded.
(2000 Code, § 5.14.050)
§ 110.050 INSURANCE.
   Certificates of insurance that certify that each developer and all
contractors registered under this chapter, including plumbing contractors
registered by the State of Illinois, has liability and workers’ compensation
insurance are required. The certificates of insurance shall name the city and
its elected and appointed officers, employees, attorneys, consultants and
volunteers as additional insureds. No registration shall be permitted under
this subchapter for any such person until current certificates of insurance, in
the form prescribed in this section, for both liability and workers’
compensation are presented to the City Clerk. The minimum amounts for
comprehensive general liability insurance are $1,000,000 for bodily injury or
death or combined single limits for bodily injury or death for $1,000,000 per
occurrence and $500,000 for property damage.
(2000 Code, § 5.14.060)
§ 110.051 ELECTRICAL AND PLUMBING CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   No electrical or plumbing contractor shall do any work as such in the
city if he or she is not registered as such by another municipality. Before
doing any work as such in the city, the contractors shall furnish evidence of
registering to the Building Commissioner or his or her authorized
representative.
   (B)   In addition to the registering requirement, each contractor shall post
a bond as provided in §
110.049.
(2000 Code, § 5.14.070) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.052 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Any business activity operated in the City of Oak Forest where state
law has preempted local registering or where the City of Oak Forest is mandated
to accept another municipality’s certification shall be required to produce all
required registering documentation and proof of current bonds and insurance
coverages.
   (B)   As to any of the businesses where state law has preempted local
authority, the City of Oak Forest shall require an annual administrative fee of
$100. This charge shall be used to reimburse the city for municipal costs to
confirm the business is in full compliance of state law.
(2000 Code, § 5.14.080)
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
§ 110.065 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; LIABILITY.
   (A)   No company, corporation or association, not incorporated under the
laws of the state, shall engage in the city in effecting fire insurance, or
transact any fire insurance business in the city, while in default by not fully
complying with any of the requirements of this subchapter, until such
requirements have been fully complied with.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section shall not relieve any such company,
corporation or association from the payment of any risk that may be undertaken
in violation of this subchapter.
   (C)   No insurance agent in the city shall have any insurance business or
dealings with any company, association or corporation, not incorporated under
the laws of the state, which is in default for not reporting or making payments
as provided in this subchapter, until it has complied with all of the
requirements of this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.20.010) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.066 PAYMENTS TO CITY.
   (A)   Any fire insurance company, corporation or association, not
incorporated under the laws of the state, which is engaged in the city in
effecting fire insurance, shall pay the City Treasurer, for the maintenance,
use and benefit of the Fire Department, a sum of money equal to 2% per annum of
the gross receipts received as premiums upon fire insurance policies by any and
all agents of the company, corporation or association, during the year ending
on July 1 in each year, for any insurance effected or agreed to be effected on
property located in the city by or with the company, corporation or association
during the year.
   (B)   The sum of money for which the company, corporation or association is
chargeable may be recovered from it or its agent by an action in the name of
and for the use of the city as for money had and received.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be held to exempt any person from
indictment and conviction under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-10-
1 et seq.
(2000 Code, § 5.20.020)
§ 110.067 ANNUAL REPORT TO CITY.
   (A)   Every person acting in the city as an agent for or on behalf of any
corporation, company or association shall, on or before July 15 of each and
every year, render to the City Clerk a full, true and just account, verified by
his or her oath, of all premiums upon fire insurance policies which, during the
year ending on July 1 preceding the report, have been received by him or her,
or by some other person for him or her, on behalf of the corporation, company
or association, on property located in the city.
   (B)   The agent shall also, at the time of rendering the report, pay to the
City Treasurer the sum of money for which the company, corporation or
association represented by him or her is chargeable under this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.20.030)
§ 110.068 ADMINISTRATION BY ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL LEAGUE; FIRE INSURANCE TAX
BUREAU.
   (A)   The Illinois Municipal League is authorized to receive and examine the
reports and payments of the 2% Fire Department tax tendered the municipality by
foreign fire insurance companies writing business on property located within
the municipality.
   (B)   The Illinois Municipal League shall establish a permanent Fire
Insurance Tax Bureau in which there shall be kept a permanent, accurate and
complete record of all such tax payments received from foreign fire insurance
companies and the distribution of the payments to the municipalities. The
records shall be open to the inspection of any municipal official during
reasonable office hours.
   (C)   The municipality agrees to pay to the Illinois Municipal League, for
the cost of maintaining the services of the Fire Insurance Tax Bureau, a fee of
7%, based upon the amount of the 2% Fire Department tax actually collected by
the league and received by the municipality. The fee shall be paid the league
not later than 30 days after the receipt of tax payments by the municipality.
The league is further authorized to carry on necessary correspondence with
foreign fire insurance companies owing taxes to the municipality on behalf of
the municipality, for the purpose of increasing the tax payments of the
insurance companies to the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 5.20.040)
GREASE TRAP SLUDGE REMOVAL AND TRANSPORTATION LICENSES
§ 110.080 GREASE TRAP SLUDGE DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GREASE TRAP SLUDGE.  The solid, lighter-than-water fraction of wastewaters
from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking or consumption of food that
are discharged to a pretreatment unit or device commonly referred to as a
grease trap. The principal components of grease trap sludge are fats, oils and
greases.
(2000 Code, § 5.24.010)
§ 110.081 MAINTENANCE OF TRAPS REQUIRED; USE OF DISSOLVING AGENTS.
   (A)   Each person who owns or operates a grease trap in accordance with
Chapter 52 of this code shall cause collected or trapped fats, oils and grease
to be cleaned and removed from the device on a periodic basis and delivered to
a facility authorized to use, treat or dispose of the material. The clean-out
and removal shall be accomplished on a monthly basis, unless the city, upon
receipt of proof from the owner or operator, or on the basis of its own
inspection of the grease trap, determines that a less or more frequent
maintenance schedule is required to achieve the purposes of this subchapter and
to prevent the discharge of fats, oils and grease into the city’s sewer system.
   (B)   No person shall introduce, nor allow the introduction of, physical,
chemical or biological agents into grease traps for the purpose of
resuspending, dissolving, emulsifying or rendering soluble any fats, oils or
grease removed from wastewater by the grease traps and reintroducing them into
the city’s sewer system.
(2000 Code, § 5.24.020) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.082 DISCHARGING SLUDGE INTO SEWERS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall cause or allow the discharge, deposit or disposal of any
grease trap sludge into a treatment works or into any sewer owned by the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.24.030) Penalty, see §
110.999
Cross-reference:
   Food and beverage, see
Chapter 111
   Sewer service system, see
Chapter 52
§ 110.083 TRANSPORTATION OR ACCEPTANCE OF SLUDGE; MANIFESTS AND LICENSES
REQUIRED.
   No person shall, within the city, cause or allow the transportation or
acceptance of grease trap sludge for rendering, storage, treatment or disposal
away from the site where the sludge was generated, unless the sludge is
accompanied by a manifest as prescribed in §
110.086, and the transporter of the grease trap sludge has the appropriate
licenses, as required by §
110.084.
(2000 Code, § 5.24.040) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.084 LICENSES REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall, within the city, remove, transfer or dispose of
grease trap sludge without first having obtained a grease trap sludge removal
and transportation license and the appropriate individual license for each
vehicle transporting the grease trap sludge as set forth in division (B) of
this section.
   (B)   Each annual grease trap sludge removal and transportation license
shall be issued at a fee of $200 for persons removing and/or transporting
grease trap sludge away from the site where the grease trap sludge was
generated within the city.
   (C)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he or she is over
21 years of age and a citizen of the United States.
   (D)   No refund shall be paid at any time to any licensee for fees paid for
any license required under this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.24.050) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.085 APPLICATION FOR LICENSES.
   (A)   Applications for a grease trap sludge removal and transportation
license shall be in a form supplied or approved by the city and shall be
accompanied by the license fees required pursuant to §
110.084. Applications for licenses under §
110.084 shall be accepted only from the owner of record of the vehicle(s) used
to transport the grease trap sludge.
   (B)   An application for a grease trap sludge removal and transportation
license hereunder shall be filed, in writing, with the City Clerk, shall be
subscribed to and sworn to under oath and shall specify:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and, if a
firm, corporation, association or partnership, the principal officers thereof
and their addresses, and, if a corporation, all shareholders of more than 5%,
the corporate purpose, the corporate recording numbers and the registered
agent;
      (2)   A list of each vehicle to be used in the grease trap sludge removal
and transportation operation. The list shall contain, for each vehicle, the
name of the vehicle owner and his or her address and phone number, the make of
the vehicle, the model of the vehicle, the vehicle identification number for
the vehicle, the year of the vehicle, a description of any tanks or other
equipment which will hold the grease trap sludge, and the location of the
facility at which each such vehicle will be garaged;
      (3)   Sufficient proof of insurance and a copy of the registration for
each vehicle to be used in the grease trap sludge removal and transportation
operation;
      (4)   A copy of the driver’s license for each person who will be driving
a vehicle in the grease trap sludge removal and transportation operation;
      (5)   A statement as to whether or not any of the above parties has ever
been convicted of a felony;
      (6)   A declaration of the facilities to which such grease trap sludge is
to be delivered by use, treatment or disposal; and
      (7)   Such other and further information as the city may require.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the truthfulness of the
statements made in the application and report to the City Administrator or his
or her results or findings.
   (D)   The City Administrator shall neither recommend for issuance nor record
a grease trap sludge removal and transportation license with the City Clerk if:
      (1)   Any of the parties requesting the grease trap sludge removal and
transportation license has been convicted of a felony;
      (2)   A false statement has been made on the application for a license;
      (3)   The applicant is not the owner of record of each of the vehicles to
be used in the grease trap sludge removal and transportation operation;
      (4)   No other grease trap sludge removal and transportation licenses are
available; and/or
      (5)   There are any items listed on the inspection report that need to be
remediated pursuant to §
110.087.
   (E)   No license shall be issued to any person, firm, corporation,
association, institution, commercial establishment or business entity if the
person, firm, corporation, association, institution, commercial establishment
or business entity does not have all the valid waste hauling permits that may
be required by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the Illinois
Department of Agriculture.
   (F)   (1)   The denial of a license shall be in writing, and the City
Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant as to the basis of the
denial.
      (2)   No denial shall be made on the basis of the applicant’s race,
creed, color, sex or national origin.
(2000 Code, § 5.24.060)
§ 110.086 SLUDGE MANIFESTS.
   (A)   No licensee shall remove, transport or dispose of grease trap sludge
in the city without the grease trap sludge being accompanied by a manifest
form, which shall be completed as set forth below. The city shall develop and
make available the grease trap sludge manifest. The manifest shall contain at a
minimum the following information:
      (1)   The name of the generator of the sludge;
      (2)   The address of the generator of the sludge;
      (3)   The telephone number of the generator of the sludge;
      (4)   The printed name and legible signature of an authorized
representative of the generator of the sludge;
      (5)   The street address of the grease trap;
      (6)   The volume of sludge removed;
      (7)   The date of the sludge removal;
      (8)   The name of the transporter of the sludge;
      (9)   The street address of the transporter of the sludge;
      (10)   The telephone number of the transporter of the sludge;
      (11)   Acknowledgment of the receipt of the sludge by the transporter;
      (12)   The printed name and legible signature of an authorized
representative of the transporter;
      (13)   The date of the collection of the sludge;
      (14)   The transporter’s United States Environmental Protection Agency
identification number;
      (15)   The transporter’s annual grease trap sludge removal and
transportation license number;
      (16)   The license number for the individual license issued by the city
for the vehicle being used to transport the sludge;
      (17)   The name of the facility receiving the sludge;
      (18)   The street address of the facility receiving the sludge;
      (19)   The telephone number of the facility receiving the sludge;
      (20)   An acknowledgment of the receipt of the sludge by the facility
receiving the sludge;
      (21)   The printed name and legible signature of an authorized
representative of the receiving facility;
      (22)   The date of the sludge receipt by the facility receiving the
sludge; and
      (23)   The disposal or receiving facility’s United States Environmental
Protection Agency identification number.
   (B)   The manifest shall be completed by the generator of the grease trap
sludge. The generator must retain one copy of the manifest and deliver or mail,
by certified mail, one copy to the Department of Public Works for the city
within 48 hours of shipment. The other copies of the manifest shall be given to
the transporter. Each transporter shall complete applicable sections of the
manifest, maintain one copy and provide the facility receiving the sludge with
the remainder of the manifest copies. The receiving and management facility
shall maintain one copy of the manifest, send one copy to the generator and
mail one copy to the Superintendent of Public Works for the city.
   (C)   The grease trap sludge generator, transporter and management facility
operator shall each retain a copy of the manifest for no less than two years
and shall produce such documents to the city upon request by the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.24.070) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.087 INSPECTION OF FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT.
   Any person who files an application for a grease trap sludge removal and
transportation license, or renewal thereof, agrees to allow the city to inspect
the condition of the facility or equipment of any generator, transporter or
receiving facility applying for the license to determine if it is suitable for
the intended grease trap sludge operation or in need of repair. If the
Inspector finds the condition of the facility or equipment to be unsuitable for
the intended grease trap sludge removal and transportation operation or in need
of repair, the Inspector shall issue a written report of his or her findings
and shall send a copy of the report to the applicant. No grease trap sludge
removal or operator’s license shall be issued to any applicant until all such
items listed on the inspection report are remediated.
(2000 Code, § 5.24.080)
§ 110.088 EXPIRATION OF LICENSES; RENEWALS.
   (A)   Each grease trap sludge removal and transportation license required by
this subchapter shall be terminated on January 1 next following its issuance.
No part of a license fee will be refunded if the license is revoked by the City
Clerk.
   (B)   Any licensee may retain his or her grease trap sludge removal and
transportation license at the expiration thereof, provided that he or she is
then qualified to receive a license and the premises and the equipment for
which the renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose, and
provided, further, that the renewal privilege herein provided shall not be
construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the Mayor and City
Council from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within its
jurisdiction.
(2000 Code, § 5.24.090)
§ 110.089 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Every grease trap sludge removal and operator’s license issued under
this subchapter is subject to the city’s right, which is expressly reserved, to
revoke the same should the licensee directly or indirectly permit the removal,
transportation, disposal or placement of any grease trap sludge contrary to the
provisions of this subchapter, any other city code or ordinance or the laws of
the state.
   (B)   The license may be revoked by the City Administrator, after written
notice to the licensee, which notice shall specify the ordinance or law
violations with which the licensee is charged, if, after a hearing, the
licensee is found to be guilty of the violations.
   (C)   Ten days’ notice of the hearing shall be given to the licensee.
   (D)   At the hearing, the licensee and his or her attorney may present and
submit evidence and witnesses in his or her defense.
(2000 Code, § 5.24.100)
§ 110.090 LICENSE TO BE PERSONAL PRIVILEGE; RIGHT TO AMEND OR REPEAL CHAPTER.
   (A)   Any grease trap sludge removal and transportation license shall be
purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance or
on January 1 next following its issuance, whichever is first, unless sooner
revoked as provided in this subchapter, and shall not constitute property, nor
shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be
alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being
encumbered or hypothecated. The license shall not descend by the laws of
testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the
licensee.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall create any vested or
property right in any grease trap sludge removal and transportation license
whatsoever, nor shall it limit or restrict the right of the city to, at any
time, amend or repeal this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.24.110)
HOUSE MOVERS
§ 110.105 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   No person shall engage in the business of moving houses in the city without
first obtaining a license therefor. The annual license fee for a house mover is
$100.
(2000 Code, § 5.28.010) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.106 BOND.
   Every person licensed under this subchapter shall file with the City Clerk a
bond in the amount of $10,000, with sureties to be approved by the Mayor and
Council, conditioned to indemnify the municipality for any loss, damage or
expense occasioned by the person or for any act or failure of the licensee to
comply with the ordinances of the municipality relating to the business of
house moving or moving houses.
(2000 Code, § 5.28.020)
§ 110.107 INSURANCE.
   In addition to the bond provided for in §
110.106, no permit shall be issued for moving a building until the mover shows
evidence of being covered by a public liability insurance policy in an amount
of not less than $300,000 for personal injury or death and $100,000 for
property damage.
(2000 Code, § 5.28.030)
§ 110.108 PLANKING OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   The pavement of any street, alley or sidewalk on or along which any house is
to be moved shall be protected by two-inch planks along the route.
(2000 Code, § 5.28.040)
§ 110.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Grease trap sludge removal and transportation licenses. Whoever
violates any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $750 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In
addition to the penalty provided herein, any violation hereof may result in
having the violator’s business license subject to suspension or revocation.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly makes a false statement or representation in any
writing required to be prepared under this subchapter shall be fined not less
than $50, nor more than $750, for each submission.
(2000 Code, § 5.24.120)
CHAPTER 111: FOOD AND BEVERAGE
Section
Food Service Establishments
   
111.01   Purpose and intent
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   License required
   
111.04   License application; design plans; schedule of events
   
111.05   Inspections
   
111.06   Certificate of registration required
   
111.07   Fees
   
111.08   Rules and regulations
   
111.09   License suspension or revocation
   
111.10   Appeals
   
111.11   Toilet or lavatory facilities for seasonal food service establishments
Vending Machines
   
111.25   License required
   
111.26   License application
   
111.27   License fee
   
111.28   Inspections and analyses
Alcoholic Beverage Sales
   
111.40   Definitions
   
111.41   License required
   
111.42   Availability of licenses
   
111.43   Applications for license
   
111.44   State approved BASSET training
   
111.45   Approval, denial of application
   
111.46   License application fees
   
111.47   Issuance of license
   
111.48   Renewals of license
   
111.49   Posting license and warning
   
111.50   License classifications
   
111.51   Number of licenses
   
111.52   Fees; term
   
111.53   Hours of operation
   
111.54   Change of location or in personnel
   
111.55   Transfer of license
   
111.56   Licensing of premises for which a license has been previously revoked
   
111.57   Cessation of business
   
111.58   Local Liquor Control Commissioner
   
111.59   Inspection
   
111.60   Health and safety requirements
   
111.61   Conduct of licenses
   
111.62   Acts of agent or employer
   
111.63   Limitations on sales in general
   
111.64   Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages
   
111.65   Purchase or possession of alcoholic liquor by underage persons
   
111.66   Suspension or revocation of licenses
   
111.67   Disqualification and suspension of manager—procedures
   
111.68   Other ordinances and laws to apply
   
111.69   City hearings—testimony required
   
111.70   Prohibited sales or promotions
   
111.71   Appeals
Restaurants
   
111.90   License and compliance required
   
111.91   Application for license
   
111.92   License fee
 
   
111.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Discharging sludge into sewers prohibited, see §
110.082
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 111.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to ensure that all foods served in the
city are served in a safe and healthful manner. This subchapter and the
regulations set forth in this subchapter promulgated pursuant thereto represent
good food service practices and it is the intent of this subchapter to require
that all food be served accordingly. However, it is expressly intended that
this subchapter shall not be applicable to the service of food during a
religious or organizational ritual or the reenactment thereof.
(2000 Code, § 5.18.010)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY HEALTH COMMISSIONER.  A licensed, registered nurse appointed to the
Health Commission by the Mayor with the consent of Council.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person on the premises of a food service establishment who
engages in management, supervision, food preparation or service or who comes in
contact with any food utensil or preparation or service equipment.
   FOOD. Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or ingredient,
including ice, used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for
human consumption.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where food that is intended for
individual service and consumption is routinely provided, completed and
prepared. The term includes any such place, regardless of whether or not
consumption is in, on or off the premises and regardless of whether or not
there is a charge for the food. FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT does not include a
private home where food is prepared for individual family consumption, nor does
it include a retail food store that does not cook or combine ready-to-eat foods
for human consumption.
   KITCHEN or FOOD PREPARATION AREA. A room or area which is separate and
distinct from other facilities within a food service establishment and which
contains all equipment for the type and volume of foods being prepared and
served.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. Any food service establishment or vehicle from which food
is served without a fixed location and which is capable of being readily moved
from location to location. The term does not include a food service
establishment or mobile vehicle which serves only ice cream or ice cream
products.
   NEW ESTABLISHMENT. Any new food service establishment applying for a
business license in the city.
   OCCASIONAL FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any food service establishment which
is operated with no regularity or for a limited period of time by a charitable,
religious, educational, municipal or other nonprofit organization for social
purposes or organizational fund raising only and in which the food is prepared
and served by voluntary personnel from the membership of, or affiliated with,
the charitable, religious, educational, municipal or other nonprofit
organization.
   RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE. A business, which sells food prepared indoors on
the premises with a full menu and provides an indoor seating area of at least
250 square feet. Such businesses may provide for the sale of alcoholic
beverages as an accessory and secondary use. Operating criteria to define a
full service food establishment include most or all of the following: served by
staff to seated customers and where payment is made at the end of  the meal;
presence of a full commercial kitchen and commercial dishwasher. The business
shall be equipped with restrooms in accordance with all applicable city. state,
and federal building codes as defined in Title XV,
Chapter 151 of the City Code.
   RETAIL FOOD STORE. Any establishment or section of an establishment where
food and food products are offered to the consumer and intended for off-
premises consumption. The term includes delicatessens that offer prepared food
in bulk quantities only. The term does not include establishments which handle
only prepackaged, non-potentially hazardous foods, food service establishments
or food and beverage vending machines.
   SEASONAL FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any food service establishment which is
operated by a person for profit and not by a charitable, religious,
educational, municipal or other nonprofit organization; which is licensed to
operate for a period of no greater than six consecutive months and no less than
15 consecutive days from a fixed location; in which no seating area is
available for the use of patrons; and whose dimensions are no greater than ten
feet by 16 feet.
   TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any food service establishment which
is operated by a person for profit and not by a charitable, religious,
educational, municipal or other nonprofit organization, which has no permanent
location and which operates for only a specified period of time at certain
locations (i.e. carnivals, fairs, public displays and the like).
(2000 Code, § 5.18.020) (Am. Ord. 2021-10-0870O, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 111.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a food service establishment, retail food store,
temporary food service establishment or occasional food service establishment
without first obtaining a license to do so. A separate license shall be
required for each such establishment or store.
(2000 Code, § 5.18.030) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04 LICENSE APPLICATION; DESIGN PLANS; SCHEDULE OF EVENTS.
   (A)   An application for a food service establishment license, retail food
store license, temporary food service establishment license or occasional food
service establishment license shall be made in writing to the City Clerk, and
the appropriate license fee, as provided by ordinance shall accompany the
signed application. The application shall be made on a form provided for that
purpose.
   (B)   (1)   The form shall contain a notice that as part of the procedure an
inspection will be conducted. The form shall also contain a statement that the
applicant grants permission to enter the premises, during reasonable hours
prior to the license being issued, to conduct the license inspection.
      (2)   The form shall include notice that at least once every six months,
the city’s Health Commission shall make an inspection of the applicant’s
establishment. The applicant’s grant of permission to enter shall be in
accordance with that schedule.
      (3)   In the case of a new establishment or remodeling of an existing
structure, the applicant shall submit final design plans to the city’s Health
Commission for approval. An inspection of the completed premises will be
conducted by, and approval shall be obtained from, the city’s Health Commission
before the issuance of a license.
   (C)   When an occasional food service establishment has a regular schedule
of events, the schedule of events must be attached to the application. The
schedule may be modified or added to, provided that written notice of the
modification or addition is submitted to the city not less than five days prior
to the event.
(2000 Code, § 5.18.040)
§ 111.05 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a new license or renewal of an
existing license, together with the appropriate fee, the City Clerk shall
notify the city’s Health Commissioner to make an inspection of the
establishment for which a license is sought. When the inspection reveals that
applicable requirements of this subchapter, the rules and regulations
promulgated under §
111.08, and other city ordinances, have been complied with and the food service
operation is approved, a license shall be issued to the applicant.
   (B)   At least once every six months, the city’s Health Commission shall
make an inspection of each establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter. The
Commission shall make such additional inspections and re-inspections from time
to time as are necessary for the enforcement of this subchapter.
   (C)   In the case of temporary food service establishments and occasional
food service establishments, the Commission shall make such inspections and
reinspections from time to time as are necessary for the enforcement of this
subchapter.
   (D)   If food is prepared at a place other than on the premises of the food
service establishment, temporary food service establishment or occasional food
service establishment, the name and address of the preparer must be available
on request of the city’s Health Commissioner at the place of service, on the
day of service and for 90 days thereafter.
   (E)   All inspections by the Commissioner must be reported in writing and
signed by the Inspector on a form provided for this purpose. The operator of
the food establishment shall be provided with a copy of the inspection report.
(2000 Code, § 5.18.050)
§ 111.06 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Each applicant for a food service establishment license shall provide the
city’s Health Commission with evidence of a valid certificate of registration
in food handling and sanitation issued by the State Department of Public Health
to members of his or her supervisory or managerial staff. At least one such
registered member who is employed full-time at the licensed location shall be
responsible for compliance with the Food Service Sanitation Manual at the
licensed location where he or she is employed.
(2000 Code, § 5.18.060)
§ 111.07 FEES.
   (A)   License fee. The amount of the license fee for each license applicant
shall be the prevailing business license fee as provided in §
111.07.
   (B)   Inspection and reinspection fee. All food service establishments and
retail food stores shall be subject to an annual fee of $130 for two health
inspections to be conducted through the calendar year. In addition, all
violations of food service establishments and retailfood stores as reported on
the City Health Commission food service establishment inspection report, as
established by the regulations of the City Health Commission, must correct any
violations as soon as possible, but in any event within ten days following such
inspection. A warrantless reinspection shall be conducted to confirm the
correction. A fee of $65 shall be charged for required reinspections. Special
event health inspections shall be billed at a rate of $50 per vendor.
(2000 Code, § 5.18.070) (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006; Am. Ord. 2017-
12-0674, passed 12-12-2017)
§ 111.08 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Adopted and applicable to the operation of a food service establishment,
retail food store, temporary food service establishment and mobile food unit in
the city are those rules and regulations set forth in the Food Service
Sanitation Manual, 1983, as amended, and the Retail Food Store Sanitation
Manual, 1983, as amended, both published by the State Department of Public
Health. Three copies of each manual are on file in the office of the City Clerk
for public use, inspection and examination and have been on file for such
purposes for more than 30 days prior to the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this subchapter (Ordinance 1423, passed May 13, 1986). Both manuals
are adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter as if fully set
forth in this subchapter. However, where any ordinance of the city sets forth a
more stringent requirement than the rules and regulations, the more stringent
ordinance shall control.
(2000 Code, § 5.18.080)
§ 111.09 LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   Conduct or operation of any food service establishment, retail food store,
temporary food service establishment or occasional food service establishment
which violates any of the provisions of this subchapter or refusal of the
holder of any license under this subchapter to allow inspection of his or her
premises, or to furnish a sample of his or her food for testing, shall be
grounds for the closing of that establishment for a period not to exceed ten
days, the suspension of any license granted pursuant to this subchapter or the
revocation of any license granted pursuant to this subchapter. The sanctions
shall not be imposed on a licensee except pursuant to written notice of the
grounds therefor and a hearing before the city’s Health Commission at which the
licensee shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses and the right to call
witnesses on his or her own behalf. Grounds for the sanctions provided for in
this subchapter must be established by a preponderance of the evidence.
Revocation shall not prejudice an applicant in applying for another temporary
food service establishment license.
(2000 Code, § 5.18.100)
§ 111.10 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision in regard to the denial of an application
for a license under this subchapter, or in connection with the suspension or
revocation of such a license, shall have the right to appeal to Council. The
appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk, within ten days after
notice of the denial, revocation or suspension, a written statement, under
oath, setting forth specifically the grounds for the appeal. Council shall
thereupon set the time and place for a hearing of the appeal and notice of the
hearing shall be given to the applicant or licensee. The hearing shall be held
within 20 days of the City Clerk’s receipt of the appeal. The decision of
Council on the appeal shall be final.
(2000 Code, § 5.18.110)
§ 111.11 TOILET OR LAVATORY FACILITIES FOR SEASONAL FOOD SERVICE
ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   A seasonal food service establishment shall not be required to have a
toilet room or a lavatory on the premises, provided, however, that the
establishment shall make available to its employees a toilet room or a lavatory
located within a reasonable distance from the premises of the establishment,
which toilet room or lavatory shall be available to such employees during all
hours the establishment is open for business.
   (B)   The city’s Health Commissioner shall determine the availability of a
toilet room or lavatory and ensure that no health hazards exist or might be
created by the lack of a toilet room or lavatory on the premises. The city’s
Health Commissioner shall not issue a license to the seasonal food service
establishment if no such facilities are available or if a health hazard exists.
The city’s Health Commissioner may require that the establishment’s arrangement
to make a toilet room or lavatory available be reduced to writing on a form to
be provided by the city’s Health Commissioner.
(2000 Code, § 5.18.120)
VENDING MACHINES
§ 111.25 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall maintain a vending machine in the city without first
obtaining a license therefor.
(2000 Code, § 5.64.010) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.26 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   An application for a vending machine license shall state the full name of
the applicant and the number of machines for which the applicant desires
licenses. The application shall be accompanied by evidence that the applicant,
if an individual, or the person in charge of a business, if a firm or
corporation, is a responsible person of good character and reputation.
(2000 Code, § 5.64.020)
§ 111.27 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for a vending machine license shall be as listed, per
machine, per establishment:
   (A)   Vending machine - pop: $50;
   (B)   Vending machine - candy/snacks: $50;
   (C)   Vending machine - coffee: $50; and
   (D)   Vending machine - tobacco: $100.
(2000 Code, § 5.64.030)
§ 111.28 INSPECTIONS AND ANALYSES.
   The Chief of Police and the Health Commissioner are authorized to inspect
and examine any food or drink being offered for sale by means of an automatic
vending machine for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the laws of the
state and the municipality in relation to sales from such a vending machine are
being complied with and that the food or drink is kept fresh, clean and
wholesome. Any person operating a vending machine, upon the demand of the Chief
or the Health Commissioner, shall furnish to him or her for his or her
inspection a sample of the food or drink, which sample may be analyzed by or
under the direction of the Chief or the Health Commissioner. A record of the
analysis shall be made and kept in the office of the Chief or the Commissioner
for the inspection of the public.
(2000 Code, § 5.64.040)
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES
§ 111.40 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term ALCOHOL does not include denatured alcohol or
wood alcohol.
      ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid
or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. For this purpose of
this chapter, ALCOHOL LIQUOR, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE and LIQUOR shall have the same
meaning.
      BEER. A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
      CITY. The City of Oak Forest, Illinois.
      CONSUMPTION SALES. The sale or offering for sale, at retail, of any
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold.
      CONVENIENCE BUSINESS. A business whose primary purpose is for the sale of
items other than liquor whose sales of liquor do not exceed 25% of the gross
sales of the business.
      HOTEL. Every building or other structure that is kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually
served and consumed and where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate
pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in
which rooms are used for sleeping accommodations and for dining conducted in
the same building or buildings in connection therewith. The building or
structure shall be provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity.
      LICENSEE. A representative of the liquor license holder to include every
officer, shareholder, associate, member, manager, agent, representative and
employee of the licensee.
      LIQUOR STORE. A business whose primary purpose is for the package sale of
liquor.
      LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER. The Mayor of the city.
      ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg,
hogshead or other receptacle or container whatsoever that is used, corked,
capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of liquor to contain and to
convey any liquor.
      PACKAGED SALES. The sale or offering for sale at retail of liquor in the
original package, which alcoholic liquor is not to be consumed, in whole or in
part, on the premises where sold.
      PERSON. A natural human being, or any applicant or licensee hereunder
even if such applicant or licensee is a group of persons, a partnership, co-
partnership, limited liability company or a corporation unless the context of
its use clearly indicates it is limited to a natural human being.
      RESTAURANT. Any public place that is kept, used, maintained, advertised
and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals
are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, the space
being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests and derives at least
60% of its gross receipts from the sale of food.
      RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE. A business which sells food prepared indoors on
the premises with a full menu and provides an indoor seating area of at least
250 square feet. Such businesses may provide for the sale of alcoholic
beverages as an accessory and secondary use. Operating criteria to define a
full service food establishment include most or all of the following: served by
staff to seated customers and where payment is made at the end of the meal;
presence of a full commercial kitchen and  commercial dishwasher. The business
shall be equipped with restrooms in accordance with all applicable city, state.
and federal building codes as defined in Title XV Chapter 151.001 of the City
Code.
      RETAILER. A person, a group of persons, a partnership or a corporation
who or which sells, or offers for sale, liquor for use of consumption and not
for resale in any form.
      SALE. Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, including the transfer of liquors by and through the transfer or
negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, for a consideration, and
includes and means all sales made by any person, whether a principal,
proprietor, agent, servant or employee, and further includes dispensing,
pouring, mixing or otherwise serving liquors.
      SELL OR SALE AT RETAIL, SELL AT RETAIL, and SALE AT RETAIL. A sale for
refer to and mean sales for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
      SERVICE OF FOOD. The service of meals, for consumption only on the
premises, in an adequate and sanitary kitchen as defined in any appropriate
health or food service ordinance of the city. The meals must consist of more
than the service or sale of packaged foods, such as potato chips, pretzels,
peanuts, cheese and crackers, or frozen or pre-made foods, such as pizzas,
hamburgers or sandwiches, which can be prepared by being heated or warmed in an
oven. Further, the meals must be actually and regularly served and eaten at
tables and not only at a bar or counter.
      SPECIAL EVENT. An event conducted by an educational, fraternal,
political, civic, religious or non-profit organization.
      SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation,
mixed with water or other substances in solution and includes brandy, rum,
whiskey, gin, vodka or other spirituous liquids, and such liquors where
rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
      TAVERN. An establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold do be
consumed on the premises whose sales of liquor exceed 70% of the gross sales of
the business.
      TO SELL. Includes keeping or exposing for sale and to keep with intent to
sell.
      VIDEO GAMING. The installation and operation of any video gaming
terminals or any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion of cash, is
available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including but not
limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the Illinois
Gaming Board utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player
may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. (ILCS Ch. 230,
Act 40, § 5). VIDEO GAMING shall only be authorized within the city based upon
the issuance of a valid license hereunder.
      WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as defined in this
section.
   (B)   Any term not defined above but defined in ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-
3 et seq. and used in this chapter shall be deemed to have the same definition
as contained in ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-3 et seq. unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.010) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014; Am. Ord.
2016-08-0616O, passed 9-13-2016; Am. Ord. 2021-10-0870O, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 111.41 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, group of persons, partnership, or corporation, limited
liability company or any other entity shall sell or offer for sale at retail,
draw, pour, mix, dispense or otherwise serve (hereinafter collectively referred
to as “sale,” “sold,” “sell” or “offered for sale”) any liquors within the city
without first having obtained an liquor license as herein provided. Each
separate place of business or location wherein liquor shall be sold or offered
for sale, drawn, poured, mixed, dispensed or otherwise served, regardless of
whether there is any type of compensation, shall have a separate license. No
video gaming terminals. activities or operations are permitted within the city,
except pursuant to the issuance of a liquor license pursuant to one of the
liquor license categories under this code which specifically authorizes such
video gaming terminals and operations on the premises of the particular
business or establishment involved, provided however that such prohibition
shall not apply to fraternal and veteran establishments a defined in the
Illinois Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch.230, Act 40, § 5).
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to play or operate
a video gaming terminal.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any licensee, its employees or agents, to allow any
person under 21 years of age to play or use a video gaming terminal.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.040) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014; Am. Ord.
2016-08-0616O, passed 9-13-2016) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.42 AVAILABILITY OF LICENSES.
   A license shall be purely a privilege, good for not to exceed one year after
issuance. No license issued under this code shall constitute property. The
renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right
which shall in any case prevent the City Council from decreasing the number of
licenses issued within the city. Any license issued under this Code therefore
will remain subject to a change in its terms, as well as the provisions of all
ordinances now in force and that may hereby be passed by the city.
(Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.43 APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE.
   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, a duly
authorized officer or shareholder of a corporation if the applicant is a
corporation, a duly authorized member if the applicant is a limited liability
company, or by a person entitled to share in the profits of the applicant if
the applicant is a copartnership (provided, however, such person shall also be
a partner thereof). The application must be verified by oath or affidavit, and
shall contain the following information and statements:
   (A)   The applicant’s name, sex, age, date of birth, social security number,
position and percentage of ownership in the business: and the name, sex, age
date of birth and social security number, position and percentage of ownership
in the business of every sole owner, partner, corporate officer, director,
member of any limited liability company, manager and any person who owns 5% or
more of the shares of the applicant business entity or parent corporation(s) of
the applicant business entity.
   (B)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of birth, and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization.
   (C)   In case of a limited liability company, corporation or a club, the
object for which it was organized, a list of the names, resident address, and
phone numbers of its officers, directors, shareholders, and members, and a
certified copy of the articles of incorporation, certificate of organization,
and/or charter.
   (D)   In case of a co-partnership, the date of the formation of the
partnership; in the case of an Illinois corporation, the date of its
incorporation; in the case of a limited liability company the date of its
organization in Illinois under the Limited Liability Company Act; or in the
case of a foreign corporation, the state where it was incorporated and the date
of its becoming qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983 to
transact business in the State of Illinois.
   (E)   The name, character and address of the business of the applicant.
   (F)   The location and a description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under the license, including the number of bars to be
operated thereon.
   (G)   A statement whether the applicant has made any other application for a
similar license on premises other than that which is described in this
application, and the disposition of the application. The statement shall
include any other application in which the applicant was in any way involved,
regardless of the name, structure and the like of the business entity. If any
license was denied the applicant shall include the reasons therefor.
   (H)   The number the date of issuance and the date of expiration of the
applicant's current local retail liquor license issued in either the city or
issued by any county or other municipality.
   (I)   The name of the city, village, or county that issued the local retail
liquor license (if other than the City of Oak Forest).
   (J)   The name and address of the landlord of any premises that are leased
in any other municipality or county in which the applicant has another local
retail liquor license.
   (K)   The date of the applicant’s first request for a state liquor license
and whether it was granted, denied or withdrawn.
   (L)   The address of the applicant when the first application for a state
liquor license was made.
      (1)   The applicant’s current state liquor license number.
      (2)   The date the applicant began liquor sales at his or her place of
business.
      (3)   The applicant’s Retailer’s Occupation Tax (ROT) registration
number.
   (M)   Whether the applicant is delinquent in the payment of the retailer’s
occupational tax (sales tax), and if so, the reasons therefor.
   (N)   Whether the applicant is delinquent under the cash beer law, and if
so, the reasons therefor.
   (O)   In the case of a retailer, whether he or she is delinquent under the
30-day credit law, and if so, the reasons therefor.
   (P)   Whether the applicant possesses a current federal wagering stamp, and
if so, the reasons therefor.
   (Q)   Whether the applicant, or any other person, directly in his or her
place of business is a public official, and if so, the particulars thereof.
   (R)   If applicable, the date of the filing of the “assumed name” of the
business with the County Clerk.
   (S)   A statement whether the applicant or any owner, partner, member or
manager of the applicant, has ever been convicted of either a misdemeanor or a
felony and whether any such individual or entity is not disqualified to receive
a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter, the laws
of the state or other ordinances of the city, and if so the particulars
thereof.
   (T)   Whether a previous license issued by any state or, subdivision
thereof, or by the federal government has been suspended or revoked, and the
reasons therefor.
   (U)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
state, the United States or any ordinances of the city in the conduct of his or
her place of business.
   (V)   The class of license desired by the applicant.
   (W)   Whether the applicant owns the premises for which a license is sought,
and if he does not, the name of his or her landlord and the period of his or
her lease. A complete and correct copy of the lease is to be attached to the
application.
   (X)   Whether or not the applicant intends to manage and conduct the
business in person, and if not, the name of the manager or agent who is to
conduct the business on the premises for which the license is sought.
   (Y)   A statement that the applicant will be required to, and shall require
all officers, agents and employees of the applicant to, testify (subject to
constitutional limitations) at any hearing that may be called by the city or
any of its committees, commissions, boards or agencies, or the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, relating, directly or indirectly, to any events or
occurrences of which they may have knowledge arising out of their position as
licensee or as an officer, agent or employee of the licensee and that the
applicant has informed all officers, agents and employees, and has made the
same a condition of employment for all employees.
   (Z)   Every application for a license, whether for a new license or for a
renewal of an existing license, where the real estate title of the premises is
in a trust, shall be accompanied by the sworn affidavit of the land trustee or
a beneficiary of the trust, disclosing the names, residence addresses and
beneficial interests of each beneficiary of the land trust.
   (AA)    In addition to the foregoing information, the application shall
contain such other information as the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may
prescribe.
      (1)   In case the application is made by a partnership, all partners must
sign the application and the information required by this chapter shall be
furnished for each partner.
      (2)   In case the application is made by a corporation, the application
shall be signed by the president and secretary of the corporation and the
corporate seal shall be affixed to the same.
      (3)   In case the application is made by a limited liability company, the
application shall be signed by the manager of the company and, if the manager
is not also a member, then the application must also be signed by a member.
      (4)   Where the applicant is a business entity, limited liability
company, corporation or partnership, the Liquor Control Commissioner reserves
the right to require, and has the authority to waive, any of the above
requirements, as determined applicable to the actual management, operation and
decision-making of the company, e.g., if ownership of the licensee is held by a
corporation in purely an investment capacity, with no regular management,
operational or decision-making role or function, the Liquor Control
Commissioner can determine that the execution of certain documents, or the
completion of an application, is not required for certain ownership interests
or officials.
      (5)   Every application for a license, whether a new license or renewal,
where the real estate title of the premises is in a trustee, shall be
accompanied by the sworn affidavit of the land trustee or beneficiary of the
trust, disclosing the names, residence addresses, and beneficial interest of
each beneficiary of the land trust.
      (6)   The applicant must also provide a letter of intent indicating the
type and nature of the applicant’s business and the types of activities to be
conducted on the licensed premises. Any basic change in the activities to be
conducted or the type and nature of the premises or business must be submitted
to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner for approval.
      (7)   Every application for a license, whether for a new license or for a
renewal of an existing license, shall be accompanied by a copy of the
applicant’s policy of dram shop insurance, written by a responsible insurance
company authorized and licensed to do business in Illinois, insuring such
applicant against liability as required under ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et
seq., as amended from time to time. The applicant shall keep the policy of
insurance in full force and effect during the term of the license (and any
renewals) or shall provide a suitable substitute policy and each such policy
shall contain a provision that the policy cannot be canceled without 30 days’
prior written notice to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
      (8)   Every application for a license, whether new or renewal, shall be
accompanied by a supplemental application signed by each manager employed by
the licensee to manage the license premises and all business operations on the
licensed premises. Such supplemental application shall be in writing, verified
by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following information and
statements:
         (a)   The manager’s name, sex, age, date of birth and social security
number.
         (b)   The citizenship of the manager, his or her place of birth, and
if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization.
         (c)   A statement whether the manager has made any other application,
either as owner or manager, for a similar license on premises other than
described in the supplemental application, and the disposition of that
application. Such statement shall include any other application which the
manager was in any way involved with regardless of what entity was the proposed
licensee under the application. If any such license was denied, the manager
shall include the reasons therefor.
         (d)   The number, date of issuance and date of expiration of any
current local retail liquor licenses issued to the manager by any county or
other municipality, and the name of such county or other municipality.
         (e)   If the manager has ever requested a state liquor license, the
date of the first request for such license and whether it was granted, denied
or withdrawn, and the address of the manager when the first application was
made.
         (f)   The manager’s current state liquor license number, if
applicable.
         (g)   Whether the manager possesses a current federal wagering stamp,
and if so, the reasons therefor.
         (h)   Whether the manager is a public official, and if so, the
particulars thereof.
         (i)   A statement whether the manager has ever been convicted of
either a misdemeanor or a felony and whether any such manager is disqualified
to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this
chapter, the laws of this state, or other ordinances of the city, and if so the
particulars thereof.
         (j)   Whether a previous license issued to the manager by any state or
subdivision thereof, or by the federal government, has ever been suspended or
revoked and the reasons therefor.
         (k)   A statement that the manager will not violate any laws of the
state, the United States or any ordinance of the city in the conduct of the
business at the license premises.
         (l)   The name of any other persons employed to manage the business to
be carried on in the premises for which the license is sought.
         (m)   A statement that the manager will be required to and shall
require all agents and employees to testify (subject to constitutional
limitations) at any hearing that may be called by the city or any of its
committees, commissions, boards, or agencies, or the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner, relating, directly or indirectly, to any events or occurrences of
which they may have knowledge arising out of their position as officer, agent
or employee. In addition, a statement acknowledging such requirement and
indicating that the manager has informed all agents and employees, and has made
the same a condition of employment for all employees.
         (n)   In addition to the foregoing, the supplementary application
shall contain such further information as the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
may prescribe.
      (9)   If during any license year there is any change in the manager(s) of
the licensee, a new supplementary application signed by each new manager must
be filed in writing, verified by oath or affidavit, and containing the same
information as required under division (AA)(7) above.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.050) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.44 STATE APPROVED BASSET TRAINING.
   (A)   All original or renewal applications for a class liquor licenses shall
be accompanied with proof of completion of a State certified Beverage Alcohol
Sellers and Servers Education and Training (BASSET) program for all persons who
sell or serve beverages, all management personnel working on premises, and
anyone whose job description entails the checking of identification for the
purchases of beverages, pursuant to that license.
   (B)   A state certified BASSET training program shall be defined as a BASSET
program licensed by the State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission (ILCC) as
required by ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 3-12(11.1) and 6-27 and Title 77 of
Illinois Administrative Code, Chapter XVI, Section 3500. All licensed BASSET
providers shall be required to have on file all licenses and certificates to
prove current qualifications and provide a certificate of course completion and
a card (a picture type ID is optional), to participants as proof of completion.
   (C)   After any new owner, manager, employee, or agent requiring BASSET
training, shall within 90 days from the beginning of their employment with that
licensee, complete an ILCC BASSET approved seller/server training program and
shall until completion of the BASSET program work under the supervision of a
person who has completed BASSET training.
   (D)   A photo copy of certificate of completion for all owners, managers,
employees, or agents required by this subchapter to have BASSET training shall
be maintained, by the establishment, in manner that will allow inspection, upon
demand, by any designee of both the state or local liquor control authorities.
(Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.45 APPROVAL, DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   All applications for a license under this subchapter shall be
delivered to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. It shall be the duty of the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner to investigate and consider all applications.
For this purpose the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may enlist the aid of
the Chief of Police and any other city officials or employees that he or she
deems necessary to complete the investigation. The investigation shall include
a background search and credit check. At any time during the pendency of any
such application(s), the Local Liquor Commissioner shall have the right to
compel the applicant to submit to any examination and to produce any books and
records which, in the judgment of the Local Liquor Commissioner, are material
to the determination of whether the applicant is qualified to receive a license
or manage the business on the licensed premises (as the case may be) under the
provisions of this code, or whether the premises sought to be licensed are
suitable for such purposes. The Local Liquor Commissioner shall also have the
right to require the applicant to answer any charges made in any objection to
the issuance of the license made by the Chief of Police, a prosecuting
official, or by the sheriff or prosecuting attorney of the county relative to
the same. The failure of any applicant to appear at the time and place fixed by
the Local Liquor Commissioner for his or her examination or to produce books
and records when requested, unless for good cause shown, shall be deemed to be
an admission that the applicant is not qualified to receive a license and/or
not qualified to be a manager, as the case may be, and, therefore, a basis for
denial of the license or disqualification of the proposed manager, as the case
may be.
   (B)   Upon completion of the investigation, the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall approve or disapprove the issuance of a license and/or
designation of the manager based on the application(s), provided, in the case
of approval, that there exists an available license as set forth in §
111.48.
   (C)   No license shall be issued to any person ineligible to receive the
same by virtue of ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-2, as amended.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.080) (Ord. 2007-02-0085O, passed 2-13-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-
03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.46 LICENSE APPLICATION FEES.
   In connection with the application of any person, group of persons,
partnership or corporation applying for a license or renewal of a license under
this subchapter, the applicant shall pay at the time of the application a
nonrefundable license application fee of $250, which shall be in addition to
the license fee required in this subchapter, both of which shall be due and
paid at the time when the application is completed and filed with the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner and which shall be paid by a certified cashier’s
check. The license application fee shall not be refunded regardless of whether
the applicant is issued a license or not.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.060) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.47 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   All applications for licenses shall be kept on file in the office of
the Liquor Control Commissioner, and fees for all licenses shall be paid to the
City Clerk who shall certify to the Liquor Control Commissioner the names and
addresses of all licenses paying fees to him together with the class of license
for which payment is made and thereupon said Liquor Control Commissioner shall
issue the license provided for in this subchapter to all applicants who have
complied with all the requirements of this subchapter and other applicable
laws. Provided, however, no license shall be issued to any person ineligible to
receive the same under this subchapter or the laws of the State of Illinois, as
amended from time to time.
   (B)   Prior to, and as a condition of initial and continued sale of any
alcoholic liquor, applicant shall ensure the following:
      (1)   That he or she has met all requirements of any approved use,
special use permit, elevations, site plans, zoning conditions, business plans,
building plans, building permits and licenses.
      (2)   That all food services equipment (if applicable) is installed and
fully operating.
      (3)   That all licensed premises shall be constructed, improved,
renovated and used consistent with any representations made by an applicant to
the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the City Council and with the
findings, approvals, conditions and/or recommendations of the Planning and
Zoning Commission and those of the City Council, regarding any approvals under
the Zoning, Subdivision or applicable Codes of the City.
   (C)   If required by the Liquor Commissioner of the city, applicant shall be
required to provide satisfactory proof that the above requirements have been
met.
   (D)   Further provided, however, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may,
as a condition to the issuance of any liquor license, impose such conditions
and restrictions upon each license as the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may
deem necessary to insure that operation of the liquor establishment shall not
be harmful to the safety, morals and welfare of the community. The conditions
imposed upon each liquor license shall be enumerated upon said license and
shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place in such establishment and
shall reiterate in detail such conditions.
(Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014; Am. Ord. 2021-10-0869O, passed
10–26-2021)
§ 111.48 RENEWALS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each license required by this subchapter shall terminate on April 30
next following its issuance. No part of a license fee will be refunded if the
license is revoked by the Liquor Commissioner.
   (B)   Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration thereof,
provided he or she is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for
which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; and
provided, further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be
construed as vested right which shall in any case prevent the Mayor and City
Council from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within its
jurisdiction.
   (C)   Application for renewal of license shall be filed with the City Clerk
on or before April 1 preceding the expiration thereof. Such application for
renewal shall be made under oath and shall be upon an application form prepared
by the city.
   (D)   The renewal application shall contain a certification that all
information contained in the applicant’s prior or initial application is still
true and correct except as indicated otherwise on the renewal application form.
The applicant’s initial or prior application must be attached to the renewal
application and the applicant must furnish any additional material in support
of the application as deemed necessary by the city. If the owner or principal
type of business has changed in any respect, a new license will be required.
   (E)   Each application for renewal shall be treated and considered in the
same manner as hereinabove provided for original applications for license.
   (F)   Each application for renewal shall also include a renewal
supplementary application signed by any manager of the business conducted on
the licensed premises and containing the same information as the original
supplementary application.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.100) (Ord. 2007-02-0085O, passed 2-13-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-
03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.49 POSTING LICENSE AND WARNING.
   (A)   Every licensee shall cause his or her license or licenses to be framed
and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises and
adjacent to or attached to each separate bar on the licensed premises,
including movable and/or other type of service bars, regardless of where such
bars are located.
   (B)   In every tavern or other place in the city where liquor is sold, there
shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place next to each bar therein a
printed warning which shall read substantially as follows:
 
“WARNING - You are subject to a fine of up to Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars
($750.00) under the ordinances of the City of Oak Forest if you purchase liquor
when under the age of 21 years, or misrepresent your age for the purpose of
purchasing or obtaining liquor.”
 
(2000 Code, § 5.08.140) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-27-2014)
§ 111.50 LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS.
   Retail liquor licenses shall be divided into classes as follows: (for each
class of license the terms “retail sale,” “selling,” “sale,” “sell” and/or
“offer to sell” shall include dispensing, pouring, mixing or otherwise serving
any liquor regardless of whether there is any type of compensation.)
   (A)   Class A "Tavern." License shall be issued for a period of one year to
any person or persons, organization, association, partnership or corporation
for the sale of any and all liquor as defined herein by the drink only and for
consumption on the premises where sold subject to the other terms and
conditions of this code.
   (B)   Class AVG "Tavern" (with video gaming). License shall be issued for a
period of one year to any person or persons, organization, association,
partnership or corporation for the sale of any and all liquor as defined herein
by the drink only and for consumption on the premises where sold subject to the
other terms and conditions of this code. Video gaming is hereby permitted on
the premises, provided a proper, current, valid license has been issued to the
holder of the liquor license hereunder, pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming
Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.). The holder of the liquor license
shall abide at all times by all requirements of §
114.011 of this code, the Illinois Video Gaming Act and any terms or conditions
of the license issued under the Video Gaming Act. The video gaming terminals
may only be operated during such times as the holder of the liquor license
hereunder is authorized to serve alcohol.
   (C)   Class B "Restaurant." License shall be issued for a period of one year
to any person or persons, organization, association, partnership or corporation
doing business as a full service restaurant for the sale of any and all liquor
as defined herein by the drink only and for consumption on the premises where
sold subject to the other terms and conditions of this code.
   (D)   Class BVG "Restaurant" (with video gaming). License shall be issued
for a period of one year to any person or persons, organization, association,
partnership or corporation doing business as a full service restaurant for the
sale of any and all liquor as defined herein by the drink only and for
consumption on the premises where sold subject to the other terms and
conditions of this code. Video gaming is hereby permitted on the premises,
provided a proper, current. valid license has been issued to the holder of the
liquor license hereunder, pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch.
230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.). The holder of the liquor license shall abide at all
times by all requirements of §
114.011  of this code, the Illinois Video Gaming Act and any terms or
conditions of the license issued under the Video Gaming Act. The video gaming
terminals may only be operated during such time as the holder of the liquor
license hereunder is authorized to serve alcohol.
   (E)   Class C "Beer Garden." License shall be issued for a period of one
year to any person or persons, organization, association, partnership, or
corporation that holds a Class A license and entitles licensee to make sales,
at retail, of liquor for use or consumption outdoors on the premises where
sold.
      (1)   Class C "Beer Garden" licenses shall designate on a site or patio
plan an area immediately adjoining the licensee’s indoor establishment, which
contiguous area shall be used for the purposes of the license, and which area
will hereinafter be referred to as a beer garden. The beer garden may not
exceed 50% of the establishment interior occupancy, and shall have its
boundaries clearly marked with the appropriate enclosure as determined by the
City Administrator or designees. The Liquor Commissioner, in his or her sole
and absolute discretion, shall approve the location of a beer garden or where
the zoning ordinance regulates the use will supersede the Liquor Commissioner’s
discretion.
      (2)   Class C "Beer Garden." All special events taking place during
inclement weather shall require permission from the Liquor Commissioner.
      (3)   Such sale and consumption of liquor shall be limited to the
designated beer garden.
      (4)   Licensee must have at least one employee stationed in the beer
garden at all operational times.
      (5)   Adequate area for pedestrian flow through the beer garden shall be
maintained at all times.
      (6)   Emergency ingress and egress and access by and to fire apparatus in
the beer garden shall be subject to review and approval of the City Fire Chief.
      (7)   The beer garden shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be kept from debris at all times.
      (8)   All trash containers located in the beer garden shall be lidded at
all times and all refuse shall be regularly removed.
      (9)   Licensees shall obtain all licenses, certifications, permits, and
other approvals required for the legal operation of the beer garden.
      (10)   Licensees shall comply with all other requirements applicable to
the beer garden in the code and other applicable codes, ordinances, and
regulations.
      (11)   It shall be unlawful to sell, offer, give away or permit to be
sold, offered or given away, at retail, in or upon a Class C licensed beer
garden, any liquor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. Sunday through
Thursday, and between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Fridays and
Saturdays.
      (12)    Following the closing times and prior to the opening times set
forth in of this section of the city code, every non-licensee person located in
the beer garden area shall relocate indoors or otherwise leave the outdoor
premises, which shall be closed and remain closed.
      (13)   All doors directly opening into or out of such location, place or
premises for ingress thereto or egress therefrom shall be securely locked
during the time that sales in the beer garden are prohibited.
   (F)   Class D "Outdoor Café." License entitles Class A and B licensees to
make sales, at retail, of liquor for use or consumption outdoors on the
premises where such sales are incidental to and sold in conjunction with the
service of food, as the same is defined in §
111.40 of the city code. The sale shall be by responsible entities otherwise
duly licensed under the city code and possessing a current, valid license from
the city for the sale of liquor at retail for consumption on the premises
(e.g., a Class A and B license in addition to a Class D license), and any
required outdoor dining permits required by the city code. The sale of liquor
at retail for consumption in connection with the service of food by a
restaurant with outdoor dining shall be allowed for limited periods of time at
the hours specified and subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Class D "Outdoor Café" licensees shall designate on a site or patio
plan an area immediately adjoining the licensee’s indoor establishment, which
contiguous area shall be used for the purposes of the license, and which area
will hereinafter be referred to as an outdoor café. The outdoor café may not
exceed 50% of the establishment interior occupancy, and shall have its
boundaries clearly marked with the appropriate enclosure as determined by the
City Administrator or designees. The Liquor Commissioner shall approve, in his
or her sole and absolute discretion, the location of an outdoor café or where
the zoning ordinance regulates the use will supersede the Liquor Commissioner’s
discretion.
      (2)   Class D "Outdoor Café." All special events taking place during
inclement weather shall require permission from the Liquor Commissioner.
      (3)   The service of liquor shall be restricted solely to on-premises
consumption by customers within the outdoor dining area designated in the
application for a Class D liquor license as the outdoorcafé area, which must be
immediately adjacent to and abutting the indoor restaurant which provides it
with food and beverage service.
      (4)   The outdoor café must be clearly separated from pedestrian traffic.
      (5)   The licensee shall post a written notice to customers that the
drinking or carrying of an open container of liquor is prohibited and unlawful
outside the designated outdoor café area.
      (6)   Adequate area for pedestrian flow through the outdoor café shall be
maintained at all times.
      (7)   Emergency ingress and egress and access by and to fire apparatus in
the outdoor café shall be subject to review and approval of the City Fire
Chief.
      (8)   The outdoor café shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be kept from debris at all times.
      (9)   Condiment and other food storage containers shall be lidded when
not in use. Perishable condiments and other food items shall not be stored in
the outdoor café.
      (10)   The tableware utilized in the outdoor café shall be the same
china, napkins, flatware, and other tableware used in the restaurant.
      (11)   All trash containers located in the outdoor café shall be lidded
at all times and all refuse shall be regularly removed. Soiled linens,
tablecloths, and napkins shall not be stored in the outdoor café.
      (12)   Licensees shall obtain all licenses, certifications, permits, and
other approvals required for the legal operation of the outdoor café.
      (13)   Licensees shall comply with all other requirements applicable to
the outdoor café in the code and other applicable codes, ordinances, and
regulations.
      (14)   It shall be unlawful to sell, offer, give away or permit to be
sold, offered or given away, at retail, in or upon a Class D licensed outdoor
café, any liquor between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. Sunday through
Thursday, and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Fridays and
Saturdays.
      (15)   Following the closing times and prior to the opening times set
forth in this section, every non-licensee person located in the outdoor café
area shall relocate indoors or otherwise leave the outdoor premises, which
shall be closed and remain closed.
      (16)   All doors directly opening into or out of such location, place or
premises for ingress thereto or egress therefrom shall be securely locked
during the time that sales in the outdoor café are prohibited.
      (17)   The outdoor café area designated in the application for a Class D
liquor license must be
adjacent to and incidental to the operation of an indoor restaurant and any use
of the sidewalk must be confined to the actual sidewalk and public right-of-way
frontage of the indoor restaurant building. An outdoor café is only permitted
where the sidewalk is wide enough to adequately simultaneously accommodate both
the usual pedestrian traffic in the area and the operation of the proposed
activity. The outdoor café shall leave not less than six consecutive feet of
sidewalk width at every point which is clear and unimpeded for pedestrian
traffic. An outdoor café shall not be allowed within ten feet of a fire
hydrant, bus or rail stop, fire escape, bus stop, any doorway posted as an
exit, loading zone or mail boxes.
   (G)   Class E "Liquor Store." License entitles licensee, doing business as a
liquor store, to make package sales, at retail, of liquor for use or
consumption off of the premises where sold. A Class E license shall also permit
the tasting of wine or other liquor, as an ancillary part of the primary
business of selling liquor. The number of such tastings may be limited by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner, in his or her discretion.
   (H)   Class F "Convenience Business." License entitles licensee to make
package sales, at retail, of liquor for use or consumption off of the premises
where sold.
   (I)   Class G "Combined." License shall be issued for a period of one year
to any person or persons, organization, association, partnership or corporation
doing business as a full service restaurant. License entitles licensee to make
sales, at retail, of liquor for use or consumption on the premises where sold
and to make package sales, at retail, of liquor for use or consumption off the
premises.
   (J)   Class GVG "Combined" (with video gaming). License shall be issued for
a period of one year to any person or persons, organization, association,
partnership or corporation doing business as a full service restaurant for the
sale of any and all liquor as defined herein by the drink only and for
consumption on the premises where sold subject to the other terms and
conditions of this code. Video gaming is hereby permitted on the premises,
provided a proper, current, valid license has been issued to the holder of the
liquor license hereunder, pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch.
230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.). The holder of the liquor license shall abide at all
times by all requirements of §
114.011 of this code, the Illinois Video Gaming Act and any terms or conditions
of the license issued under the Video Gaming Act. The video gaming terminals
may only be operated during such times as the holder of the liquor license
hereunder is authorized to serve alcohol.
   (K)   Class H "Temporary." License shall be issued for a set period of time
and license shall permit the sale of any and all liquor as defined herein by
the drink only and for consumption on the premises for those hours approved and
identified in the license.
   (L)   Class I "Video gaming Boutique". License shall be issued for a period
of one year to any person or persons, organization, association, partnership or
corporation, the principal business of which is the operation of video gaming
terminals, for the sale of any and all liquor as defined herein by the drink
only and for consumption on the premises where sold, in connection with and
secondary to the video gaming operations. Video gaming is hereby permitted on
the premises, provided a proper, current, valid license has been issued to the
holder of the liquor license hereunder, pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming
Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.). The holder of the liquor license
shall abide at all times by all requirements of §
114.011 of this code, the Illinois Video Gaming Act and any terms or conditions
of the license issued under the Video Gaming Act. The video gaming terminals
may only be operated during such times as the holder of the liquor license
hereunder is authorized to serve alcohol. The determination of whether a
business meets the criteria for this license includes the following:
      (1)   No full service kitchen;
      (2)   Seating area for video gaming exceeds the seating for food/
beverages;
      (3)   Estimated net revenue from overall business operation which is
greater than 40% from video gaming;
      (4)   Total square footage of 2,000 feet or less.
The Class I license shall be further conditioned upon the full, continuous
compliance with all city codes, including the building, sign and property
maintenance codes.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.110) (Ord. 2006-07-0045O, passed 8-8-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-09-
0260O, passed 9-22-2009; Am. Ord. 2010-12-0315O, passed 12-14-2010; Am. Ord.
2014-03-0488O, passed 3-27-2014; Am. Ord. 2016-06-0607O, passed 6-28-2016; Am.
Ord. 2016-08-0616O, passed 9-13-2016; Am. Ord. 2021-10-0871O, passed 10-26-
2021) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.51 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   Without the need or requirement for any further action by the City Council,
when a license is forfeited or revoked or terminated for any reason, that
license is immediately and automatically eliminated, and the number of licenses
from that class is lowered by one. The following shall be the number of
licenses to be issued; there shall be issued no more than:
   (A)   Two Class A licenses.
   (B)   Three Class AVG (with video gaming) licenses.
   (C)   Five Class B licenses.
   (D)   Twelve Class BVG (with video gaming) licenses.
   (E)   Nine Class C licenses.
   (F)   Zero Class D licenses.
   (G)   Three Class E licenses.
   (H)   Twelve Class F licenses.
   (I)   Zero Class G licenses.
   (J)   Three Class GVG (with video gaming) licenses.
   (K)   Class H shall not be limited.
   (L)   Four Class I licenses.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.130) (Am. Ord. 2025-08- 1106O, passed 8-12-2025)
Editor’s Note: Only the most recent ordinance amending §
111.51 is listed.
§ 111.52 FEES; TERM.
   (A)   Fees.
      (1)   The fee of any Class A "Tavern" license granted hereunder shall be
in the amount of $1,500.
      (2)   The fee for any Class AVG "Tavern" license granted hereunder shall
be in the amount of $2,000.
      (3)   The fee for any Class B "Restaurant" license granted hereunder
shall be in the amount of $1,500.
      (4)   The fee for any Class BVG "Restaurant" license granted hereunder
shall be in the amount of $2,000.
      (5)   The fee for any Class C "Beer Garden" license granted hereunder
shall be in the amount of $350.
      (6)   The fee for any Class D "Outdoor Café" license granted hereunder
shall be in the amount of $200.
      (7)   The fee for any Class E "Liquor Store" license granted hereunder
shall be in the amount of $1,500.
      (8)   The fee for any Class F "Convenience Business" license granted
hereunder shall be in the amount of $1,500.
      (9)   The fee for any Class G "Combined" license granted hereunder shall
be in the amount of $1,800.
      (10)   The fee for any Class GVG "Combined" license granted hereunder
shall be in the amount of $2,500.
      (11)   There is no fee for a Class H "Temporary" license granted
hereunder.
   (B)   A civic, charitable or fraternal organization may be granted a
temporary permit by the Liquor Control Commissioner to sell or serve liquor in
the city. The temporary license shall be limited in time, and the location for
the use of the license shall be defined. Applications shall be made directly to
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, and the licenses, when granted by the
Commissioner, do not require a fee.
   (C)   All license fees shall be paid in advance on or before April 15 April
in each year.
   (D)   Every license shall expire on April 30 following its issuance (except
24-hour licenses).
   (E)   All license fees shall be paid at the office of the City Clerk.
   (F)   In the event a license is not issued, any license fees (except the
initial license expense in § 111.52) which have been prepaid shall be refunded
to an applicant.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.110) (Ord. 2006-07-0045O, passed 8-8-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-09-
0260O, passed 9-22-2009; Am. Ord. 2010-12-0315O, passed 12-14-2010; Am. Ord.
2014-03-0889O, passed 3-20-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014; Am.
Ord. 2014-04-0490O, passed 4-8-2014; Am. Ord. 2016-06-0607O, passed 6-28-2016;
Am. Ord. 2016-08-0616O, passed 9-13-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-03-0682O, passed 3-13-
2018) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.53 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically provided in §§
111.40 et seq. of this code which govern and regulate alcoholic beverage sales
in the City of Oak Forest for any particular license classification, no person
licensed under this subchapter as a retailer of alcoholic liquor shall sell,
permit to be sold or give away any alcoholic liquor between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m. on Saturdays, and between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
Sundays provided further, however, that it shall be the duty of the license
holders of such establishments to require that all persons, other than
employees of said establishments, leave the premises at the stated closing
times.
   (B)   The Liquor Control Commissioner may extend the closing hours for two
hours on December 31 and January 1.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.150) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014; Am. Ord.
2016-06-0607O, passed 6-28-2016) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.54 CHANGE OF LOCATION OR IN PERSONNEL.
   (A)   A retail liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only
in the premises described in the application and license. A location may be
changed upon making written application to make the change to and receiving
approval thereof issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. No change of
location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one
for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of the state and the
ordinances of the city.
   (B)   Any change in partnerships, officers, directors or managers of
establishments licensed under this subchapter, or persons holding directly,
beneficially or through any form of indirect or concealed ownership or control,
more than 5% of the stock or ownership interest of any location or premises for
which a license has been issued, shall be reported, in writing, to the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner within ten days of the change. All new personnel
shall meet all the standards of this subchapter and must otherwise qualify to
hold a liquor license. All such changes in personnel shall be subject to review
by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.170) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.55 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A liquor license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for a term
not to exceed the period for which the same is issued unless sooner revoked, as
provided in this subchapter, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be
subject to attachment, garnishment or execution nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall not descent by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee,
provided that the executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased
licensee and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when the estate
consists in part of liquor, under order of the appropriate court, may exercise
the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the
death of such license but not linger more than six months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.
   (B)   When the licensee is a corporation or limited liability company, the
license shall terminate whenever 50% or more of the ownership interest therein
changes from that shown on the original license application. In such event, the
corporation or limited liability company, through its officers, must make
application for the issuance of a new license as provided herein; provided,
however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply where the
transfer of an ownership interest is made to an owner shown on the original
license application who owned 50% or more of the ownership interest of such
corporation or limited liability company at the time the original license
application was filed with the city.
   (C)   When the licensee is a partnership or corporation or limited liability
company, no change in ownership from that shown on the original application
involving the addition of a new partner of such partnership or a new
shareholder of the corporation, or a new member of the limited liability
company, who will have an ownership interest in the aggregate more than 5%,
shall be effective until such proposed change in ownership has first been
reported in writing to the Local Liquor Commissioner and said Commissioner
finds that the proposed new partner, shareholder or member is not ineligible
under the provisions of this subchapter and so advises the licensee in writing.
Any change in ownership without complying with the terms hereof shall
constitute grounds for revocation of the liquor license issued pursuant hereto.
   (D)   Any licensee may seek to renew his or her license at the expiration
thereof pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter provided he or she is
then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal
license is sought are suitable for such purpose; and provided, further, that
the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested
right which shall in any case prevent the Board of Trustees from decreasing or
increasing the number of licenses to be issued within the city, nor shall it
limit or restrict the right of the city to at any time amend or repeal any or
all provisions of this subchapter.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any other provision herein, where ownership in a sole
proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company or corporation is
transferred solely to any person or persons found qualified pursuant to
application under this code to hold a liquor license in the city and proven to
be a parent or a son or daughter of the prior owner and where such transfer of
ownership under this code requires the issuance of a new liquor license, no
additional fee for a new liquor license shall be assessed for the year in which
the transfer of ownership is made; instead, the fee for that year’s liquor
license shall be pro-rated between or among the owners as follows:
      (1)   The first owner shall pay the entire amount; and
      (2)   The subsequent owner shall pay a pro-rated amount based on the date
on which ownership is acquired; and
      (3)   Upon receipt of payment of the pro-rated amount the city shall
return to the first owner that same pro-rated amount.
   (F)   Upon payment of the pro-rated amount a new license in the name of the
new owner or owners shall be issued which shall be effective only for that
portion of the year for which the prorated amount was paid.
(Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.56 LICENSING OF PREMISES FOR WHICH A LICENSE HAS BEEN PREVIOUSLY REVOKED.
   When any license issued under the provisions of this subchapter is revoked
for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person, group of persons,
partnership, firm or corporation for a period of one year thereafter for the
sale of alcoholic liquor in the premises described in the revoked license.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.200) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.57 CESSATION OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Any licensee who ceases to do business or closes his or her place of
business for a period of more than 30 successive days shall be subject to
having his or her license declared forfeited and lapsed by order of the Liquor
Control Commissioner.
   (B)   Provided, however, if any licensee wishes to close for repairs or
remodeling, the licensee shall so notify the Liquor Control Commissioner, and
indicate the work to be done and the construction schedule for the work. The
licensee shall also request from the Liquor Control Commissioner approval to
cease doing business for such purpose, and, if approved, the Liquor Control
Commissioner will indicate the period of time for which the temporary cessation
has been approved in the order permitting such temporary cessation of business.
   (C)   If, due to no fault of the licensee, the remodeling or repairs
continue for a longer period of time than originally approved, the licensee
shall so notify the Liquor Control Commissioner and the order of the Liquor
Control Commissioner shall then be revised accordingly if the Local Liquor
Commissioner agrees to such extension of time. Such revised order shall
indicate a new date for completion of all work.
   (D)   However, no such business shall be allowed to cease doing business for
such remodeling or repairs for a period in excess of one year unless and until
an extension has been granted in writing by the Local Liquor Commissioner.
   (E)   There shall be no reduction or proration of the license fee for any
period of time during remodeling.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.190) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-27-2014)
§ 111.58 LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   The Mayor shall be the Local Liquor Commissioner of the City and shall be
charged with the administration of the appropriate provisions of this code and
other ordinances of the city relating to liquors and shall have the following
powers:
   (A)   To suspend for not more than 30 days, or revoke for cause after notice
and hearing has been afforded as provided in §
111.63 hereof, all licenses issued under this subchapter, and to disqualify or
place conditions upon any person acting as manager or purporting to act as
manager of any licensed premises.
   (B)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed under this subchapter in order to determine
whether any of the provisions of state or federal laws or this code or other
ordinances of the city or any rules or regulations adopted by him or her or the
State Commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine
said premises in connection therewith.
   (C)   To receive complaints from any citizens within the city that any of
the provisions of state or federal laws or this code or other ordinances of the
city or any rules or regulations adopted in connection with the control of the
sale of liquors have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaints
in the manner provided by law.
   (D)   If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to believe that
any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately
threaten the welfare of the community, he or she may, upon issuance of a
written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or
hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven days,
giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, except that
if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or
businesses on the licensed premises such order shall not be applicable to such
other business or businesses.
   (E)   To appeal to the Circuit Court or any other court of competent
jurisdiction any decision of the State Liquor Control Commission which reverses
or modifies any order issued or penalty imposed by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
(Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.59 INSPECTION.
   It shall be the duty of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or his or her
authorized agent, and is hereby authorized and empowered from time to time to
inspect and examine the premises wherein retail liquor business is carried on,
for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not all health ordinances of the
city and provisions of this code relative to the carrying on of such business
are being complied with at such premises. It shall be the duty of every such
person, firm or corporation licensed under the provisions of this subchapter to
permit such inspection to be made and to exhibit the premises to such persons
making such inspection and a record of such inspection shall be kept on file in
the office of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or the City Police
Department. A failure to permit such inspection shall be sufficient cause to
revoke or suspend a license for the premises.
(Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.60 HEALTH AND SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation licensed to
carry on a business under the provisions of this subchapter to at all times
keep the premises where such business is conducted clean and in proper sanitary
condition. All persons employed or working in any such premises shall be kept
clean and cleanly clothed. All utensils, appliances, vessels, receptacles,
refrigerators, closets, rooms or other places or things whatsoever which are
used for the purpose of selling or offering for sale, such liquors or of the
storing or dispensing of the same, must at all times be kept in a clean,
wholesome and sanitary condition.
   (B)   Every person in charge of such premises shall keep himself or herself
and his or her employees in a clean condition and cleanly clothed and no person
who has tuberculosis or venereal or communicable skin disease or who has any
infectious or contagious disease shall engage in or be employed in and about
such business or such premises, or engaged in any way in the handling,
preparation or distribution of liquor. Every person in charge of such premises
and his employees shall obtain and keep in effect all necessary health
certificates as may be required by the Illinois Department of Public Health
and/or any other government agencies, including any certificates required
because the liquor establishment serves food as well as liquor.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.240) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.61 CONDUCT OF LICENSEES.
   Every licensee and every officer, shareholder, associate, member, agent,
representative and employee of every licensee under this subchapter shall be
subject to the following regulations, and all persons shall likewise be subject
to the applicable regulations set forth below.
   (A)   Every licensee shall conduct his or her place of business in a quiet,
decent and respectable manner and shall eject therefrom or refuse admittance
thereto all persons rendering themselves objectionable or undesirable by reason
of undue noise or other acts disturbing the peace.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to give or deliver any alcoholic
liquor or intoxicating beverages to a person under the influence of
intoxicating liquor. Soliciting of drinks or prostitution is prohibited.
   (C)   Every licensee shall immediately report to the Police Department any
act by a person or patron which renders the person or patron objectionable,
causes undue noise or disturbance, breaches the peace or is otherwise unlawful.
   (D)   Every license shall publicly display items offered for sale. If an
item cannot be displayed, a public sign within the business must identify items
offered for sale.
   (E)   No person licensed under the provisions hereof shall make or allow any
loud or boisterous talking, or obscene or profane language, quarreling,
singing, fighting or other disturbance of persons passing along any street or
public way in the vicinity thereof or to the disturbance of the peace and quiet
of persons doing business or residing in the neighborhood thereof.
   (F)   All licensees dispensing or serving food or liquor shall be decently
clothed. Topless or similar attire is prohibited.
   (G)   It is unlawful for any person, while acting as a waiter, waitress,
bartender, entertainer or any other position, to:
      (1)   Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair regions;
      (2)   Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance
of, or simulates, the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum,
anal region or pubic hair regions; or
      (3)   Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola
thereof. It is also unlawful to allow any customer or any other person to
perform any of the foregoing acts.
      (4)   It shall also be unlawful to allow any customer or any other person
to perform any of the foregoing acts.
   (H)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any waiter,
waitress, bartender, entertainer or other employee or person to commit any of
the acts declared to be unlawful in this section. A person shall be deemed to
be a waiter, waitress, bartender or entertainer if the person acts in that
capacity without regard to whether or not the person is paid any compensation
by the management of the establishment in which the activity is performed.
   (I)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any act or form of
entertainment which, when considered as whole, would be considered obscene (for
example, entertainment which predominantly appeals to prurient interests), as
the term is defined by state law.
   (J)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any of the
following: male or female striptease (regardless of whether the participants
strip off all their clothes); modeling and/or advertising for the sale of
swimsuits, undergarments, brassieres and other garments where the individuals
modeling and/or advertising solicit and/or receive any money from a customer of
the licensee during the course of such modeling or advertising; wet T-shirt
contests; or any contact sport, including, but not limited to, wrestling in
mud, jello or any substance other than air, and any similar contest or
performance.
   (K)   It is unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any
contagious, infectious or venereal disease.
   (L)   It is unlawful for a license holder to employ any person under the age
of 21 in any capacity where the principal duty is the sale of alcoholic liquor.
In situations where the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal activity
but a secondary consideration, no person under the age of 21 may be involved.
No person under the age of 21 may be directly involved in the sale or service
of alcoholic beverages. In addition when an alcoholic beverage is being served
by an employee under the age of 21, an employee over the age of 21 must be
present and responsible for verifying the age of any patron being served an
alcoholic beverage as being 21 years of age or older.
   (M)   Each licensee shall comply with all ordinances of the City of Oak
Forest, whether or not they related to the sale of alcohol. In addition, all
licensees will be current on all payments, fees, and fines with the City of Oak
Forest. Any violation of the City Code of Ordinances or in payments made to the
city, may be subject to penalties within this subchapter up to and including
revocation of a liquor license.
   (N)   Prohibited entertainment. It shall be unlawful to permit the following
conduct on licensed premises:
      (1)   Performance of acts, or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or other
sexual act.
      (2)   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus or genitals.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.180) (Am. Ord. 2012-06-0386O, passed 6-26-2012; Am. Ord.
2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.62 ACTS OF AGENT OR EMPLOYER.
   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any
of the provisions of this subchapter by any officer, director, shareholder,
manager, associate, member, representative, or other agent or employee of any
licensee, shall be deemed and held to be an act of such employer or licensee
and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if said
act or omission had been done or omitted by him or her personally.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.020) Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.63 LIMITATIONS ON SALES IN GENERAL.
   (A)   No licensee, or any officer, shareholder, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of the licensee, shall sell, give or deliver
alcoholic liquor, beer or wine to any person under the age of 21 years, to any
intoxicated person or to any person known by him or her to be a habitual
drunkard, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental
treatment. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor,
shall sell, give or deliver the alcoholic liquor to another person under the
age of 21 years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.
   (B)   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor
is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of such
alcoholic liquor, nor shall he or she have the alcoholic liquor in his or her
possession.
   (C)   If a licensee or his or her agent or employee believes or has reason
to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited
because of the age of the prospective recipient, he or she shall, before making
the delivery, demand the presentation of some form of positive identification,
containing proof of age, issued by any county, state or federal agency.
   (D)   No person shall transfer, alter or deface any identification card; use
the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged identification
card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information. No person
shall purchase, accept delivery of or have possession of alcoholic liquor by
using an identification card in violation of this section. The possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under 21 years of age is
forbidden.
   (E)   The possession of alcoholic liquor by a minor, or the dispensing of
alcoholic liquor to a minor, or the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor,
in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, is not prohibited by
this section.
   (F)   The prices established for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor must
remain the same from opening to closing of the licensed establishment.
   (G)   The prices charged for retail sales of alcoholic liquor must remain
the same for all customers.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.210) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014) Penalty, see
§
111.99
§ 111.64 MISREPRESENTATION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispense, pour, or mix any
liquor which is represented to be of a certain quantity or kind, a given brand
name, or to be of certain ingredients when it is in fact different from such
representation. It shall be unlawful to add to or water down any liquor while
it is in its original package, or otherwise, except when a customer orders a
drink with water as a mix.
(Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.65 PURCHASE OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY UNDERAGE PERSONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any parent or legal guardian of any person under
the age of 21 to allow that person to purchase, receive, consume or possess
alcoholic liquor in violation of this subchapter upon either public or private
property within the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises located
within the city to allow any person under the age of 21 to remain on the
premises while in possession of alcoholic liquor or while consuming alcoholic
liquor in violation of this subchapter.
   (C)   No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed to be in any
establishment whose primary business is the sale of alcohol liquor, unless that
person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.230) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014) Penalty, see
§
111.99
§ 111.66 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to proceed
by complaint and notice of hearing to require any licensee or manager under
this Chapter to appear at a time and place specified in said notice to show
cause why the license issued under this subchapter to said licensee by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner should not be suspended or revoked for
violations of the provisions of this subchapter, rules or regulations adopted
pursuant thereto or other applicable law.
   (B)   All such original proceedings shall be instituted by complaint in
writing, shall state the particular provision, rule or regulation alleged to be
violated and a general statement of the facts upon which such allegation is
based and shall be signed by the Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (C)   The licensee against whom complaint has been filed shall be entitled
to be served with a copy of the complaint and shall be given notice of the time
and place set for the hearing of said complaint.
   (D)   Said complaint and notice of hearing shall be served on the licensee
named therein, not less than three days prior to the date specified in said
notice of hearing unless a different time limit is required under existing law,
and if such is so required, notice shall be served in compliance with said time
period. The licensee shall be given the opportunity to appear and defend.
   (E)   Said licensee named in said complaint and notice of hearing shall
appear at the time and place designated in said notice of hearing and at such
hearing shall have all protections and rights allowed under law from time to
time; provided, however, the failure of the licensee to appear and/or defend
shall not impair the power of the Local Liquor Commissioner to either suspend,
revoke, or not renew the license for cause.
   (F)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall within five days after
such hearing, if he or she determines after such hearing that the license
should be revoked, suspended or non-renewed, state the reason or reasons for
such determination in a written order of revocation, suspension, or non-
renewal, and shall serve a copy of the order within said five days upon the
licensee.
   (G)   The licensee, after the receipt of the order of suspension or
revocation shall have the privilege, within a period of 20 days after the
receipt of such order of suspension or revocation, of appealing the order to
the Illinois Liquor Control Commission. If and only if such right exists under
Illinois law, the
licensee shall have the similar right to appeal any decision of non-renewal
within said 20-day period to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission.
   (H)   The notice of hearing required hereunder shall be served on the
licensee either personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested. If served by certified or registered mail, the licensee shall be
conclusively deemed to be served three calendar days after such notice was
deposited in the United States mail.
   (I)   Different or additional procedures from those provided by this
subchapter may be established from time to time governing complaints and
hearings provided for herein upon being instituted by the Liquor Control
Commissioner and approved by the Mayor and City Council.
   (J)   At such hearings regarding suspension or revocation, a verbatim record
of the proceedings shall be made by a certified court reporter or certified
shorthand reporter.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.220) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.67 DISQUALIFICATION AND SUSPENSION OF MANAGER—PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to proceed by
complaint and notice of hearing to require any manager managing a business in a
licensed premise under this subchapter to appear at a time and place specified
in said notice to show cause why the manager should not be suspended or
disqualified to act as manager for violations of the provisions of this
subchapter, rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto or other applicable
law.
   (B)   All such original proceedings shall be instituted by complaint in
writing, shall state the particular provision, rule or regulation alleged to be
violated and a general statement of the facts upon which such allegation is
based and shall be signed by the Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (C)   The manager against whom complaint has been filed shall be entitled to
be served with a copy of the complaint and shall be given notice of the time
and place set for the hearing of said complaint.
   (D)   Said complaint and notice of hearing shall be served on the manager
named therein, not less than three days prior to the date specified in said
notice of hearing unless a different time limit is required under existing law,
and if such is so required, notice shall be served in compliance with said time
period. The manager shall be given the opportunity to appear and defend.
   (E)   Said manager named in said complaint and notice of hearing shall
appear at the time and place designated in said notice of hearing and at such
hearing shall have all protections and rights allowed under law from time to
time; provided, however, the failure of the manager to appear and/or defend
shall not impair the power of the Local Liquor Commissioner to either suspend
or disqualify said manager, or place conditions on the continued functioning of
said manager if not disqualified.
   (F)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall within five days after
such hearing, if he or she determines after such hearing that the manager
should be disqualified, suspended or conditions placed on his or her continued
operation as manager, state the reason or reasons for such determination in a
written order of disqualification, suspension and/or conditions, and shall
serve a copy of the order within said five days upon the manager. The decision
of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be final.
   (G)   The notice of hearing required hereunder shall be served on the
manager either personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested. If served by certified or registered mail, the manager shall be
conclusively deemed to be served three calendar days after such notice was
deposited in the United States mail.
   (H)   Different or additional procedures from those provided by this
subchapter may be established from time to time governing complaints and
hearings provided for herein upon being instituted by the Liquor Control
Commissioner and approved by the Mayor and City Council.
   (I)   At such hearings regarding suspension or revocation, a verbatim record
of the proceedings shall be made by a certified court reporter or certified
shorthand reporter.
(Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.68 OTHER ORDINANCES AND LAWS TO APPLY.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall excuse or relieve the licensee, owner,
proprietor, and/or other person in charge of any place within the city where
liquor is sold from the restrictions and requirements of any other chapters of
this code, other ordinances of the city, and/or of the statutes of the State of
Illinois or of the United States of America. The failure of any licensee,
owner, proprietor, and/or other person in charge of any such establishment to
obey and/or comply with said code, ordinances, and/or statutes shall be a
violation hereof and shall also constitute cause for the suspension,
revocation, and/or termination of any liquor license issued by the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.030) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.69 CITY HEARINGS—TESTIMONY REQUIRED.
   (A)   As a condition attached to the issuance of, or renewal of, an liquor
license hereunder, it shall be the duty of each licensee to require all owners,
officers, agents, and employees of licensee to testify (subject to any
constitutional restrictions) at any hearing that may be conducted by the city,
or any of its committees, commissions, boards or agencies, or the Local Liquor
Commissioner, regardless of whether they would otherwise be subject to subpoena
power, when such hearings may relate directly or indirectly to any events or
occurrences of which they may have knowledge arising out of their position as
owner, officer, agent or employee of the licensee.
   (B)   It shall further be the duty of licensee to inform all such owners,
officers, agents, and employees of their duty to testify hereunder and licensee
shall make the same a condition of employment for all licensee’s employees.
   (C)   If any such officer, agent, or employee fails or refuses to testify to
the full extent of their knowledge at any such hearing when requested so to do
by the city, such failure shall be deemed to constitute a violation of this
section by licensee, unless such failure to refusal is based upon a
constitutional right to not so testify.
   (D)   The violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute due
cause for the nonrenewal, suspension and/or revocation of the license of the
licensee. Any such non-renewal, suspension or revocation shall be effective
only after compliance with the procedures and provisions set forth in §
111.69 hereof or otherwise in conformity with law. The suspension, revocation
or non-renewal of such licensee shall be an additional remedy and shall not
prevent or exclude a prosecutorial action(s) for a fine under §
111.72 hereof.
(Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 111.70 PROHIBITED SALES OR PROMOTIONS.
   (A)   All licensees selling alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on
the licensed premises are prohibited from engaging in any of the following
practices:
      (1)   Selling, offering or delivering to any person or persons any drinks
sold on the basis of two or more drinks for the price of one drink;
      (2)   Selling, offering or delivering to any person an unlimited number
of drinks during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private
functions not open to the public or full meal (banquet) and hors d’oeuvres
packages which are open to the public;
      (3)   Increasing the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink
without increasing proportionately the price charged for the drink during the
same calendar week;
      (4)   Encouraging or permitting any game or contest which involves
drinking, or the awarding of drinks as prizes on the licensed premises; and/or
      (5)   Advertising or promoting in any way, whether within or without the
licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under this section.
   (B)   The prohibitions provided in division (A) of this section shall not
prohibit liquor licensees from:
      (1)   Offering free food or entertainment at any time;
      (2)   Including a drink as part of a meal package;
      (3)   Offering free liquor (spirits, wine and beer) tastings; or
      (4)   Offering room service to registered guests in hotels licensed for
such services.
   (C)   Licensees shall make nonalcoholic beverages and coffee available for
purchase by any person during the licensee’s hours of operation.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.250) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014; Am. Ord.
2015-08-0515O, passed 8-26-2014) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.71 APPEALS.
   Pursuant to the provisions of ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-9, any appeal
authorized thereunder from an order of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings of the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner, and it is hereby resolved that such review
shall be solely on the record.
   (A)   A certified official record of any proceeding that is subject to
appeal under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-9, before the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner shall be taken and prepared by a certified court
reporter or certified shorthand reporter and shall be filed by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner with the State Liquor Commission within five days after
notice is received by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner of the filing of an
appeal from an order of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (B)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the power and right to
appeal to the Circuit Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction any
decision of the State Liquor Control Commission which reverses or modifies any
order issued or penalty imposed by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
(Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
RESTAURANTS
§ 111.90 LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to operate a restaurant in the city without first
having obtained a license therefor or without full compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.91 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Application for licenses under this subchapter shall be made in writing to
the City Clerk on a form to be furnished by him or her and shall comply with
the general provisions of this code and ordinances relating to licenses.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 111.92 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for licenses under this subchapter shall be established by
the City Council.
(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §§
111.40 through
111.71 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
      (2)   Revocation of licenses. In addition to the penalty provided in
division (B)(1) above, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the
power to revoke, to refuse to renew or to suspend licenses granted under §§
111.40 through
111.71.
(2000 Code, § 5.08.280) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)
CHAPTER 112: VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
Limousine Services
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Issuance of licenses; fees; inventory of vehicles
   
112.03   Vehicle identification
   
112.04   Insurance
   
112.05   Nontransferability of licenses
   
112.06   Revocation of licenses
   
112.07   Vehicle inspections
   
112.08   Inspection stations
   
112.09   Drivers to be licensed
   
112.10   Daily manifests
   
112.11   Solicitation of passengers
   
112.12   Use for criminal purposes
   
112.13   Payment for services rendered
Taxicabs
   
112.25   Licenses required
   
112.26   License application
   
112.27   License fee
   
112.28   Use of stands
   
112.29   Age of licensee
   
112.30   Records
   
112.31   Suspension and revocation of licenses; inspections by Police Chief
   
112.32   Display of owner’s name on vehicle
   
112.33   Hours of operation
   
112.34   Drivers
   
112.35   Insurance
   
112.36   Condition of taxicabs; repairs
   
112.37   Meters; receipts
   
112.38   Rates of fare
   
112.39   Refusal to pay fare
   
112.40   Overcharging
   
112.41   Advance payment of fares
   
112.42   Refusal to convey passengers
   
112.43   Parking on streets
   
112.44   Soliciting business at railroad stations and on streets
   
112.45   Exceptions to subchapter
Towing Services
   
112.60   Definitions
   
112.61   Application for contract
   
112.62   Investigation of application; approval
   
112.63   Insurance
   
112.64   Heavy-duty towing list; liability of owner
   
112.65   Costs, records and inspections
   
112.66   Towing vehicles called on rotation basis; exception
   
112.67   Termination of licenses; establishment of maximum fees
   
112.68   Rules and regulation
   
112.69   Soliciting business
   
112.70   Services not under contract with city
   
112.71   Towing or repair of city vehicles/seized vehicles
 
   
112.99   Penalty
LIMOUSINE SERVICES
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LICENSEE. A person to whom a limousine license has been issued.
   LIMOUSINE SERVICE. A service providing or offering to provide transportation
in a chauffeur-driven motor vehicle designed to carry eight or fewer
passengers, but not including the carrying of passengers over fixed routes,
service to or from an airport where regular commercial air passenger service is
provided and service in connection with funerals.
   LIMOUSINE SERVICE LICENSE or LICENSE. A license issued by city for the
operation of a limousine service.
(2000 Code, § 5.34.010)
§ 112.02 ISSUANCE OF LICENSES; FEES; INVENTORY OF VEHICLES.
   Limousine service licenses shall be issued by the Business License
Commissioner after the applicant has filed an application for the license and
has shown that the operation of the limousine service will comply with this
subchapter and with all applicable laws and ordinances. Each vehicle shall be
submitted to an inspection as provided in §
112.07 prior to the issuance of the initial license. The annual fee for the
license shall be payable in advance and shall be $100, plus $100 for each
vehicle used in the business, plus the appropriate square footage fees as set
forth in §
110.007. The licensee shall provide to the city a complete list of each vehicle
used for limousine service and shall promptly notify the city of any vehicles
added or removed from service.
(2000 Code, § 5.34.020)
§ 112.03 VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION.
   The City Clerk shall issue a card or decal for each vehicle covered by a
limousine service license, and the card or decal shall be displayed by
fastening it inside the vehicle.
(2000 Code, § 5.34.030)
§ 112.04 INSURANCE.
   Before a licensee operates a limousine service within the city, he or she
shall secure and maintain in force at all times a liability insurance policy
issued by a company authorized to do business in the state, covering each
vehicle to be used for limousine service, with limits of not less than $100,000
for bodily injury to any one person, not less than $300,000 for bodily injuries
to more than one person that are sustained in the same accident, and not less
than $50,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident. A current
copy of the insurance policy or a certificate of the insurance shall be filed
in the office of the City Clerk.
(2000 Code, § 5.34.040)
§ 112.05 NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSES.
   No limousine service license, nor any rights or privileges thereunder, shall
be sold, transferred, leased or assigned.
(2000 Code, § 5.34.050) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.06 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   The Business License Commissioner shall revoke a limousine service license
from a limousine service for repeated violations of this subchapter and for
failure to keep in effect the insurance required by this chapter. No license
shall be revoked without 30 days’ written notice specifying the reasons for the
revocation. Within the 30-day period, the license holder may request a public
hearing before the Business License Commissioner to review the basis of the
revocation.
(2000 Code, § 5.34.060)
§ 112.07 VEHICLE INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Each vehicle operated under authority of a limousine service license
shall be inspected from time to time, and at least annually, by the Police
Department, to ensure continued maintenance of safe operating conditions. The
Chief of Police shall send notice to all license holders to submit their
vehicles for inspection.
   (B)   After receiving notice from the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, the licensee shall be allowed seven days to take the licensed vehicle
or vehicles to an inspection station for inspection. The license of all
licensed vehicles not inspected within that period will be suspended by
direction of the Business Licensing Commissioner.
   (C)   The inspection will include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Vehicle make, year and identification number;
      (2)   State license number and year;
      (3)   City vehicle license number and year;
      (4)   Vehicle color;
      (5)   Vehicle number;
      (6)   Company name;
      (7)   Service brakes;
      (8)   Emergency brakes;
      (9)   Horn;
      (10)   Rear view mirror;
      (11)   Windshield wipers and washers;
      (12)   Headlights;
      (13)   Tail lights;
      (14)   Stop lights;
      (15)   Turn signals;
      (16)   Speedometer;
      (17)   Taximeter;
      (18)   Rates displayed;
      (19)   Steering;
      (20)   Interior condition;
      (21)   Exterior condition;
      (22)   Windows;
      (23)   Tires; and
      (24)   Current bond sticker.
   (D)   Any vehicle failing to pass the inspection will be given a period of
five working days to allow for repairs. The vehicle cannot be used as a vehicle
for hire until repairs have been completed and it passes inspection. If the
vehicle does not pass reinspection within the five-working-day period, the
license will be suspended by direction of the Business License Commissioner.
   (E)   The Chief of Police shall prescribe reasonable standards which
vehicles must satisfy to pass the inspections required prior to licensing and
periodically thereafter, which standards shall be designed to assure that
vehicles licensed by the city are mechanically dependable, safe and clean and
that they satisfy the requirements of this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.34.070)
§ 112.08 INSPECTION STATIONS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall designate those facilities which may serve
as inspection stations to conduct the vehicle inspections required by this
subchapter, which stations may be within or without the city. He or she shall
establish procedures for conducting the inspections and minimum standards for
vehicle approval. He or she shall supply inspection stations with certified
inspection forms, numbered certified vehicle inspection stickers and such other
supplies as may be required to perform the duties required by this subchapter
and the regulations established hereunder.
   (B)   A list of authorized inspection stations shall be kept by the Chief of
Police and shall be given to each vehicle owner, together with the notice that
vehicles must be inspected. An owner may use the authorized inspection station
of his or her choice.
   (C)   Inspection stations shall charge an inspection fee authorized by the
Chief of Police for all vehicle inspections required under this subchapter.
There shall be no charge for a reinspection within the five working days
allowed for repairs to a vehicle that fails the inspection. The authorized
inspection fee shall be charged for reinspections made after the five-working-
day grace period.
(2000 Code, § 5.34.080)
§ 112.09 DRIVERS TO BE LICENSED.
   Each driver shall be licensed as required by state law.
(2000 Code, § 5.34.090)
§ 112.10 DAILY MANIFESTS.
   Each driver of a limousine shall maintain a daily manifest in which shall be
recorded, in connection with each trip, the time and place of origin, the
destination, the time and place of termination, the amount of the fare, the
name of the driver and the identity of the limousine. The manifest form shall
be furnished to the driver by the licensee. The licensee shall preserve each
daily manifest for a period of four years and shall submit any information
contained in the manifest forms at the request of the Police Department or the
Director of Public Safety.
(2000 Code, § 5.34.100)
§ 112.11 SOLICITATION OF PASSENGERS.
   No person shall solicit passengers for limousine service at a taxicab stand.
(2000 Code, § 5.34.110) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.12 USE FOR CRIMINAL PURPOSES.
   It is unlawful for a limousine service driver to permit any person to occupy
or use a limousine for the purpose of sale and/or transportation of drugs,
prostitution, lewdness, indecent conduct or other criminal activity. It is
unlawful for a driver to direct, or to offer or agree to direct, any person to
any place or person for the purpose of sale of drugs, prostitution, lewdness,
indecent conduct or other criminal activity.
(2000 Code, § 5.34.120) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.13 PAYMENT FOR SERVICES RENDERED.
   It is unlawful for a person hiring a limousine service to refuse to pay the
fare for such service, and no person shall hire a limousine with intent to
defraud the licensee or driver of the value of the service.
(2000 Code, § 5.34.130) Penalty, see §
112.99
TAXICABS
§ 112.25 LICENSES REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in, conduct, manage or carry on the business of
operating a taxicab service in the city without first obtaining a license
therefor.
   (B)   In addition to the license required by division (A) of this section,
each taxicab used in the business shall bear the license required by §§
70.20 through
70.24.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.010) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.26 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Each application for a license to engage in, conduct, manage or carry
on the business of operating a taxicab service shall be made in writing to
Council and shall set forth:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The number of taxicabs to be used in the business and a complete
description of each taxicab;
      (3)   A statement that each taxicab used in the business will be operated
by a person who is 21 years of age or older, who is of sound physical condition
and who is the holder of a valid and unrevoked state driver’s license and
chauffeur’s license;
      (4)   A statement that each taxicab used in the business will be covered
by public liability and property damage insurance in amounts required by this
subchapter; and
      (5)   A statement that public convenience and necessity require the
taxicab service.
   (B)   Upon receipt of any such application by Council, the Mayor shall
appoint a committee to investigate the same, which committee shall report the
results of its investigation, together with its recommendations, at the next
regular meeting of Council. Council shall thereupon consider the application,
together with the report and recommendations of the committee. If Council finds
that the public convenience and necessity require the operation of the taxicab
service in the city and that each taxicab proposed to be used and sought to be
licensed complies with the requirements of this subchapter, it shall, by
resolution, direct the Business License Commissioner to issue the license upon
payment of the required fee; otherwise, it shall deny the application and
notify the applicant thereof.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.020)
§ 112.27 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for the license required by §
112.25(A) is $100 per vehicle, plus the appropriate square footage fee as set
forth in §
110.007.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.030)
§ 112.28 USE OF STANDS.
   No person shall park or stand a vehicle of any kind in a public taxicab or
hack stand in the municipality, or otherwise make use of such a stand, unless
the owner of the vehicle has obtained a license for that purpose as provided in
this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.040) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.29 AGE OF LICENSEE.
   No taxicab license shall be issued to any person who is under 21 years of
age.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.050) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.30 RECORDS.
   The City Clerk shall keep a register of the names of persons to whom a
taxicab license is granted, the date of issuance, the number of the license and
the description of the vehicle licensed.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.060)
§ 112.31 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES; INSPECTIONS BY POLICE CHIEF.
   (A)   The Mayor or the Business License Commissioner may revoke any license
issued under this subchapter for a violation of or a failure to comply with any
of the provisions of this subchapter, any applicable provision of this business
regulation title or any state or city traffic ordinance. In such an event, the
fee paid for the unexpired term of the license shall not be refunded.
   (B)   If any taxicab licensed under this subchapter becomes unsafe for the
transportation of passengers or unsightly in appearance, the license for the
taxicab may be suspended by the Mayor or the Business License Commissioner
until the vehicle is put in fit condition for public use. The Chief of Police
shall inspect every vehicle licensed under this subchapter a sufficient number
of times each year to ensure compliance with this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.070)
§ 112.32 DISPLAY OF OWNER’S NAME ON VEHICLE.
   Every vehicle licensed under this subchapter shall bear, on the outside
thereof, in a conspicuous place, the name of the owner thereof, in letters not
less than two inches high, which letters shall be of a color in contrast to the
color of the vehicle and shall be properly proportioned and legible.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.080)
§ 112.33 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Each licensee under this subchapter shall maintain 24-hour service each day
of the year and shall meet all trains where reasonably possible. If any such
licensee discontinues operation for a period of five days, the Mayor may revoke
the license of the licensee.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.090)
§ 112.34 DRIVERS.
   No taxicab shall be driven by or operated by any person who is not of sound
physical condition, by any person who is under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or drugs, or by any person who is not a holder of a valid and unprovoked
state driver’s license and chauffeur’s license. Any violation of this section,
in addition to the penalty provided in §
112.99, shall be grounds for revocation of the license for the vehicle by the
Mayor.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.100) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.35 INSURANCE.
   Each licensee under this subchapter shall carry public liability and
property damage insurance covering each vehicle operated by it for the sum of
at least $50,000 for property damage, $100,000 for injury or death of any one
person and $300,000 for injury or death of more than one person in any one
accident. The policy shall be deposited with the City Clerk before the issuance
of the license required by this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.110)
§ 112.36 CONDITION OF TAXICABS; REPAIRS.
   Every taxicab shall be kept, at all times, in good mechanical condition and
shall be equipped with all equipment, in good working order, required for motor
vehicles by the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. The Mayor
may, at all reasonable times, examine or cause to be examined any vehicle
licensed under this subchapter. If the same is found to be in an unsafe
condition, the Mayor may require that any defect be remedied. If the defect is
not remedied, the Mayor may suspend or revoke the license for the vehicle.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.120)
§ 112.37 METERS; RECEIPTS.
   (A)   No taxicab shall be operated unless it is equipped with a meter in
good condition to record the amount to be charged on each metered trip, which
amount shall be shown in figures visible to the passenger.
   (B)   Upon paying his or her fare, each passenger shall be given a receipt
showing the amount so paid and the name of the company or person operating the
taxicab, together with the number of the taxicab if the company or person
operates more than one taxicab in the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.130) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.38 RATES OF FARE.
   (A)   The price or rate of fare to be asked or demanded by an operator or
owner of a taxicab shall not exceed the maximum set by ordinance or other
regulation.
   (B)   The distance to which the rate set forth in division (A) of this
section applies shall be determined by the nearest traveled route from the
point where the passenger enters the vehicle to the point where the passenger
alights therefrom.
   (C)   There shall be affixed on the inside of each vehicle, in a conspicuous
place, and in such manner that the name may be easily read by any person riding
in the vehicle, a card upon which shall be printed in plain, legible type the
rate of fare provided for in this section.
   (D)   Any passenger shall be allowed to have conveyed upon any such vehicle,
without charge, his or her ordinary traveling baggage, provided that ordinary
hand baggage shall not be construed to mean trunks or sample cases.
   (E)   Upon the request of any passenger, the driver of the vehicle shall
give the person requesting the same a receipt for the amount of the fare
demanded and paid.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.140)
§ 112.39 REFUSAL TO PAY FARE.
   No passenger shall fail or refuse to pay the lawful fare at the termination
of a taxicab trip. All disputes as to fare shall be determined by the officer
in charge of the Police Department. Failure to comply with the determination
shall subject the offending party to a charge of disorderly conduct.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.150) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.40 OVERCHARGING.
   The owner, driver or operator of any vehicle licensed under this subchapter,
who demands and receives a fare in excess of that which is provided for in this
subchapter, shall return the excess received and, in addition, shall be subject
to the penalty provided in §
112.99 and may have his or her license revoked.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.160)
§ 112.41 ADVANCE PAYMENT OF FARES.
   Every owner, driver or operator of a taxicab may demand, in advance, his or
her fare of the person employing him or her or entering his or her vehicle and
may refuse to convey any person who does not comply with the demand.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.170)
§ 112.42 REFUSAL TO CONVEY PASSENGERS.
   Except as provided in §
112.41, no owner, driver or operator of a vehicle licensed under this
subchapter shall refuse to convey in the municipality any person with or
without hand baggage when applied to for that purpose, or, having undertaken to
convey the person, shall omit or neglect to do so.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.180)
§ 112.43 PARKING ON STREETS.
   No person in charge of any public taxicab or vehicle carrying passengers for
hire shall permit the same, except when receiving or discharging passengers or
when instructed by the passenger to do so, to stand on any street, avenue or
alley in the municipality for any period longer than five minutes, except as
otherwise provided by Council.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.190) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.44 SOLICITING BUSINESS AT RAILROAD STATIONS AND ON STREETS.
   No owner, driver or operator of any vehicle licensed under this subchapter
shall solicit, by word, gesture or otherwise, the patronage of any person at
any railroad station or upon any public street in the municipality. No such
owner, driver or operator shall stand or be upon the platform of any railroad
until the expiration of three minutes after the departure of a train, except to
assist persons who have indicated a desire to patronize the vehicle in his or
her charge.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.200) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.45 EXCEPTIONS TO SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter shall not apply to ambulances, passenger buses or vehicles
designed for carrying more than seven passengers.
(2000 Code, § 5.56.210)
TOWING SERVICES
§ 112.60 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE.  The executive head of the Police Department of the city or
his or her designated representative.
   TOWING LIST. A list maintained by the Police Department containing the names
of vehicle towing services licensed by the city and approved pursuant to §§
112.61 through
112.69 to respond to a request for the towing of a vehicle made by the
Department. A vehicle towing service on the list must be within ten miles of
the corporate boundaries of the city.
   VEHICLE TOWING SERVICE. A person engaged in the business of, or offering the
services of, a vehicle wrecker or towing service, whereby motor vehicles are or
may be towed or otherwise moved from one place to another by use of a motor
vehicle adapted to and designed for that purpose.
(2000 Code, § 5.62.010) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord.
2020-04-0787O, passed 4-14-2020)
§ 112.61 APPLICATION FOR CONTRACT.
   (A)   Any person desiring to perform towing work at police request shall, in
addition to meeting the requirements of
Chapter 110, submit an application for vehicle towing service list to the
Business License Commissioner. This application shall include the name of the
owner, his or her home and business address, his or her home and business
phone; the name under which the person does or will trade; the location, size
and security features of the storage lot on which towed vehicles will be
stored; the location to which the public must come to claim stored vehicles; a
statement of willingness to provide vehicle towing service on a continuous 24-
hour a day basis each day of the year; a list of the towing equipment, its size
and capacity; a complete listing of insurance policies, carriers and agents the
owner would place into effect upon approval; a statement that the vehicle
towing service owner will accept responsibility for any and all personal
property left in towed and stored vehicles, along with a description of the
place he or she would use to adequately protect the property left in towed or
stored vehicles; and a description of the two-way mobile communications and
base station to be used on each towing vehicle and at the office where calls
are received.
   (B)   No vehicle towing service may be put on this list until the applicant
has furnished all information requested by the Business License Commissioner or
any other municipal official and until all other applicable provisions of these
codified ordinances have been complied with.
   (C)   The fee to be paid to the city in order to be placed on the towing
list is $500. The initial fee is due and payable upon approval of the
application provided for in this subchapter. The renewal fee shall be paid on
each anniversary date.
   (D)   Application forms shall be prepared and kept on file by the Business
License Commissioner.
   (E)   The Chief of Police and the Business License Commissioner, shall
determine the appropriate number of towing services to be placed on the towing
list. Factors to consider in determining the appropriate number of towing
services include:
      (1)   The number of tows performed on a regular basis;
      (2)   The level and quality of services provided to the public by the
approved towing services; and
      (3)   Emergency needs for the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.62.020) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord.
2015-09-0556O, passed 9-22-2015; Am. Ord. 2020-04-0787O, passed 4-14-2020)
§ 112.62 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION; APPROVAL.
   Within 30 days after receiving an application for vehicle towing service
list, the Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation to determine the truth
and accuracy of the information contained in the application. Upon completion
of his or her investigation, the Chief shall forward a copy of the application
to the Business License Commissioner along with a recommendation for approval
or disapproval and the reasons, if any, for disapproval. Upon receiving the
application, the Business License Commissioner, on behalf of the city, shall
determine whether or not the applicant has complied with necessary standards
and criteria. If he or she finds that the applicant is qualified, the
applicant’s name shall be placed at the end of the towing list.
(2000 Code, § 5.62.030) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord.
2020-04-0787O, passed 4-14-2020)
§ 112.63 INSURANCE.
   (A)   No vehicle towing service shall be placed on the list until the
applicant has deposited with the Business License Commissioner the following
insurance policies:
      (1)   Garagekeeper’s policy. A garagekeeper’s legal liability policy
covering fire, theft, windstorm, vandalism and explosion in the amount of
$10,000, with each vehicle suffering damage being deemed a separate claim; and
      (2)   Liability policy. A liability policy covering the operation of the
owner’s business, equipment or other vehicles or any bodily injury or property
damage. This policy shall be in the minimum amount of $300,000 for more than
one person killed or injured in any accident and an additional $100,000 for
property damage.
   (B)   Each policy required by this section must contain an endorsement by
the carrier providing 90 days’ notice to both the city and the insured in the
event of any change in coverage under the policy.
   (C)   A certificate of the policy or a copy of the policy shall be carried
in the cab of each tow truck.
(2000 Code, § 5.62.040) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord.
2020-04-0787O, passed 4-14-2020) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.64 HEAVY-DUTY TOWING LIST; LIABILITY OF OWNER.
   (A)   A vehicle towing service owner shall provide towing vehicles of
sufficient size and weight to remove and tow vehicles other than tractor-
trailer rigs. Owners with towing vehicles that can haul tractor-trailer rigs
shall be placed on the regular list and on a special heavy-duty towing list.
The heavy-duty towing list may be used any time heavy-duty towing is required.
   (B)   All towing vehicles shall conform with all sections of the Illinois
Vehicle Code regulating towing vehicles, as well as with all other applicable
state statutes and city ordinances.
   (C)   The vehicle towing service owner shall assume all liability, shall
indemnify and save the city harmless from liability for damage sustained by
vehicles while being towed or stored and for all personal injuries occurring to
any of the firm’s employees or other persons and shall maintain the required
insurance policies. The owner shall not release any vehicle directly impounded
by the city without written authorization from the Police Department.
(2000 Code, § 5.62.050) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord.
2020-04-0787O, passed 4-14-2020)
§ 112.65 COSTS, RECORDS AND INSPECTIONS.
   All costs incident to towing and storage shall be paid by the vehicle owner
to the vehicle towing service and a receipt for payment shall be issued to the
owner. The city shall assume no liability or responsibility for any vehicle
removed from any place without the authority of the Chief of Police. The
vehicle towing service owner shall maintain approved records and claim check
systems to ensure release of a vehicle to the rightful owner or authorized
person. The records shall be open to the Police Department for investigation of
specific complaints and for compiling surveys under §§
112.61 through
112.69. The owner of any vehicle towing service shall permit any person
appointed by the Chief to inspect his or her towing vehicles, vault, security
room or storage area at such times as the Chief deems appropriate.
(2000 Code, § 5.62.060) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord.
2020-04-0787O, passed 4-14-2020)
§ 112.66 TOWING VEHICLES CALLED ON ROTATION BASIS; EXCEPTION.
   The Chief of Police may ensure that towing vehicles are called to the scene
of an accident or to impound vehicles on a rotation basis, distributing the
calls on an equitable basis from the towing list. The Chief shall not call or
cause to be called any towing vehicle not licensed with the city unless all
licensed towing vehicles are unavailable. The Chief may call a towing vehicle
out of sequence where proximity to the wreck and estimated response time make
it more practical to do so. The heavy-duty vehicle towing list may be used
pursuant to §
112.64 when heavy-duty towing is required. However, the Chief of Police at his
or her discretion may include on the towing list, contingency vehicle towing
services that do not meet eligibility requirements in emergency cases tow
services exceed capacity of registered firms.
(2000 Code, § 5.62.070) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord.
2020-04-0787O, passed 4-14-2020)
§ 112.67 TERMINATION OF LICENSES; ESTABLISHMENT OF MAXIMUM FEES.
   (A)   The Business License Commissioner may terminate the license of any
owner on the towing list when he or she finds:
      (1)   The listing was secured by fraud or by the concealment of a
material fact by the towing vehicle service owner and such fact, if known,
would have caused the Commissioner to refuse to put the service on the list;
      (2)   The towing vehicle service owner has violated any of the
requirements or regulations established by the Chief of Police under §
112.68;
      (3)   The city is not satisfied with the general services of the owner
and/or his or her employees or with the cooperation it has received while
rendering service; and/or
      (4)   Any other cause constitutes justification for the termination.
   (B)   The Chief, after consultation with towing vehicle service owners
licensed under §§
112.61 through
112.69, shall establish a table of maximum fees that may be charged by the
owners.
(2000 Code, § 5.62.080) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord.
2020-04-0787O, passed 4-14-2020)
§ 112.68 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of Police shall establish and cause the enforcement of such
reasonable rules and regulations for towing vehicles as, from time to time, he
or she deems appropriate for the safety, well-being and protection of residents
within his or her jurisdiction and their property.
(2000 Code, § 5.62.090) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord.
2020-04-0787O, passed 4-14-2020)
§ 112.69 SOLICITING BUSINESS.
   No owner or operator of a towing vehicle shall respond to the scene of an
accident or emergency for the purpose of towing vehicles unless specifically
called there by the police or by a person involved in the accident or
emergency. This section is intended to prohibit towing vehicle service owners
from soliciting business at the scene of an accident or emergency and shall not
be construed to prohibit any towing vehicle from contracting with any person,
provided that the towing vehicle service owner or his or her agent or employee
does not solicit towing contracts at the scene of an accident or emergency.
(2000 Code, § 5.62.100) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord.
2020-04-0787O, passed 4-14-2020) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.70 SERVICES NOT UNDER CONTRACT WITH CITY.
   (A)   License required; application and fee.
      (1)   No person shall maintain or operate a vehicle towing service in the
city without first obtaining a license therefor.
      (2)   An application for a license required by division (A)(1) of this
section shall specify the number of vehicles owned and operated by the
applicant.
   (B)   Parking of towing vehicles. No person shall stand or park a towing
vehicle upon any service station, garage or private or public property unless
the owner thereof has obtained a license as provided in division (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Age of applicant. No license required by division (A) of this section
shall be issued to any person under 18 years of age.
   (D)   Registration. The Business License Commissioner shall keep a register
of the names of persons to whom the license required by division (A) of this
section is granted, the date of issuance, the number of the license and a
description of the vehicle or vehicles licensed.
   (E)   License revocation or suspension; inspection of vehicles.
      (1)   The Mayor or the Business License Commissioner may revoke any
license issued under this section for a violation of or failure to comply with
any of the provisions of the section or for a violation of any state or city
traffic regulation. In such event, the fee paid for the unexpired term of the
license shall not be refunded.
      (2)   If any towing vehicle licensed under this section becomes unsafe
for towing or unsightly in appearance, the license for the vehicle may be
suspended by the Mayor or the Business License Commissioner until the vehicle
is put in safe condition for towing service. Every vehicle licensed under §§
112.60 through
112.70 shall be subject to inspection by the chief twice each year to ensure
compliance with the provisions of the section.
   (F)   Towing vehicles for storage in city. No person shall tow or allow to
be towed any motor vehicle into the city for the purpose of storage.
(2000 Code, § 5.62.110) (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006; Am. Ord. 2010-
02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord. 2020-04-0787O, passed 4-14-2020) Penalty,
see §
112.99
§ 112.71 TOWING OR REPAIR OF CITY VEHICLES/SEIZED VEHICLES.
   Vehicle towing services on the towing list shall tow city vehicles or
complete minor roadside repairs (change flat tire, etc.) at no cost to the city
unless the city vehicle is located ten miles outside of the city when repairs
are needed. In addition, no cost shall be charged for vehicles to be seized by
the city and waiting judgment from the court or State of Illinois to become the
possession of the city.
(Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord. 2020-04-0787O, passed 4-14-
2020)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any provision of §§
112.01 through
112.13 shall be fined not less than $100 or more than $750 for each offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
      (2)   The penalty provided for herein shall be in addition to any fee,
deposit, charge, surcharge, interest, insurance or bond requirement or
equitable remedy, including, but not limited, to injunctive relief, that may be
assessed or imposed under authority of any provision of §§
112.01 through
112.13 or any other provision of these codified ordinances.
(2000 Code, § 5.34.140) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord.
2020-04-0787O, passed 4-14-2020)
CHAPTER 113: ADVERTISING AND MERCHANDISING
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Deceptive advertisements and sales
   
113.03   Misrepresenting new merchandise
   
113.04   Standards and style of merchandise
   
113.05   Time limit for deliveries
   
113.06   Pricing
   
113.07   Brand or identity
   
113.08   Sponsorship, affiliation or certification
   
113.09   Statements of material facts
   
113.10   Sufficient quantities
   
113.11   Sales tax
   
113.12   Revocation of licenses and permits
Handbills
   
113.25   Definitions
   
113.26   Depositing or distributing in public places
   
113.27   Placing on vehicles
   
113.28   Distribution on vacant premises
   
113.29   Distribution prohibited where requested
   
113.30   Distribution on inhabited private premises
   
113.31   Exceptions
Outdoor Advertisers
   
113.45   Outdoor advertiser defined
   
113.46   License required; application
   
113.47   License fee
   
113.48   Consent of owner required
   
113.49   Disposal of refuse
   
113.50   Weeds and grass at base of billboards
   
113.51   Obscene and unlawful advertisements
   
113.52   Damaging signs or advertisements
   
113.53   Posting of name of advertiser
   
113.54   Compliance with state and city regulations
   
113.55   Exceptions to subchapter
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVERTISEMENT. An attempt, by publication, dissemination, solicitation or
circulation, to induce any person, directly or indirectly, to enter into any
obligation or acquire any title or interest in any merchandise, including every
word or device used to disguise any form of business solicitation, such as the
terms “renewal,” “invoice,” “bill,” “statement” or “reminder,” to create an
impression of existing obligation when there is none, or other language to
mislead any person in relation to any sought after commercial transaction.
   MERCHANDISE. Objects, wares, goods, commodities, intangibles, real estate
and services.
   SALE. Any sale, offer for sale or attempt to sell any merchandise for cash
or on credit.
(2000 Code, § 5.06.010)
§ 113.02 DECEPTIVE ADVERTISEMENTS AND SALES.
   No person shall use any deception, fraud, false pretense, false promise or
misrepresentations or conceal, suppress or omit any material fact with intent
that others rely upon the concealment, suppression or omission, in connection
with the sale for cash or on credit or advertisement of any merchandise,
whether or not any person has in fact been misled. However, nothing in this
subchapter shall apply to the owner or publisher of a newspaper, magazine,
publication or printed matter wherein such an advertisement appears, or to the
owner or operator of a radio or television station which disseminates such an
advertisement, when the owner, publisher or operator has no knowledge of the
intent, design or purpose of the advertiser. Further, nothing in this
subchapter shall apply to any advertisement which is subject to and complies
with the rules and regulations of, and the statutes administered by, the
Federal Trade Commission.
(2000 Code, § 5.06.020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.03 MISREPRESENTING NEW MERCHANDISE.
   No person shall represent that merchandise is new if it is deteriorated,
altered, reconditioned, reclaimed, used or secondhand.
(2000 Code, § 5.06.030) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.04 STANDARDS AND STYLE OF MERCHANDISE.
   No person shall represent that merchandise or services are of a particular
standard, grade or quality, or that merchandise is of a particular style or
model, if it is not.
(2000 Code, § 5.06.040) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.05 TIME LIMIT FOR DELIVERIES.
   No person shall fail to deliver ordered merchandise within 60 days from the
date of order or contract, unless otherwise provided in the order or contract,
or unless the customer is notified in writing of the reason for the delay and
the merchandise is delivered in less than a total of 90 days or a refund is
offered within 90 days of the date of the order or contract.
(2000 Code, § 5.06.050) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.06 PRICING.
   No person shall make false or misleading statements of fact concerning the
reasons for or the existence or amounts of price reductions, or engage in any
other pricing conduct that causes confusion or misunderstanding.
(2000 Code, § 5.06.060) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.07 BRAND OR IDENTITY.
   No person shall represent that merchandise or services are those of another
when, in fact, they are not.
(2000 Code, § 5.06.070) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.08 SPONSORSHIP, AFFILIATION OR CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   No person shall cause confusion or misunderstanding concerning the
course, sponsorship, approval or certification of merchandise or services.
   (B)   No person shall cause confusion, misunderstanding or false or
deceptive representation concerning affiliation, connection or association
with, or certification by another.
   (C)   No person shall represent that merchandise or services have
sponsorship or approval concerning the source of or certification of
merchandise or services when, in fact, they do not have such approval or
sponsorship.
(2000 Code, § 5.06.080) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.09 STATEMENTS OF MATERIAL FACTS.
   No person shall fail to state a material fact, if that failure tends to
deceive or mislead.
(2000 Code, § 5.06.090) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.10 SUFFICIENT QUANTITIES.
   No person shall advertise for sale at a stated price any item when a
sufficient quantity of the advertised item is not readily available to be sold
to purchasers at the advertised price during the effective period of the
advertisement. As used in this section, “readily available” means available to
the customer in an area of the store normally used to display the type of
merchandise in question, except in a case where the space available for the
item is limited, in which case a sample of the item may be placed in a
prominent location, accompanied by a prominent, written notice clearly stating
that the item is in stock and may be obtained upon request. “Sufficient
quantities” means available in quantities sufficient to meet reasonably
expected customer demand through medium response.
(2000 Code, § 5.06.100) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.11 SALES TAX.
   No person shall charge a higher amount of tax than the legal rate set forth
by law and regulation existing at the time of sale.
(2000 Code, § 5.06.110) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.12 REVOCATION OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   In addition to the penalty provided in §
10.99, any violation of this subchapter may be grounds for revocation of any
license or permit issued by the city to the violator. However, nothing in this
section shall be construed to preclude the revocation of any license or permit
for a violation of any other provision of these codified ordinances.
(2000 Code, § 5.06.120)
HANDBILLS
§ 113.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter or any sample, device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copy of any matter or literature which:
      (1)   Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or other
thing;
      (2)   Directs attention to a business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
      (3)   Directs attention to or advertises a meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or other event for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit, but this division shall not apply
where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose
of defraying the expenses incident to the event. Nothing contained in this
division shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of
any such event without a license, where the license is or may be required by
any law of this state or under any ordinance or regulation of the city; and/or
      (4)   While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or circulated
for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any person so
engaged as an advertiser or distributor.
   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter or any sample, device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copy of any matter or
literature not included in the definition of “commercial handbill.”
   POLITICAL PAMPHLETS.
      (1)   Any printed or written matter or any sample, device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copy of any matter or literature which:
         (a)   Advertises the credentials, positions, advantages or
accomplishments of an individual seeking elective office or of a registered
political party or an issue coming before the electorate; or
         (b)   Advertises an opposing position to an individual seeking
elective office or to a registered political party or an issue coming before
the electorate.
      (2)   In all cases, the POLITICAL PAMPHLET must contain an inscription
which is clearly visible, readable and comprehensible, establishing the
individual or group responsible for the preparation, printing and distribution
of the document and the opinions enumerated therein.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. A dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed
or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and includes a
yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, step, vestibule or mailbox belonging or
appurtenant to the structure.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, avenue, lane or other public way and any public
park, space, plaza, ground or building.
(2000 Code, § 5.26.010)
§ 113.26 DEPOSITING OR DISTRIBUTING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast a commercial handbill
in or upon any public place within the city. No person shall hand out,
distribute or sell a commercial handbill in any public place. However, a person
may hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill in a public place to any person willing to accept the
noncommercial handbill.
(2000 Code, § 5.26.020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.27 PLACING ON VEHICLES.
   No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast a
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon an automobile or other vehicle.
However, this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handling,
transmitting or distributing of a noncommercial handbill to the owner or other
occupant of an automobile or other vehicle who is willing to accept the same.
(2000 Code, § 5.26.030) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.28 DISTRIBUTION ON VACANT PREMISES.
   No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast a
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
(2000 Code, § 5.26.040) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.29 DISTRIBUTION PROHIBITED WHERE REQUESTED.
   No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast a
commercial handbill upon any premises, if he or she is requested by the owner,
tenant or occupant thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises,
in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words
“No Trespassing”, “No Peddlers or Agents” or any similar notice indicating in
any manner that the occupant of the premises does not desire to be molested, to
have his or her privacy disturbed or to have any such handbill left upon the
premises.
(2000 Code, § 5.26.050) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.30 DISTRIBUTION ON INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES.
   No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast a
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are
inhabited, except by handing or transmitting the handbill directly to the
owner, occupant or any other person present in or upon the premises. However,
in the case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in §
113.29, a person, unless requested by the owner, tenant or occupant of the
premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon the
premises, if the handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent it
from being blown or drifted about the premises or elsewhere, except that
mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal laws or
regulations.
(2000 Code, § 5.26.060) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.31 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not be construed to prohibit the distribution of mail
by the United States, or of newspapers or political pamphlets.
(2000 Code, § 5.26.070)
OUTDOOR ADVERTISERS
§ 113.45 OUTDOOR ADVERTISER DEFINED.
   As used in this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISER. Any person engaged in the business of placing, posting
or painting any sign, advertisement, notice or display in one or more places
for the purpose of outdoor advertising so that the resulting display is visible
from any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place.
(2000 Code, § 5.42.010)
§ 113.46 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of outdoor advertising in the
city without first obtaining a license therefor.
   (B)   An application for a license required by division (A) of this section
shall be accompanied by a list of all places, including billboards or natural
structures, on which it is intended to place signs or advertisements. This list
shall be added to from time to time by the licensee as a right to post or place
advertisements or signs on additional places as required.
(2000 Code, § 5.42.020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.47 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for the license required by §
113.46 shall be as set forth in §
110.007(B).
(2000 Code, § 5.42.030) (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 113.48 CONSENT OF OWNER REQUIRED.
   No person shall post any advertisement on any premises in the city without
the consent of the owner of the premises. The consent must be in writing and
must be filed with the City Clerk.
(2000 Code, § 5.42.040) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.49 DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
   No person engaged in outdoor advertising shall permit any refuse resulting
from the work to accumulate anywhere in the city, except by placing it in
properly established refuse receptacles. No person shall permit any loose or
flapping combustible material to hang from or be attached to any billboard,
signboard or other place used for display or advertising purposes. All refuse
resulting from the operation of the business shall be carefully gathered up and
properly disposed of.
(2000 Code, § 5.42.050) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.50 WEEDS AND GRASS AT BASE OF BILLBOARDS.
   Every outdoor advertiser shall keep all grass, weeds and other growths,
except trees and ornamental shrubbery, cut down so that the same do not grow to
a height greater than eight inches within six feet of any billboard or
signboard used by him or her, provided that this obligation shall extend only
to property controlled by the advertiser.
(2000 Code, § 5.42.060)
§ 113.51 OBSCENE AND UNLAWFUL ADVERTISEMENTS.
   No person shall post or display any advertisement of an obscene or immoral
character, of an unlawful gathering or of an unlawful sale.
(2000 Code, § 5.42.070) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.52 DAMAGING SIGNS OR ADVERTISEMENTS.
   No person shall mutilate or disfigure in any way any lawful sign or
advertisement in the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.42.080) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.53 POSTING OF NAME OF ADVERTISER.
   No outdoor advertiser shall carry on his or her business unless the name of
the advertiser is attached to, or displayed or printed on, all billboards or
signboards used by him or her, or on any notice, placard or advertisement
posted by him or her, in such lettering as to be visible from a distance of at
least five feet from the notice or advertisement.
(2000 Code, § 5.42.090) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.54 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND CITY REGULATIONS.
   Anyone engaged in the business of outdoor advertising shall comply fully
with all state laws and city ordinances, rules or regulations concerning the
location, construction and the like of signs, advertisements, notices or
displays.
(2000 Code, § 5.42.100)
§ 113.55 EXCEPTIONS TO SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter shall not be construed to apply to the posting of signs or
notices by order of any court or by any public officer in the performance of
his or her duties.
(2000 Code, § 5.42.110)
CHAPTER 114: AMUSEMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
114.001   Disturbances and crowds
   
114.002   Inspections
   
114.003   Riots
   
114.004   Smoking in assembly halls prohibited
   
114.005   Lighted exit signs
   
114.006   Mini-theaters prohibited
   
114.007   Billiard and pool halls
   
114.008   Bowling alleys
   
114.009   Carnivals, parks, menageries and exhibitions
   
114.010   Circuses
   
114.011   Coin-operated amusement devices and video gaming terminals
   
114.012   Movie houses and theaters
   
114.013   Shooting galleries
Special Events
   
114.050   Definitions
   
114.051   Exemptions
   
114.052   Major or minor special event determination
   
114.053   Major special events
   
114.054   City services for major special events
   
114.055   Minor special events
   
114.056   Special event conditions
   
114.057   Inspections
Young Adult Entertainment Facilities
   
114.070   Definitions
   
114.071   Young adult entertainment facility license required
   
114.072   License application procedures
   
114.073   Procedures for issuance or denial of license
   
114.074   Operating rules and regulations
   
114.075   Access by police officers
   
114.076   Suspension or revocation of licenses
   
114.077   License; nontransferable
   
114.078   Nuisances; injunction
Raffles
   
114.079   Title
   
114.080   Definitions
   
114.081   Licensing limitations
   
114.082   License, application, restrictions
   
114.083   Ineligibility
   
114.084   Conduct of raffles
   
114.085   Records and reports
   
114.086   Raffles administrator bond
   
114.087   Political committees
   
114.088   Raffle penalty
Parades and Public Assemblies
   
114.090   Title
   
114.091   Definitions
   
114.092   Permit required
   
114.093   Application for permit
   
114.094   Contents of application
   
114.095   Late applicants
   
114.096   Standards for issuance
   
114.097   Approval or denial of permit
   
114.098   Alternative permit
   
114.099   Notice to officials
   
114.100   Contents of permit
   
114.101   Duties of permittee
   
114.102   Public conduct during parades, public assemblies or similar
activities
   
114.103   Revocation of permit
   
114.104   Waiver of provisions
 
   
114.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.001 DISTURBANCES AND CROWDS.
   (A)   The audience at any amusement, show or theatrical exhibition shall be
orderly and quiet at all times. No person attending such an amusement, show or
exhibition shall create a disturbance in the audience.
   (B)   No person shall suffer, permit or allow a crowd to witness an
amusement, show or exhibition in such a manner or under such conditions as to
create a fire hazard or other hazard or risk.
(2000 Code, § 5.10.080) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.002 INSPECTIONS.
   The Chief of Police and the Fire Chief shall see that every amusement, show
and exhibition is inspected by a member of the Police Department and a member
of the Fire Department to ensure conformity with city and state laws concerning
the amusements.
(2000 Code, § 5.10.090)
§ 114.003 RIOTS.
   No person shall present any public amusement or show of any kind which tends
to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or disturbance.
(2000 Code, § 5.10.100) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.004 SMOKING IN ASSEMBLY HALLS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe on
or beneath the stage or in a dressing room of any building used as an assembly
hall, with seating accommodations for 100 persons or more, in which
exhibitions, shows, amusements, lectures or other entertainment is offered,
presented, operated or given.
   (B)   The owner of the premises or the occupant in charge thereof shall
provide and place printed signs on which the words “No Smoking” appear in
letters at least four inches high, in conspicuous places on the premises. At
least two signs shall be upon the stage or in the wings thereof and one shall
be in each dressing room.
(2000 Code, § 5.10.110) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.005 LIGHTED EXIT SIGNS.
   The owner or occupant in charge of any building used as an assembly hall,
with accommodations for 100 persons or more, in which exhibitions, shows,
amusements, lectures and other entertainment is offered, presented, operated or
given, shall provide a sign on which the word “EXIT” appears in letters at
least six inches high and place the same over every door or other opening from
the hall to every means of egress therefrom. He or she shall also provide a
light with a red globe and place the same over the sign, which light shall be
kept burning during the entire period that the hall is open to the public and
until the audience has left the hall.
(2000 Code, § 5.10.120)
§ 114.006 MINI-THEATERS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MINI-THEATERS. Any place, building or portion of a building to which the
public is admitted where one or more coin-operated, paper currency-operated,
slug-operated or token-operated (or otherwise operated by any means of payment)
electrically, electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors or video display devices are maintained to show still or
motion pictures or other video display materials to five or fewer persons per
machine or projector at any one time and are located in a booth, cubicle or
stall.
   (B)   No person shall own, operate or maintain a mini-theater in the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.10.130) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.007 BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS.
   (A)   Fee. The annual license fee for a billiard and pool hall shall be as
set forth in §
110.007.
   (B)   Minors. Minors under the age of 16 years shall, under no
circumstances, frequent, loiter about or remain in any hall licensed hereunder
at any time, unless they are upon some lawful errand at the direction of, or
with the consent and knowledge of, the parent, guardian or other person having
lawful custody of the minor. No proprietor of any hall so licensed shall allow
or permit any such minor to frequent, loiter about or remain in the hall in
violation of this section.
(2000 Code, § 5.10.010) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.008 BOWLING ALLEYS.
   (A)   Fee. The annual license fee for a bowling alley shall be as set forth
in §
110.007(B).
   (B)   Minors. Minors under the age of 16 years shall, under no
circumstances, frequent, loiter about or remain in any establishment licensed
hereunder at any time, unless they are upon some lawful errand at the direction
of the person having lawful custody of such minor. No proprietor of any
establishment so licensed shall allow or permit any such minor to frequent,
loiter about or remain in the hall in violation of this section. However,
minors belonging to bowling leagues or attending special bowling parties are
permitted in such establishments if they are accompanied by a parent or
guardian, and minors over the age of 16 years may be employed in the
establishments if the person operating or conducting the same has first
obtained the written consent of the parent, guardian or other person having
lawful custody of the minor.
(2000 Code, § 5.10.020) (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.009 CARNIVALS, PARKS, MENAGERIES AND EXHIBITIONS.
   The annual license fees for carnivals, parks, menageries and exhibitions
shall be as follows:
   (A)   Parks where amusement rides are operated during the summer season: $15
per season for the first ride and $5 for each additional ride;
   (B)   Carnivals: $15 per day, plus $5 per day for each side show and
concession connected therewith;
   (C)   Menageries: $15 per day;
   (D)   Exhibitions: $15 per day; and
   (E)   Other amusements not specifically licensed: $15 per day.
(2000 Code, § 5.10.030)
§ 114.010 CIRCUSES.
   (A)   Fees. The fee for a circus license shall be $200 for each day during
which the circus is conducted or open to the public. There shall be an
additional license fee for each side show and concession operated in connection
with a circus in the amount of $15 per day.
   (B)   Inspections. The Chief of Police and the Fire Chief shall see that
inspections are made of all circus performances and of the premises used.
   (C)   Parades. No person shall conduct or exhibit any parade connected with
a circus in or on any public street, alley or other public way or place in the
municipality, unless a permit therefor is first obtained from the Chief of
Police. The permit shall specify the route to be followed and shall be
accompanied by a bond in the sum of $10,000, conditioned to indemnify the
municipality for any loss, damage or liability incurred or caused by the
conduct or exhibition of the parade.
(2000 Code, § 5.10.040) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.011 COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any device which, upon the insertion of a
coin, slug, token or disk, may be operated by the public as a game,
entertainment or amusement. It includes, but is not limited to, such devices as
pinball machines, skill ball machines and electronic games using a video screen
and electrical impulses. It includes any other type of mechanical game the
object of which is to secure a particular score or high score by the use of
balls, spheres, springs, trigger devices or electrical impulses.
      VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game,
including but not limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized
by the Illinois Gaming Board utilizing a video display and microprocessors in
which the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for
cash. The term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash,
or tokens or is for amusement purposes only (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, § 5).
   (B)   Number of devices. There shall not be a prohibition as to the maximum
number of coin-operated amusement devices that business establishments may
operate, permit to be operated, keep or maintain. The maximum number of video
gaming terminals which may be operated by an establishment licensed by the
Illinois Gaming Board is authorized from time to time per Illinois statute.
(ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, § 25(e)).
   (C)   Licensing generally.
      (1)   No business establishment which is authorized by this section to do
so shall operate, permit to be operated, keep or maintain any coin-operated
amusement device or video gaming terminal device in the city without first
having obtained the appropriate device license and liquor license authorizing
the service of liquor and video gaming under
Chapter 111 of this code.
      (2)   Any person may apply for a coin-operated amusement device license
with the City Clerk or his or her designated representative. A device license
for video gaming terminals must be applied for by the owner of the
establishment so designated and licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board allowing
such establishment to operate video gaming terminals.
      (3)   Applications shall be made on forms provided by the city, which
shall require:
         (a)   The name and address of the person making the application;
         (b)   The names and addresses of all directors, officers and
shareholders of the applicant, if applicable;
         (c)   The name and address of the business establishment where the
device is to be used;
         (d)   A general description of the proposed device;
         (e)   A list of all felony and misdemeanor arrests of and charges
against the applicant and its directors, officers, shareholders or
administrators in the last five years, and the nature of the arrest or charge;
         (f)   The number of other coin-operated amusement devices and/or video
gaming terminals proposed for the same address;
         (g)   The name and address of the owner of the coin-operated amusement
devices and/or video gaming terminals; and
         (h)   Any other information the City Clerk deems necessary to process
the application.
      (4)   The City Clerk shall evaluate each application for an amusement
device license and/or video gaming terminal license within 30 days of the date
the application is filed. At the end of that time, the Clerk shall either issue
the appropriate device license or give a brief written statement of the reasons
for rejecting the application for non-compliance with the provisions of this
code, this chapter or the Illinois Gaming Act. An application shall be denied
only for good cause.
      (5)   Each coin-operated amusement device and video gaming terminal
license shall be effective for a period of one year (from January 1 to December
31), at which time the license shall expire. A new application must be filed
prior to the expiration of the license, pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
      (6)   The appropriate device license must be issued prior to the date the
applicant installs any device for use. If the device is already on the premises
and is already licensed under this title, the appropriate device license shall
be obtained pursuant to this section prior to the time the existing license
expires. If the device is already on the premises and is unlicensed, a license
must be obtained within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified
in this section (Ordinance 1402, passed July 23, 1985).
      (7)   The license can be suspended for a ten day period for violations of
the restrictions set forth in division (E) of this section. Any licensee
hereunder who is found to be unqualified to hold a license due to a failure to
comply with any of the restrictions, or who continually violates any of the
provisions of this section, or whose license has been suspended for cause, as
provided above, two or more times, shall be subjected to having his or her
license revoked by the City Clerk. Upon the occurrence of any of the above, the
clerk or his or her designated agent shall cause a notice to be sent to the
licensee for a hearing to determine cause as to whether the license should be
revoked. The hearing shall be held within ten days, but no sooner than three
days, from the receipt of the notice. The notice shall set forth the nature of
the hearing and shall contain such information as is necessary to reasonably
inform the licensee of those violations for which he or she is charged, and
shall further set forth the time, date and location of the hearing. The
licensee will be given an opportunity to present testimony and evidence in his
or her own behalf as he or she deems necessary. Upon the completion of the
hearing, the Clerk shall determine whether sufficient cause has been shown
which would require the revocation of the license and shall, within five days
from the date of the hearing, inform the licensee, in writing, if the
determination results in a revocation.
      (8)   The license shall be affixed to a prominent place on the device.
      (9)   A coin-operated amusement device and/or video gaming terminal
device may only be used at the address set forth in the license. Licenses are
not transferable.
      (10)   Each coin-operated amusement device shall have affixed to it a
current City of Oak Forest municipal coin-operated amusement device decal with
an assigned number. Each video gaming terminal device shall have affixed to it
a current City of Oak Forest video gaming terminal license decal with an
assigned number.
   (D)   Fee schedule.
      (1)   The annual fee shall be as listed, per amusement device, per year:
         (a)   Jukebox: $100;
         (b)   Dart/video: $100; and
         (c)   Electronic poker, “21,” dice or other games of chance: $500;
         (d)   Video gaming terminal as defined in ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, § 5:
$500 (video gaming terminal license fees shall be prorated on a quarterly basis
when applicable.)
      (2)   The transfer fee shall be $4 per machine, per transfer.
   (E)   Operating restrictions. The following operating restrictions shall
apply to all coin-operated amusement and/or video gaming terminals devices
located within the city.
      (1)   Awards for skill or for obtaining a particular score must be posted
on the device.
      (2)   Any person under the age of 14 years who is operating any coin-
operated amusement device must be accompanied by an adult. Any person under the
age of 21 years may not operate a video gaming terminal device.
      (3)   Video gaming terminals in a licensed establishment, licensed
fraternal establishment, or licensed veterans establishment must be located in
an area that is restricted to persons over 21 years of age, and the entrance to
the area must be within the view of one employee of the establishment who is
over 21 years of age (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, § 58).
      (4)   Devices are not to be placed or operated outside the business
premises, including, but not limited to, malls, hallways, parking areas or in
any required exit path.
   (F)   Video gaming. Operation of video gaming terminals is pursuant to the
Illinois Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40) and
Chapter 111 of this code.
(Ord. 2012-10-0405O, passed 10-23-2012; Am. Ord. 2016-08-0616O, passed 9-13-
2016) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.012 MOVIE HOUSES AND THEATERS.
   The annual license fee for movie houses and theaters shall be as set forth
in §
110.007.
(2000 Code, § 5.10.060)
§ 114.013 SHOOTING GALLERIES.
   (A)   Fee. The annual license fee for a shooting gallery shall be as set
forth in §
110.007.
   (B)   Safety. Targets shall be placed before a backstop of steel,
sufficiently thick to prevent any bullet from piercing it and so arranged that
there will be no danger from ricocheting bullets or deflected pieces of a
bullet.
(2000 Code, § 5.10.070)
SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 114.050 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any natural person, syndicate, association, partnership, firm,
club, company, corporation, limited liability company, institution, agency,
government corporation, municipal corporation, district or other political
subdivision, or any officers, agents, employees or other representative, acting
either for himself or herself or for any other person in any capacity; or any
other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties other than
the City of Oak Forest who submits an application pursuant to this chapter.
   CARNIVAL. Any aggregation of shows or riding devices, games of skill or
chance, or any combination of shows and riding devices, or any combination of
several enterprises, such as Ferris wheels, tilt-a-whirls, carousels, roller
coasters, giant swings, or other riding devices, whether carried on or engaged
in or conducted in any field, park or in a building or enclosure, and whether
carried on, engaged in or conducted as one enterprise or by several
concessionaires, and whether one admission fee is charged for admission to all
such shows or entertainments, or separate fee for admission is charged for each
amusement.
   CARNIVAL RIDES. Riding devices including, but not limited to, Ferris Wheels,
tilt-a-whirls, carousels, roller coasters, and giant swings.
   CIRCUS. A show consisting of acrobats, trained animals, clowns, or similar
forms of entertainment that is held in an arena, which may be open air or
enclosed in a tent or building.
   CITY. The City of Oak Forest and all of its government entities.
   CITY PROPERTY. Public streets, sidewalks, right-of-way, or other property
owned or controlled by the city.
   CITY SERVICES. Services provided by city departments including, but not
limited to public safety, crowd control, traffic control, management of the
event site, road closures, demarcation of no-parking tow zones, inspection
services, garbage removal, and production of event materials and city website
information.
   MAJOR SPECIAL EVENT. A special event including, but not limited to, parades,
festivals, and athletic events which meet some or all of the following
criteria:
      (1)   Anticipated attendance by a large number of people;
      (2)   Closure of roads, streets or city blocks;
      (3)   Demarcation of “No Parking, Tow Zones”;
      (4)   Issuance of multiple permits or licenses;
      (5)   Provision of city services as defined herein.
   MINOR SPECIAL EVENT. Special events which do not require provision of city
services as defined herein.
   PRIVATE EVENT. An event located entirely on private property provided for an
exclusive or invited group of attendees, held on suitable premises, which does
not exceed occupancy permits.
   SPECIAL EVENT. Any temporary occurrence conducted or sponsored by an
applicant involving a display, demonstration, performance, exhibition, or
amusement which includes, but is not limited to, festivals, concerts,
carnivals, art and craft shows, firework displays, sporting events, parades,
rallies and the like.
   SPECIAL EVENTS COORDINATOR. An individual appointed by the Mayor to
coordinate applications for major and minor special events.
(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)
§ 114.051 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The following are exempt from obtaining a major or minor special event
permit:
      (1)   The City of Oak Forest.
      (2)   Educational institutions approved or authorized by the State of
Illinois.
      (3)   Regularly scheduled and coordinated sporting events conducted by
not-for-profit organizations designed for youth activities.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in this chapter, issuance of
other permits or licenses may be required depending on the nature of the event,
including but not limited to: amplifier permits, tent permits, carnival/
carnival ride permits, firework permits, bonfire permits, generator permits,
and liquor licenses.
(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)
§ 114.052 MAJOR OR MINOR SPECIAL EVENT DETERMINATION.
   In advance of filing an application for a major or minor special event
permit, an applicant shall submit a detailed narrative description of the
proposed special event to the Special Events Coordinator and request direction
as to whether the event should be designated a major or minor special event.
Upon receipt of sufficient information regarding the proposed event, the
Special Events Coordinator shall, in a timely manner, advise the applicant
whether the event will be treated as a major or minor special event.
(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)
§ 114.053 MAJOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   A major special event permit application shall be available on the
city’s website and at the City Clerk’s office. The application shall include
requirements for issuance of a major special event permit, including but not
limited to those listed in herein. In addition to the requirements set forth in
this code and as set in the major special event permit application, events may
be subject to additional conditions or restrictions deemed necessary and
appropriate by the city. The major special event application shall consolidate
applications for licenses and permits that may be needed for such event, except
that applications for a liquor license shall be applied for separately as
provided by this code. The requirements and fees for issuance of each such
permit or license shall remain as otherwise provided for in the code.
      (1)   The application shall be accurately and completely filled out prior
to submission and shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         (a)   A complete and accurate description of the event for which the
permit is applied and an estimate of anticipated attendees and/or participants.
         (b)   Information regarding whether admission fees or charges are to
be assessed to attendees or participants.
         (c)   Information regarding whether alcohol consumption is planned,
and if so, the hours, location and type of alcohol planned to be served.
         (d)   A description of provision for refuse needs for the event which
shall be in compliance with city policies and code provisions and state law.
         (e)   A description of restroom availability and maintenance for the
event.
         (f)   A description of the type and nature of any entertainment,
including but not limited to music acts, carnival rides, and games of chance.
         (g)   A certificate of general liability insurance, naming the City of
Oak Forest and its officers, employees, agents and representatives as
additional insureds, in a form and amount determined by the Special Events
Coordinator, or his or her designee, may be required. Whenever a certificate of
insurance is required, an additional insured endorsement shall also be
provided.
         (h)   Information describing in detail the accessibility plans for the
event.
         (i)   Information pertaining to the use of city amenities for the
event as described in §
114.054 of this subchapter.
         (j)   Information regarding requests for city services associated with
the event.
         (k)   A list of all vendors participating in the event.
      (2)   Submission of major event permit application.
         (a)   An application for a major event permit shall be submitted to
the city’s Special Events Coordinator a minimum of 60 days prior to the
proposed event.
         (b)   An application may be considered within the 60-day time period
and approved by the City Administrator without City Council approval.
Applications submitted late may be considered on a case by case basis, but may
be rejected for untimeliness.
         (c)   An applicant for a major special event must be vested with the
legal authority to bind the applicant and may be requested to supply evidence
to that effect. Said individual or representative shall certify and swear to
the accuracy of all statements and information contained in the application and
that the applicant is qualified in all respects to receive the permits applied
for.
   (B)   Notification of major special event. An applicant for a major special
event permit shall, at its cost, provide written notification of the proposed
event, including a narrative summary of the event, to residents and businesses
which may be affected by such event. The Special Events Coordinator shall
review and approve the narrative and the scope of notice proposed by the
applicant and shall inform the applicant of the date the application shall be
considered by the City Council so that such date may be included in the
notification. Such notice shall be provided not less than two weeks, and not
more than four weeks, prior to City Council consideration of the application.
   (C)   Promotion of city amenities. Recognizing the importance of
incorporating and promoting positive local economic impact as part of major
special events within the city, the applicant shall contact and work with the
city’s Community Development Department in a good faith manner in order to
encourage and facilitate overnight accommodations and use of other community
amenities within the city for the event.
   (D)   City Council consideration. A request for a major special event permit
shall be submitted to the City Council by the Special Events Coordinator for
review and consideration. The City Council, taking into consideration whether
the event is to be held for a lawful purpose, whether there is a reasonable
basis to believe that it will tend to cause a breach of the peace or unduly
interfere with the public use of public right-of-way or other public property,
or whether it will unduly interfere with the peace and quiet of the residents
of the city, may approve the permit, deny the permit, or approve the permit
subject to such conditions or restrictions as it deems appropriate.
   (E)   Issuance of major special event permit. A major special event permit
shall be issued after it has been approved as set forth herein and after the
Special Events Coordinator is in timely receipt of the following items, as
applicable: (a) a completed major special event permit application, signed and
notarized; (b) all required fees; (c) a certificate of insurance and additional
insured endorsements in a form and in amounts approved by the city, naming the
city and its officers, agents, employees and representatives as additional
insureds; (d) a copy of a temporary liquor license issued by the city’s Liquor
Commissioner, if applicable; and (e) any other information or documentation
deemed necessary or appropriate. All permits or licenses needed for the major
special event, other than a liquor license if applicable, shall be included in
the issuance of the major special event permit if the applicant has paid the
required fees and otherwise complied with the requirements for each such permit
or license. Such permits and licenses include, but may not be limited to
licenses and permits for amplifiers, tents, temporary signage, raffles, right-
of-way, carnivals, carnival rides or circuses.
(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)
§ 114.054 CITY SERVICES FOR MAJOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   The applicant may request city services be provided for the major
special event and may be billed accordingly. The city, through recommendations
of the city’s various departments, may impose required city services and
personnel for public safety, public works or inspections as necessary.
   (B)   After a major special event is over, the city may issue the applicant
a bill for applicable costs incurred by the city, including but not limited to
reasonable personnel costs attributable to the major special event and for any
damage caused to public property. The applicant shall be responsible for
payment of said bill in full within the timeframe specified on the bill. In the
event that such payment is not made in full in a timely manner, the City
Attorney may be requested by the City Administrator to take or direct the
necessary legal action to obtain such payment. The reasonable costs and
attorney’s fees resulting from such action shall be added to the amount due and
owed by the applicant. Failure to timely pay bills for charge back services may
result in denial of future permits to the applicant or the applicant’s
organization.
   (C)   The applicant may request that city services be provided at no cost.
Such request must be made prior to the major special event being considered by
the City Council.
(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)
§ 114.055 MINOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   Minor special event permit application. A minor special event permit
application shall be available on the city’s website and at the City Clerk’s
office. In addition to the requirements set forth in this code and as set in
the minor special event permit application, events may be subject to additional
conditions or restrictions deemed necessary and appropriate by the city.
   (B)   Submission of minor event permit application.
      (1)   An application for a minor special event permit shall be submitted
to the city’s Special Events Coordinator a minimum of 21 days prior to the
proposed event. Applications submitted late may be considered on a case by case
basis, but may be rejected for untimeliness.
      (2)   An application for a minor special event must be vested with the
legal authority to bind the applicant and may be requested to supply evidence
to that effect. Said individual or representative shall certify and swear to
the accuracy of all statements and information contained in the application and
that the applicant is qualified in all respects to receive the permits applied
for.
      (3)   An application fee and hold harmless, defense and indemnification
agreement may be required by the city.
   (C)   Other permits or licenses may be necessary in addition to the minor
special event permit, depending on the event, including but not limited to
raffle licenses, or tent permit.
   (D)   The Special Events Coordinator shall review applications for proposed
minor special events and submit a report to the City Administrator regarding
such events and any requirements or conditions therefore. In the event the City
Administrator denies the permit, written notification of the denial and the
reasons for a denial shall be provided to the applicant.
   (E)   Issuance of minor special event permit. Upon approval of the
application, as set forth herein, and after payment of any required fees, the
City Clerk shall issue the minor special event permit.
(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)
§ 114.056 SPECIAL EVENT CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Fire and life safety. Special events must comply with state law and
with the city code, ordinances, rules, regulations, and policies.
   (B)   Access to event. There shall be in every permitted premises for major
special events not less than two exits leading to the outside, each not less
than three feet in width and, if doors are present, they are required to open
outward.
   (C)   Occupancy at a special event shall be in compliance with city and
state law.
   (D)   The nature and intensity of the event must be planned so that the
event will be compatible with the existing development in the area of the
event. The event shall not significantly or materially be detrimental to the
public health, safety, and welfare, or injurious to property or improvements in
the surrounding area, including, but not limited to, excess traffic, parking,
noise, pedestrian safety, and adverse effects on neighboring areas.
   (E)   Parking areas, both on and off street, for a particular event, are to
be of adequate size, properly located, and the entrance and exit drives shall
be laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances. For major special
events the applicant shall coordinate with the Special Events Coordinator for
major events to provide easily maps and information relative to parking and
accessible parking.
   (F)   An applicant shall allow free and unobstructed access to the premises
during the pre-inspection and permitting phases of event approval by authorized
city personnel while acting on city business.
   (G)   Any activity occupying or using any street, public place, or public
right-of-way in the city may be allowed only in accordance with the provisions
of this code where applicable.
   (H)   A review will be conducted by the Chief of Police for security for
each event and the Chief of Police shall determine the number of Oak Forest
police officers required. If Oak Forest police officers are used for an event,
the applicant shall be responsible for their costs, which will be assessed as
part of the charge back provided for in §
114.054 of this subchapter.
   (I)   Smoking on event premises shall be in compliance with state law.
   (J)   Special events including fundraising activities shall comply with city
and state laws.
   (K)   Carnivals, carnival rides, and circuses shall comply in all respects
with city ordinances, code requirements, and state law.
   (L)   If consumption of alcohol is proposed, said use must comply with city
and state law.
   (M)   If animal use or exhibition is proposed, it must comply with city
rules, regulations, ordinances, and state law.
   (N)   In addition to the specific regulations, standards, and time
limitations set forth in the code, events shall be subject to such conditions
and restrictions on their location and operation as deemed necessary from time
to time by the City Administrator or his or her designee.
(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)
§ 114.057 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The city’s Fire, Police, Emergency Management, Building, and Public
Works Departments shall be advised of proposed major special events and also
minor special events as deemed appropriate by the Special Events Coordinator.
Prior to the issuance of a permit, they shall conduct such inspections and
investigations as they deem necessary to verify information provided by the
applicant and to evaluate and ensure compliance with city code requirements and
state law in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare. Individual
vendors may only participate if it is determined that they are in compliance
with applicable state law and city code provisions.
   (B)   The city may inspect the event premises and participating vendors at
any time during the event to ensure continued compliance with city code, state
law and specific permit conditions, if applicable.
(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)
YOUNG ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
§ 114.070 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Oak Forest.
   LIGHT FOOD SERVICE. The ability to store, prepare, sell, and service hot and
cold sandwiches, snacks, and similar food items and is separately licensed by
the city as a food service establishment.
   PERSON. One or more natural PERSONS, corporations, partnerships,
associations or other entities capable of having an action of law brought
against the entity.
   PREMISES. Any place where a young adult entertainment facility is operated
or maintained, including, but not limited to, all hallways, bathrooms, parking
areas and any other portions of the area which is accessible to the public
during operating hours.
   SPECIAL EVENT. An activity at a young adult entertainment facility which is
marketed to patrons or prospective patrons as being of a temporary or non-
routine nature.
   YOUNG ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY.
      (1)   Commercial facilities which are open to the public, the primary
function of which is to offer, provide, procure, make available, allow, suffer
or permit entertainment to patrons between the ages of 18 and 30 years an
opportunity to engage in social activities such as dancing, or the enjoyment of
live or prerecorded music, or the enjoyment of entertainment provided by
dancers or other performers. A YOUNG ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY shall provide
light food service and beverages (excluding alcoholic beverages) to its patrons
from the time of opening until 11:00 p.m.
      (2)   The term YOUNG ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY does not include the
following: premises which serve alcoholic beverages as defined by state and
local laws; theaters which the patrons sit in parallel rows of fixed seats;
full service restaurants where the only entertainment consists of background
music which is incidental to the primary function of serving food; outdoor
performances, a banquet party or celebration conducted for invited guests which
is not open to the public; dances or events sponsored and operated by a
governmental entity, an educational institution, or a nonprofit or charitable
group duly licensed with the state and having a five-year operational history
in the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.68.010)
§ 114.071 YOUNG ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to own, operate, manage, or maintain a
young adult entertainment facility in the city without first obtaining a young
adult entertainment facility license from the city. The license fee shall be
based on the permitted occupancy of the young adult entertainment facility as
follows:
      (1)   For occupancy up to 100: $1,000;
      (2)   For occupancy from 101 to 200: $5,000;
      (3)    For occupancy from 201 to 300: $10,000; and
      (4)   For occupancy from 301 to 600: $20,000.
   (B)   Those establishments holding a license for occupancy to 600 may after
operating for a minimum of three months apply for an increased occupancy of up
to 200 patrons without the payment of any additional licensing fee. The
additional occupancy shall be permitted if the establishment otherwise complies
with other ordinances and codes of the city and there has been no previous
revocation or suspension of the licensee’s license within the preceding three
months.
   (C)   Those establishments holding a license for occupancy of up to 600
people who have received an increase of occupancy of up to 200 patrons may,
following a period of three months after the licensee who had occupancy for up
to 800 patrons has operated at such level, receive an additional increase of
occupancy by applying for an increase of occupancy of up to 200 more patrons
without paying any additional fee. The additional occupancy shall be permitted
if the establishment otherwise complies with other ordinances and codes of the
city and there has been no previous revocation or suspension of the licensee’s
license within the preceding six months. No further occupancy increases shall
be permitted.
   (D)   All young adult entertainment facilities shall have an occupancy limit
established by the applicable fire or city codes. For the purpose of this
division, licensed premises shall not include kitchen area, storage areas,
hallways, or any area used by the licensee and/or his or her employees and not
open to the licensee’s patrons.
   (E)   A license shall be effective from the date of its issue until December
31 of each year.
(2000 Code, § 5.68.020)
§ 114.072 LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   An application for a license shall be made in writing to the City
Clerk upon forms provided, and shall include the following:
      (1)   The name, birth date, and address of the applicant in the case of
an individual; in the case of a partnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation, the date of
incorporation (in the case of a foreign corporation, the state where it was
incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Illinois Business
Corporation Act to transact business in the state of Illinois), and the objects
for which it was organized. The names, dates of birth and addresses of any
partner, any officer and any director, and if a majority in interest of the
stock of a corporation is owned by one person or his or her nominees, the name,
date of birth and address of the person;
      (2)   The location of the young adult entertainment facility;
      (3)   A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant as
provided in this section. If the applicant is a corporation, the statement
shall include applicant’s officers and directors thereof, and any stockholder
or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 20% of the stock of the
corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the statement shall include all
general partners, and any limited partner owning more than 20% of the aggregate
limited partner interest in the partnership. The listing shall include the
following:
         (a)    Any offense involving sexual misconduct with children or other
sex offenses as defined in Article 11 of the Illinois Criminal Code Sex
Offenses (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 11-6 et seq.) and as amended;
         (b)   A felony based upon conduct or involvement in the business or
activity or related or similar business or activity, within the past ten years;
         (c)   A felony unrelated to conduct or involvement in the business or
activity or related or similar business or activity, but which felony involved
the use of a deadly weapon, traffic in narcotic drugs, or violence against
another person, including rape, within the past five years; or
         (d)   A misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation, based upon
conduct or involvement in the business or activity or related or similar
business or activity, within the past two years.
      (4)   A description of the proposed young adult entertainment facility,
including the anticipated age and number of patrons, hours of operation and all
activities and business conducted at the same location, and the physical
facilities to be used;
      (5)   A written statement setting forth all measures proposed to ensure
that adequate traffic control, crowd protection and security, both inside and
outside the licensed premises, will be maintained, and that the ages of the
patrons admitted to the young adult entertainment facility will be monitored;
      (6)   A statement of whether the business will be conducted by a manager.
In such case the manager’s name, address, telephone number and age shall be
provided, along with a statement of any convictions as set forth under division
(A)(3) of this section;
      (7)   A statement whether the applicant has made similar application for
a similar other license at a location other than described in this application
and the disposition of the application;
      (8)   The license fee as provided in §
114.071;
      (9)   A site plan for the licensed premises, including a floor plan
showing all entrances, exists and public areas;
      (10)   The operation and training manuals to be used for the
establishment, setting forth procedures for complying with this subchapter,
including, but not limited to security and age verification; and
      (11)   A certificate of insurance evidencing that the applicant has
secured commercial general liability insurance issued by one or more companies
authorized to do business in the state of Illinois providing the following
minimum coverage:
         (a)   $1,000,000 per person, per occurrence; and
         (b)   $1,000,000 annual aggregate.
   (B)   In the event the applicant is made aware that any information or
document submitted as part of this application process is inaccurate or
incomplete, the applicant shall immediately notify the city and provide
appropriate corrections. Failure to accurately and completely provide, or as
necessary update, required information may delay the processing of the
application or result in its denial.
   (C)   In addition to the requirements of divisions (A) and (B) of this
section, the applicant and, if applicable, the manager, shall submit their
fingerprints to be used in completing the investigation. Applicants are
required to present themselves for fingerprints to be taken by the Police
Department as provided by the Chief of Police. If the applicant is a
corporation, fingerprints shall be required of applicant’s officers, directors,
and any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 20% of
the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, fingerprints
shall be required of all general partners, and any limited partner owning more
than 20% of the aggregate limited partner interest in the partnership. The
applicant shall pay the fingerprint fee for each person required to submit
fingerprints. Provided, in the case of a renewal application, fingerprints and
the fingerprint fee shall not be required from a renewal applicant whose
fingerprints are on file, unless the Chief of Police determines that there may
be reason to believe that the renewal applicant may have unreported
convictions.
(2000 Code, § 5.68.030)
§ 114.073 PROCEDURES FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   After receiving a complete application for a young adult entertainment
facility license, the city shall initiate the following procedures.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall forward copies of the application to appropriate
city officials for their comments regarding compliance with regulations under
their jurisdiction. The City Clerk shall consider all materials and comments
submitted and issue or deny the license within 30 working days after the date
on which a completed application was filed unless the applicant agrees to an
extension of the time period in writing. In the event that the City Clerk fails
to act upon any application within the time period set forth herein, the
inaction shall be deemed a denial of the application.
   (B)   The issuance or renewal of a young adult entertainment facility
license shall be denied by the City Clerk for any one or more of the following
reasons:
      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of one or more of the following
offenses:
         (a)   Any offense involving sexual misconduct with children or other
sex offenses as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-6 et seq. “Sex Offenses”
Code of 1961, as amended;
         (b)   A felony based upon conduct or involvement in the business or
activity or related or similar business or activity, within the past ten years;
         (c)   A felony unrelated to conduct or involvement in the business or
activity or related or similar business or activity, but which felony involved
the use of a deadly weapon, traffic in narcotic drugs, or violence against
another person, including rape, within the past five years; or
         (d)   A misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation, based upon
conduct or involvement in the business or activity or related or similar
business or activity, within the past two years.
      (2)   The applicant whose license issued under this subchapter has been
revoked for cause;
      (3)   The applicant who at the time of application for renewal of any
license issued under this subchapter would not be eligible for the license upon
a first application;
      (4)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
      (5)   Where grounds for revocation of the license exists;
      (6)   If the applicant is a partnership and any general partner, or any
limited partner of owning more than 20% of the aggregate limited partner
interest in the partnership, would not be eligible to receive a license under
this chapter;
      (7)   If the applicant is a corporation and any officer or director, or
any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 20% of the
stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license under
this chapter;
      (8)   If the applicant is a corporation unless it is incorporated in
Illinois or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the
Business Corporation Act of 1983 to transact business in Illinois;
      (9)   If the business of the young adult entertainment facility is to be
conducted by a manager unless the manager possesses the same qualifications
required by the licensee;
      (10)   If the applicant is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee;
      (11)   If the premises do not comply with all applicable city ordinances
and state laws;
      (12)   If the application is incomplete or if it contains any material
misrepresentation; and
      (13)   If the application does not show adequate measures for the
protection of persons or property, security, both inside and outside the
premises, and the monitoring of the ages of patrons admitted to the young adult
entertainment facility.
   (C)   If the City Clerk denies a license, written notice of the denial
stating the reasons why shall be sent to the applicant within five working days
after the denial. The applicant shall have a period of ten working days after
the date of license denial to appeal to the City Council. The appeal shall be
in writing and shall be scheduled for hearing within 14 days of the receipt of
the appeal for a regular meeting occurring not more than 30 days after receipt
of the notice and after at least five days notification of the hearing date to
the appellant.
(2000 Code, § 5.68.040)
§ 114.074 OPERATING RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to enter or
remain on the premises of a young adult entertainment facility unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person 30 years of age or older to enter or
remain on the premises of a young adult entertainment facility except for bona
fide employees or independent contractors hired by the licensee to work in the
young adult entertainment facility, a parent or guardian of a person under 21
years of age present in the young adult entertainment facility or a
governmental employee in the performance of his or her duties.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to falsely represent their age for the
purpose of gaining admission to a young adult entertainment facility.
   (D)   The licensee shall require each person admitted or seeking to be
admitted to display to a supervisory security person of the young adult
entertainment facility an identification card showing the photo and age of the
person seeking admission. In addition all patrons shall be required to pass
through a metal detection device or pass a scanning by a metal detection wand.
   (E)   It is unlawful to knowingly permit a person to enter or remain in a
young adult entertainment facility who is under the age of 18 years, or 30
years of age or older unless the person is a bona fide employee or independent
contractor hired by the licensee to work in the young adult entertainment
facility or a governmental employee in the performance of his or her duties.
   (F)   A patron once admitted to the young adult entertainment facility on
the premises shall not be permitted to exit and re-enter the premises sooner
than the following business day.
   (G)   In the event of an emergency, health or safety condition occurring
anywhere on the licensed premises, including the parking lot, the licensee and
its employees and/or agents shall immediately contact the Fire Department or
Police Department, as appropriate to the incident, and request assistance.
   (H)   It shall be the obligation of the licensee to employ two off-duty Oak
Forest police officers who shall be present on the premises during all
operating hours to maintain peace and order and to ensure compliance with all
applicable laws of the state and of the city. The licensee shall pay to the
city the wages and benefit costs associated with providing to the licensee the
two police officers. The licensee shall also employ qualified security
personnel who shall have been trained in crowd control, drug awareness, and
gang awareness. The names, addresses and birth dates of all the security
personnel must be on file with the Chief of Police at least 48 hours before
their employment.
   (I)   Each licensee shall provide at least one supervising security person
to monitor and verify ages of those persons seeking to gain admittance to the
licensed premises.
   (J)   The licensee and its agents shall not permit or allow alcoholic
beverages or controlled substances to be consumed or be present on any young
adult entertainment facility premises and shall not allow or permit tobacco to
be used or sold in any young adult entertainment facility. The presence of any
prohibited item upon the licensed premises shall be deemed a violation of this
provision.
   (K)   It shall be the obligation of the licensee to refuse admittance and to
remove from the young adult entertainment facility any person who is, or
appears to be, under the influence of, or affected by the use of, alcohol or
drugs, or whose conduct poses a physical danger to the safety of others
present. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to refuse admittance and to
remove from a young adult entertainment facility any person under the age of 18
years who possesses tobacco.
   (L)   It shall be the obligation of the licensee to provide proper and
adequate illumination of all portions of the premises which are available for
public use. The illumination shall be not less than 1.3 footcandle at floor
level at all times when the premises are open to the public or when any member
of the public is permitted to enter and remain on the premises. All off-street
parking areas within 100 feet of any entrance shall be illuminated during all
hours of operation after sunset with a lighting system designed to provide a
minimum maintained horizontal illumination of greater than one footcandle of
light on the parking surface and/or walkway.
   (M)   It shall be the obligation of the licensee to prevent loitering, the
creation of public nuisances or disturbances of the peace by any patrons of the
young adult entertainment facility on the premises or in the immediate
vicinity. “Loitering” shall not include walking between the premises and a
patron’s vehicle, nor shall it include the act of waiting in line to gain
admission to the premises.
   (N)   It shall be the obligation of the licensee to clean up all litter
resulting from its operations. The cleanup shall occur within two hours after
the end of each day’s operation.
   (O)   (1)   It is unlawful for a licensee to permit:
         (a)   A greater number of patrons into the premises at any time than
the permitted occupancy; or
         (b)   Any greater number of patrons to remain upon the premises than
the permitted occupancy.
      (2)   All young adult entertainment facilities shall provide seating for
not less than 30% of the maximum permitted occupancy.
   (P)   No licensee, his or her agent or employee shall allow or permit any
person to perform acts of or acts which simulate:
      (1)   Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;
      (2)   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breast, buttocks, anus or genitals;
      (3)   The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva
or genitals;
      (4)   The actual or simulated displaying of the breast so as to expose
the nipple of the female breast; or
      (5)   The displaying of films or pictures depicting acts, a live
performance of which is prohibited by this division.
   (Q)   No licensee, his or her agent or employee shall allow or permit any
person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes in public view
any portion of his or her genitals or anus.
   (R)   Each licensee shall provide at least one public telephone for outgoing
calls only for each 125 patrons (based upon the maximum occupancy of the
premises). No licensee shall permit sound or vibration exceeding 90 decibels
measured with a standard meter “A” scale within two feet of any public
telephone receiver or audible at such level on the outside of any exterior wall
of the premises located more than ten feet from a doorway of the licensed
premises. No public telephone shall be provided on the premises for incoming
calls.
   (S)   The licensee shall deliver to the Chief of Police, no later than 72
hours before any scheduled special event occurring at a licensed premises, true
and accurate copies of any and all advertisements of whatever nature therefor
used to advertise or promote the event. The licensee shall also include prior
to any such advertised event:
      (1)   The number of employees and/or performers to be used for the event;
      (2)   Designation of the individual who will be available prior to and
during the event and who shall have authority to accept complaints, notice of
violations, or take corrective action as required by proper officials of the
city;
      (3)   A security plan with an acknowledgment that any changes to the
security plan must be submitted to the Chief of Police in writing one business
day before the event, and the security plan must be followed without any
changes unless the change has been submitted to the Chief of Police in writing
and he or she has approved it prior to the event being opened;
      (4)   Security personnel shall be required for the maximum capacity of
the event as determined by the maximum occupancy of the premises under the
city’s ordinance unless attendance is limited to a lesser number;
      (5)   Inspections may be conducted by the city to ensure compliance with
its codes and ordinances;
      (6)   No members of the general public shall be allowed admittance prior
to the opening of the event;
      (7)   Only one such event per evening shall be allowed;
      (8)   Automatic counters are required to be used prior to entry into the
licensed premises to determine occupancy of the premises; and
      (9)   Tickets may be sold before the event with the number of tickets
sold limited to the occupancy limit of the premises for patrons, and after all
the tickets have been sold, the licensee shall post a sign stating that the
event is “Sold Out”.
   (T)   The hours of operation of a young adult entertainment facility are as
follows:
      (1)   Sunday through Thursday, 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m.;
      (2)   Friday and Saturday, 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.; and
      (3)   New Year’s Eve, 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day.
   (U)   All employees and independent contractors hired by the licensee to
work in the young adult entertainment facility who will be present on the
premises during hours of operation shall submit to criminal background checks.
No person shall be permitted to be employed who has been convicted of a felony
violation of any section of the following sections of ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5,
Title III:
      (1)   Article 8 Solicitation, Conspiracy and Attempt;
      (2)   Article 9 Homicide;
      (3)   Article 10 Kidnapping and Related Offenses;
      (4)   Article 11 Sex Offenses;
      (5)   Article 12 Bodily Harm;
      (6)   Article 18 Robbery;
      (7)   Article 19 Burglary;
      (8)   Article 33A Armed Violence; and
      (9)   Article 33D Contributing to the Criminal Delinquency of a Juvenile
of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended; or any section of the
Illinois Controlled Substances Act, as amended.
(2000 Code, § 5.68.050) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.075 ACCESS BY POLICE OFFICERS.
   All police officers of the city shall be permitted access to all young adult
entertainment facilities for the purpose of inspection and to enforce
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter at all times that the
premises are open to the patrons.
(2000 Code, § 5.68.060)
§ 114.076 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The Mayor may, at any time, suspend a young adult entertainment
facility license whenever the licensee, or any manager, officer, director,
agent or employee of the licensee has caused, permitted or knowingly done any
of the following:
      (1)   Failed to keep the building structure or equipment of the licensed
premises in compliance with the applicable health, building, fire or safety
laws, regulations or ordinances in a way which relates to or affects public
health or safety on the young adult entertainment facility premises; and/or
      (2)   Failed to comply with the provisions of young adult entertainment
facilities specified in this chapter.
   (B)   The suspension shall remain in effect until the conditions causing the
suspension are cured and reasonable measures are taken to ensure that the same
will not reoccur as determined by the Mayor.
   (C)   The Mayor may, at any time, revoke or suspend a young adult
entertainment facility license on any one or more of the following grounds:
      (1)   Whenever the city learns that the licensees made a material false
statement or representation or failed to disclose any material information to
the city, in connection with any application for the young adult entertainment
facility license or any license renewal;
      (2)   Whenever the licensee or any manager, officer, director, agent or
employee of the licensee fails within a reasonable time to cure a condition
that cause a license suspension;
      (3)   Whenever the licensee or any manager, officer, director, agent or
employee of the licensee knowingly permits conduct on the licensed premises
that violates any federal, state or village criminal or penal statute, law or
ordinance;
      (4)   Whenever the operation of the young adult entertainment facility
becomes the proximate cause of a significant increase in criminal activity on
the premises or in the immediate vicinity in such a way as to endanger persons
or property; and/or
      (5)   Upon the cessation of business for a period in excess of 60 days.
   (D)   The suspension or revocation of a license may be appealed to the City
Council within five days of the suspension or revocation. The appeal shall be
taken by filing with the Mayor a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The Mayor shall transmit a report and the entire record upon which the
appeal was taken. From and after five business days after the appeal is filed,
any suspension or revocation shall be stayed unless the Mayor from whom the
appeal is taken certifies to the City Council that by reason of facts stated in
the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to
life or property. In this event the suspension or revocation shall not be
stayed otherwise than by the City Council.
   (E)   (1)   The City Council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the appeal
within a reasonable time.
      (2)   Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney.
      (3)   The City Council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the suspension or revocation as in its opinion ought to be made.
(2000 Code, § 5.68.070)
§ 114.077 LICENSE; NONTRANSFERABLE.
   (A)   A license granted under the provisions of this subchapter is
nontransferable.
   (B)   The sale, lease or transfer of substantially all of the assets of a
business holding a young adult entertainment facility license or a sale or
transfer of a controlling interest in a corporation or partnership holding a
young adult entertainment facility license shall result in the termination of
the license granted herein.
(2000 Code, § 5.68.080)
§ 114.078 NUISANCES; INJUNCTION.
   (A)   Any violation of this subchapter is declared to be a nuisance.
   (B)   In addition to any other relief provided by this subchapter, the City
Attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to
prohibit the continuation of any violation of this subchapter.
   (C)   The application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining
order, temporary injunction or permanent injunction.
(2000 Code, § 5.68.090)
RAFFLES
§ 114.079 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as “Raffles Ordinance of the
City of Oak Forest.”
(Ord. 2023-06-0979O, passed 6-13-2023)
§ 114.080 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings hereby given them.
   BUSINESS. A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses
who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and
civic interests of the city.
   CHARITABLE. An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit
an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
   CITY. The City of Oak Forest, Cook County, Illinois.
   EDUCATIONAL. An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common
to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope
and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
   FRATERNAL. An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
   KEY LOCATION. The physical location within the city’s corporate boundaries
where the raffle drawing is conducted.
   LABOR. An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. An agency of this state or a unit of local
government in this state that is vested by law or ordinance with the duty to
maintain public order and to enforce criminal laws or ordinances.
   NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
   NON-PROFIT. An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-
for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
   RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in Section 28-2(b) of the “Criminal
Code of 1961,” conducted by an organization licensed under this subchapter, in
which:
      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
      (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
   RELIGIOUS. Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the
purpose of religious worship.
   SPONSORING ORGANIZATION. One of the eligible organizations defined in the
Act that may receive a city-approved raffle license and consisting of: non-
profit organizations or institutions, charitable organizations or institutions,
educational organizations or institutions, religious congregations, societies
and organizations, fraternal organizations, veterans organizations or
associations, and law enforcement agencies and associations that represent law
enforcement agencies.
   THIRD-PARTY RAFFLE OPERATOR/VENDOR. A person, company, corporation or
organization who contracts with and acts at the direction of and under the
supervision of the sponsoring organization, to provide bona fide services to
the sponsoring organization in connection with the operation of a raffle and
may receive reasonable compensation from the sponsoring organization for such
services as provided for in the Illinois Raffles Act (See ILCS Ch. 230, Act 15
§ 4(a)(2)). Such services include the following:
      (1)   Advertising, marketing and promotion;
      (2)   Legal;
      (3)   Procurement of goods, prizes, wares and merchandise for the purpose
of operating the raffle;
      (4)   Rent, if the premises upon which the raffle will be held is rented;
      (5)   Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping;
      (6)   Website hosting;
      (7)   Mailing and delivery;
      (8)   Banking and payment processing; and
      (9)   Other services relating to the operation of the raffle.
   VETERANS. An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit.
(Ord. 2023-06-0979O, passed 6-13-2023)
§ 114.081 LICENSING LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Each event at which a raffle or raffles are to be conducted shall have
a separate raffle license issued by the city.
   (B)   Limitations. The following limitations apply to raffles conducted
within the city.
      (1)   Location. Sales of raffle chances shall be only at locations
designated in the license application and which are within the borders of the
State of Illinois.
      (2)   Eligibility for license. Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide
religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans
organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have been
in existence continuously for a period of five years immediately before making
application for a license and which have had during that entire five-year
period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives, or to a
non-profit fund-raising organization that the city determines is organized for
the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual
or group suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness,
disability, accident or disaster, as well as law enforcement agencies and
associations that represent law enforcement officials.
      (3)   Duration of license. Licenses shall permit the applicant to issue
or sell raffle chances only for those dates stated in the license application,
but in no event shall the period of sales exceed one year. Each license is
valid for not more than one raffle per week during any one-year period.
      (4)   Maximum value of prizes.
         (a)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded
by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed $500,000. For any raffle that
has the potential for jackpots or roll over jackpots (e.g., Queen of Hearts
raffles) to exceed maximum aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise
awarded restriction, the applicant or the third party raffle operator/vendor
shall award only a jackpot or jackpots or prizes or merchandise that meets the
above dollar amount restriction. The applicant or the third
party raffle operator/vendor shall not sell raffle chances in an amount that
would cause the jackpot or roll over jackpot or prizes or merchandise to exceed
the above dollar amount restriction.
         (b)   The retail value of each individual prize awarded by a licensee
in a single raffle shall not exceed $250,000. For any raffle that has the
potential for jackpots or roll over jackpots (e.g., Queen of Hearts raffles) to
exceed the maximum retail value of each jackpot, roll over jackpot or prize
awarded restriction, the applicant or the third party raffle operator/vendor
shall award only a jackpot, a roll over jackpot or a prize that meets the above
dollar amount restriction. The applicant or the third party raffle operator/
vendor shall not sell raffle chances in an amount that would cause the jackpot
or roll over jackpot or prize to exceed the maximum dollar amount restriction.
      (5)   Price of chances. The price charged for each raffle chance sold or
issued shall not exceed $250.
(Ord. 2023-06-0979O, passed 6-13-2023)
§ 114.082 LICENSE, APPLICATION, RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a raffle without having
first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   Each application for a license shall be in writing upon forms provided
by the city and shall contain, at minimum, the following:
      (1)   Name and address of individual making application;
      (2)   Name and address of organization applying for a license;
      (3)   Approximate number of members of the organization that reside in
the city and the length of existence of the organization;
      (4)   Name and address of the raffle administrator;
      (5)   The location(s) at which raffle chances are to be sold or issued;
      (6)   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
      (7)   The maximum number of raffle chances will be sold or issued;
      (8)   The time of determination of winning chances;
      (9)   The key location at which winning chances will be determined;
      (10)   A sworn statement, signed by the presiding officer, and secretary
if there is one, of the organization attesting to the not-for-profit character
of the organization, and attesting to the fact the organization is not
otherwise ineligible to receive a license;
      (11)   If the applicant intends to contract with a third-party raffle
operator/vendor the pertinent portions of the application shall be completed
and also signed by the third-party raffle operator/vendor, which contains
information regarding the role and activities of the third-party raffle
operator/vendor in relative to the raffle. The third-party operator/vendor’s
name, authorized representative, principal place of business, and contact
information shall be disclosed;
      (12)   The application shall also contain sworn statements to be signed
by the presiding officer and the secretary (if any) of the applicant and an
authorized representative of the third-party raffle operator/vendor (if any)
that certify the applicant and the third-party raffle operator/vendor agree to
comply with all applicable statutes, ordinances, city code provisions and
regulations regarding the conduct of raffles; and
      (13)   The application completed by the applicant and the third-party
operator/vendor (if any) shall be on a form prepared by the city in accordance
with this section. The raffle application forms may be amended from time to
time by the City Administrator or the City Administrator’s designee.
   (C)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by payment of a
license fee of $25.
   (D)   The City Council hereby delegates the authority to approve or to deny
an application to conduct a raffle to the City Administrator or to the City
Administrator’s designee.
(Ord. 2023-06-0979O, passed 6-13-2023)
§ 114.083 INELIGIBILITY.
   The following are ineligible for any license under this subchapter.
   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character;
   (D)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in division (A), (B)
or (C) has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest or in which such a
person is active or employed;
   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in division (A), (B) or (C)
is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not; and
   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in division (A), (B) or (C)
is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle.
(Ord. 2023-06-0979O, passed 6-13-2023)
§ 114.084 CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
   The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions.
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game;
   (B)   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle, provided however that
sponsoring organizations may contract with third parties (i.e., a third-party
operator/vendor) who, acting at the direction of and under the supervision of
the sponsoring organization, provide bona fide services to the sponsoring
organization in connection with the operation of a raffle and may pay
reasonable compensation for such services. Such services include the following:
      (1)   Advertising, marketing, and promotion;
      (2)   Legal;
      (3)   Procurement of goods, prizes, wares and merchandise for the purpose
of operating the raffle;
      (4)   Rent, if the premises upon which the raffle will be held is rented;
      (5)   Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping;
      (6)   Website hosting;
      (7)   Mailing and delivery;
      (8)   Banking and payment processing; and
      (9)   Other services relating to the operation of the raffle.
   (C)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle, except for a third-party operator/
vendor as provided herein;
   (D)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed
under this subchapter;
   (E)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the State of Illinois
and only at the locations specified on the license, and winning chances may be
determined only at the key location(s) specified on the license; and
   (F)   A person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting
of raffles or chances only with the permission of a parent or guardian. A
person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where winning chances
are being determined only when accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.
(Ord. 2023-06-0979O, passed 6-13-2023)
§ 114.085 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep records of
its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or
occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross
receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with
receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased
item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The
distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and
date of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same non-profit organization
pursuant to license therefore issued by the Department of Revenue of the State
of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization should have
separate records for its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles should not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to
its membership, and to the city its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds
from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required by this
section.
   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three years,
and organizations shall make available for public inspection at reasonable
times and places their records relating to operation of raffles.
(Ord. 2023-06-0979O, passed 6-13-2023)
§ 114.086 RAFFLES ADMINISTRATOR BOND.
   All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision
of a single raffles administrator designated by the organization, including
supervision of any third-party operator/vendor. The administrator shall give a
fidelity bond in an amount determined by the licensing authority in favor of
the organization conditioned upon his or her honesty in the performance of his
or her duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in
writing to the licensing authority not less than 30 days prior to its
cancellation. The City Council may waive this bond requirement by including a
waiver provision in the license issued to an organization under this Act,
provided that a license containing such waiver provision shall be granted only
by unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization.
(Ord. 2023-06-0979O, passed 6-13-2023)
§ 114.087 POLITICAL COMMITTEES.
   Any political committee shall obtain a license from the Illinois State Board
of Elections and fully comply with ILCS Ch. 230, Act 15, § 8.1 of the Illinois
Raffles and Poker Runs Act as well as comply with all of the requirements of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 2023-06-0979O, passed 6-13-2023)
§ 114.088 RAFFLE PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this subchapter, shall upon conviction be fined $250 for each
offense.
(Ord. 2023-06-0979O, passed 6-13-2023)
PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
§ 114.090 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Parade and Public
Assemblies Ordinance of the City of Oak Forest.”
(2000 Code, § 5.70.010)
§ 114.091 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARADE. Any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any
kind or similar display, in or upon any street or other public property in the
City of Oak Forest.
   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY. Any congregation or gathering of persons held outdoors and
upon any public property for the purpose of hearing or observing individuals or
demonstrating views on a topic, either verbally or nonverbally.
      (1)   Private functions defined as those by invitation only shall be
prohibited on city property.
      (2)   PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES shall be prohibited in public buildings or on
city properties where it will substantially interfere with the normal course of
business.
(2000 Code, § 5.70.020)
§ 114.092 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No parade, public assembly or similar activity where the number of
participants or spectators are expected or may reasonably be expected to exceed
50 or more persons and/or vehicles, is permitted on any street or area of the
city unless a permit allowing the activity has been obtained from the city;
provided, however that this subchapter shall not apply to students going to and
from school classes or participating in educational activities under the
immediate direction and supervision of school authorities or a governmental
agency acting within the scope of its functions, nor shall a permit be required
for normal or scheduled activities of the city. Only one permit shall be issued
during any 12-month period to the same applicant, or an affiliate organization
of the applicant.
(2000 Code, § 5.70.030)
§ 114.093 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person, partnership, voluntary association, corporation or other
organization seeking to obtain a parade or public assembly permit shall file an
application with the City Clerk not more than 90 days and not less than 21 days
before the date for which the parade, public assembly or similar activity is
proposed. The City Clerk is authorized to establish rules, regulations and
procedures for the processing of parade and public assembly permit
applications.
   (B)   In order for any application to be reviewed by the City Clerk, it must
contain any and all information and requested materials listed in §
114.094 of this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.70.040)
§ 114.094 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   Any application for a parade or public assembly permit filed with the City
Clerk must contain the following information:
   (A)   The name, address and phone number of the person signing the
application;
   (B)   If the parade, public assembly or similar activity is proposed to be
conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and phone
number of the authorized and responsible leaders of the organization conducting
the parade or public assembly, and the name, address and telephone number of
the headquarters of the organization and the names, addresses and telephone
numbers of any state, regional and national organizations with which the
applicant organization is affiliated;
   (C)   The date of the proposed parade or public assembly and the hours that
it will commence and terminate;
   (D)   The location of the assembly area and the time when the participants
will begin to assemble;
   (E)   The route to be traveled, starting point and the termination point;
   (F)   The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles to participate
in the parade, public assembly or similar activity;
   (G)   A statement as to whether the parade or public assembly will occupy
all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
   (H)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade,
public assembly or similar activity;
   (I)   If the parade, public assembly or similar activity is designed to be
held by and on behalf of, or for any person, partnership, voluntary
association, corporation or other organization other than the applicant, the
applicant for the permit shall file with the City of Oak Forest a communication
in writing from the person or from an authorized and responsible leader of the
organization authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on behalf of the
person or organization; and
   (J)   Any additional information which the City Clerk or City Council shall
find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should
be issued.
(2000 Code, § 5.70.050)
§ 114.095 LATE APPLICANTS.
   The City Council, when good and compelling cause is shown therefor, may
consider an application hereunder which is filed less than 21 days before the
date the parade, public assembly or similar activity is proposed to be
conducted.
(2000 Code, § 5.70.060)
§ 114.096 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   The City Council shall direct the City Clerk to issue a permit as provided
for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other
information as may otherwise be obtain it is found that:
   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interfere with the
safe and orderly movement of traffic in the area contiguous to the route.
   (B)   The activity will not present an unreasonable danger to the health or
safety of the applicant, city employees, or members of the public, which is to
be determined upon the basis of past events that have occurred within the
corporate limits of the City of Oak Forest.
   (C)   There are available at the time of the parade, public assembly or
similar activity a sufficient number of peace officers to police and protect
lawful participants in the activity and maintain adequate police protection in
the rest of the City of Oak Forest.
   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the assembly
points of the parade, public assembly or similar activity will not unduly
interfere with the proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service
to areas contiguous to the assembly areas.
   (E)   The activity will not interfere with scheduled city functions or the
normal pursuit of activities of the residents of the City of Oak Forest.
   (F)   The conduct of the parade, public assembly or similar activity will
not interfere with the movement of the fire fighting equipment en route to a
fire.
   (G)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
   (H)   The parade, public assembly, or similar activity is not being
conducted for an unlawful purpose or for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods or event and is not designed to be held purely for private
profit.
   (I)   (1)   Before the issuance of a permit the City Clerk shall require the
organization to furnish evidence of insurance naming the city as an additional
insured in a form as may be determined by the City of Oak Forest to provide for
the payment of any claims for personal injuries (including death and any
injuries to city employees, agents or contractors), property damage or other
suits arising out of or connected with the public assemblies or parades. If an
organization’s most reasonable efforts are unsuccessful, the required insurance
can be waived by the City Clerk, subject to the conditions stated in this
section. In such a situation the organization must provide written proof of
their inability to obtain insurance. If prior events of the applicant in the
city have resulted in damage or injury for which the applicant did not have
insurance or did not compensate the damaged or injured parties, the City Clerk
shall require either:
         (a)   The insurance policy as stated in this section; or
         (b)   A cash security deposit in an amount based upon damage incurred
in any prior event of the applicant in the city, as determined by the City
Clerk.
      (2)   Any funds not expended shall be returned to the applicant within 30
days after the determination of the damage or injury.
   (J)   A hold harmless agreement shall be signed with the City of Oak Forest
holding the city harmless from any and all claims that may arise from the use
of designated public property, right of way, equipment or any injury to a city
employee, agent or contractor in conjunction with the permitted use.
   (K)   Prior to the issuance of any permit, all parade or public assembly
applicants must pay for the estimated cost of clean-up and restoration of the
area of the event and traffic control costs of any Police Department, or other
city personnel utilized in conjunction with the function at a reasonable rate
to be determined by the City Clerk. The estimated costs shall be specifically
set out in writing to the applicant prior to the issuance of the permit,
showing the basis of the estimated costs. These estimated costs shall not
include any use of city personnel to protect the public safety in an emergency
situation in conjunction with the event. In the event that the estimated costs
paid are in excess of the actual costs, the overage shall be refunded to the
applicant within 30 days after such a determination has been made. In addition,
applicants must agree to and must pay for any damage created as a result of the
public assembly or parade.
   (L)   If the City Clerk receives more than one application for a parade or
public assembly to be held at the same time and at the same place, the
applications filed first in time shall take precedence. An event shall be
considered to be “at the same time” if the event is scheduled to commence
within two hours before or after the holding of another event. If the City
Clerk receives an application for more than one parade or public assembly in a
single day, he or she may set a time for the duration of each parade or public
assembly which shall not, without the consent of the group seeking the permit,
be less than three hours.
(2000 Code, § 5.70.070)
§ 114.097 APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   Following the receipt of the application and applicant’s submittal of all
required information the Clerk shall refer the application to the City Council
for its consideration at the next scheduled City Council meeting. In the event
the application is denied, the City Council shall state the reasons for the
denial of the permit. The actions of the City Council shall be subject to
judicial review.
(2000 Code, § 5.70.080)
§ 114.098 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.
   The City Council in denying a permit application pursuant to §
114.096(A) through (F) and (J) shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of a
parade, public assembly or similar activity on a date, at a time, at a location
or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant
desiring to accept an alternate permit shall within two days after notice of
the action by the City Council file a written notice of acceptance with the
City Clerk. An alternative permit shall conform to the requirements of and
shall have the effect of a parade or public assembly permit.
(2000 Code, § 5.70.090)
§ 114.099 NOTICE TO OFFICIALS.
   Immediately upon the issuance of a parade or public assembly permit, the
City Clerk shall send a copy thereof to the Police Chief, the Fire Chief and
the Corporation Counsel.
(2000 Code, § 5.70.100)
§ 114.100 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   Each parade or public assembly permit shall state the following information:
   (A)   Starting time;
   (B)   Minimum speed;
   (C)   Maximum speed;
   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade of public assembly;
   (E)   The portions of the streets to be transversed that may be occupied by
the parade or public assembly;
   (F)   The maximum length of the parade or public assembly in miles or
fractions thereof; and
   (G)   Such other information as the City Clerk and City Council shall find
necessary to insure the enforcement of this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.70.110)
§ 114.101 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions
and with all applicable laws and ordinances. One of the authorized and
responsible leaders of the organization conducting the parade, public assembly
or similar activity, shall carry the parade or public assembly permit upon his
or her person during the conduct of the parade.
(2000 Code, § 5.70.120)
§ 114.102 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES, PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES OR SIMILAR
ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or
interfere with any parade, public assembly or similar activity, or with any
person, vehicle or animal participating or used in such activity.
   (B)   Driving through parades, public assemblies or similar activities. No
driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a
parade, public assembly, or similar activity when such vehicles or persons are
in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade, public assembly, or
similar activity; provided, however, that fire and police vehicles and
ambulances may interrupt a parade, public assembly or similar activity in an
emergency situation.
   (C)   Parking on parade or public assembly route. The City Clerk or City
Council shall have the authority to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a
parade, public assembly or similar activity. The City Clerk or City Council
shall order the posting of signs to such effect and it shall be unlawful for
any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No
person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this
subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.70.130) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.103 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The City Clerk or City Council shall have the authority to revoke a parade
or public assembly permit issued hereunder if at any time, facts are brought to
the attention of the City Clerk or City Council which show that the parade,
public assembly, or similar activity does not, or will not, comply with the
standards for issuance as herein set forth.
(2000 Code, § 5.70.140)
§ 114.104 WAIVER OF PROVISIONS.
   The City Council may, with the consent of all members of the Council present
at any meeting thereof, waive any provision of this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.70.150)
 
§ 114.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of §§
114.001 through
114.013 shall be fined not less than $1,000 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or
noncompliance occurs or continues.
(2000 Code, § 5.10.140)
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §§
114.070 through
114.078, young adult entertainment facilities, shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(2000 Code, § 5.68.100)
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
114.050 through
114.057 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500. Each day a violation
continues or occurs shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to limit such other legal remedies as may be
available to the city under the provisions of the building code or as otherwise
provided by law.
(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 5, passed 3-12-2013)
CHAPTER 115: ELDER CARE
Section
Adult Day Care Centers
   
115.01   License required
   
115.02   License fee
Nursing Homes
   
115.15   Definitions
   
115.16   License required
   
115.17   License application
   
115.18   License fee
   
115.19   Fee exemptions
   
115.20   Display and transfer of licenses; responsibility of licensees
   
115.21   Investigation; issuance and effective period of licenses
   
115.22   Denial of licenses; petition for review
   
115.23   Hearing Board
   
115.24   Revocation or nonrenewal of licenses
   
115.25   Hearings
   
115.26   Minimum standards for buildings
   
115.27   Accommodations; ventilation, sanitation and safety requirements
   
115.28   Isolation rooms
   
115.29   Removal of dead persons
   
115.30   Records
   
115.31   Rules and regulations
   
115.32   Reports of diseases
   
115.33   Inspections
   
115.34   Treatment by spiritual means
   
115.35   Conflict of laws
   
115.36   State Department of Public Health standards, rules and regulations
   
115.37   Conditions for closing homes
   
115.99   Penalty
ADULT DAY CARE CENTERS
§ 115.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating an
adult day care center without first obtaining a license to engage in the
business in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.04.010) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.02 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee is stated in §
110.007(B).
(2000 Code, § 5.04.030) (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006)
NURSING HOMES
§ 115.15 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person making application for a license required by §
115.16.
   HOME FOR THE AGED. Any home operated not for profit under the auspices of a
religious, fraternal, charitable or other organization, or operated not for
profit under an endowment, which, through its ownership or management, and as
its principal objective, provides maintenance, personal care, nursing or
sheltered care to not less than three persons over 60 years of age.
   MAINTENANCE. Food, shelter and laundry.
   NURSING. Professional nursing or practical nursing, as defined in ILCS Ch.
225, Act 70, § 4, as amended, for sick or infirm persons who are under the care
and supervision of licensed medical practitioners.
   NURSING HOME. A private home, institution, building, residence or other
place, whether or not operated for profit, which, through its ownership or
management, provides maintenance, personal care or nursing for three or more
persons, not related to the applicant or owner by blood or marriage, who, by
reason of illness or physical infirmity, require personal care or nursing.
   OWNER. In the case of a licensee who is an individual, means the licensee,
and in the case of a firm, partnership or association, means each member
thereof.
   PERSONAL CARE.  Assistance with meals, dressing, movement, bathing or other
personal needs, or general supervision and oversight of the physical and mental
wellbeing of an individual, exclusive of nursing, which individual, because of
age, physical or mental disability, emotional or behavioral disorder or mental
retardation, is incapable of maintaining a private, independent residence, or
is incapable of managing his or her person, whether or not a conservator has
been appointed for the individual.
   RESIDENT. Any person admitted, for care, to a nursing home, sheltered care
home or home for the aged.
   SHELTERED CARE. Maintenance and personal care.
   SHELTERED CARE HOME.
      (1)   A private boarding home, institution, building, residence or other
place, whether or not operated for profit, which, through its ownership or
management, provides sheltered care to three or more persons who are not
related to the applicant or owner by blood or marriage, or any similar facility
in which maintenance is provided to three or more persons who, by reason of
physical infirmity, require personal care.
      (2)   “Nursing home,” “sheltered care home” and “home for the aged” do
not include the following:
         (a)   A home, institution or other place operated by the federal
government or an agency thereof, the state, the county or the city;
         (b)   A hospital, sanitarium or other institution whose principal
activity or business is the diagnosis, care and treatment of human illness
through the maintenance and operation of an organized facility therefor, which
is required to be licensed under the Hospital Licensing Act, approved July 1,
1953, as amended; and/or
         (c)   Any facility for child care, as defined in the Child Care Act,
ILCS Ch. 225, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq..
(2000 Code, § 5.40.010)
§ 115.16 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, other than the regularly constituted authorities of the United
States, the state, the county or the city, shall conduct or operate any nursing
home, sheltered care home or home for the aged in the city without first
obtaining a license therefor.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.020) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.17 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a license to conduct and operate a nursing home,
sheltered care home or home for the aged shall be made in conformity with the
general requirements of
Chapter 110 relating to applications for licenses. The application shall be
under oath and shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant if an individual, and, if a
firm, partnership or association, the name and address of every member thereof,
and, if a corporation, the name and address thereof and of its officers;
      (2)   The location of the home for which a license is sought;
      (3)   The name of the person under whose management or supervision the
home will be conducted;
      (4)   The number and type of residents for which maintenance, personal
care or nursing is to be provided; and
      (5)   Such information relating to the number, experience and training of
the employees of the home, and of the moral character of the applicant and of
the employees, as the Health Department may deem necessary.
   (B)   Each application shall be accompanied by a statement relative to the
financial status of the applicant.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.030)
§ 115.18 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for a license to operate a nursing home, sheltered care home
or home for the aged shall be as set forth in §
110.007(B).
(Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 115.19 FEE EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Homes which are operated without a charge being made for the care of
residents shall be exempt from payment of the license fee required by §
115.18. An application for a license for such a home shall be accompanied by an
affidavit stating that no charge is made for the care of residents.
   (B)   After investigation by the Health Department and upon the
recommendation of the Department, any home that is not operated for gain, but
where a charge is made for the care of residents, shall be exempt from payment
of the license fee by a specific ordinance of Council. The period of the
exemption shall be set forth in the exempting ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.050)
§ 115.20 DISPLAY AND TRANSFER OF LICENSES; RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEES.
   The license required by this subchapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous
place in the hall or near the main entrance inside the home. A license shall be
valid only in the hands of the person to whom it is issued and it shall not be
the subject of a sale, assignment or other transfer, voluntary or involuntary,
nor shall a license be valid for premises other than those for which it was
originally issued. The licensee shall conform to all standards, rules and
regulations of the Health Department relating to the operation of the types of
homes covered by this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.060) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.21 INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE AND EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF LICENSES.
   The City Clerk, upon the receipt of an application for a license under this
subchapter, shall cause the Health Department, the Fire Department and the
Building Department to make a thorough investigation of the premises proposed
to be licensed and of the applicant. If the minimum standards prescribed in §
115.26 are met, and if the applicant is otherwise qualified, the City Clerk
shall, pursuant to a favorable report from the Departments of their findings,
in writing, issue a license to the applicant to conduct a home of the class
designated at the location specified, which license shall state the maximum
number of residents that may be accommodated at any one time. Any license
issued under this subchapter shall expire December 31 of the year in which it
is issued.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.070)
§ 115.22 DENIAL OF LICENSES; PETITION FOR REVIEW.
   If the application for a license required by this subchapter is denied, the
applicant may, within 30 days thereafter, file a petition for review of the
action denying the application, which petition shall be under oath and shall be
filed with the Hearing Board as provided in this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.080)
§ 115.23 HEARING BOARD.
   The Mayor shall appoint a Hearing Board consisting of the Health
Commissioner, the Fire Chief, the Building Commissioner, the City Attorney and
the City Clerk or a duly qualified employee designated by the head of the
department in which such person is employed. The Board shall pass on
applications for licenses for nursing homes, shelter care homes and homes for
the aged which have been denied for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Failure to meet the minimum standards prescribed in this subchapter;
   (B)   Conviction of the applicant, or if the applicant is a firm,
partnership or association, of any of its members, or if the applicant is a
corporation, of any of its officers or directors, or of the person designated
to manage or supervise the home, of a felony, or of two or more misdemeanors
involving moral turpitude, as shown by a certified copy of the record of the
court of conviction, or, in the case of a conviction of a misdemeanor by a
court not of record, as shown by other evidence, or other satisfactory evidence
that the moral character of the applicant, manager or supervisor of the home is
not reputable;
   (C)   Personnel insufficient in number or unqualified by training or
experience to provide proper and adequate care for the proposed number and type
of residents; or
   (D)   Insufficient financial or other resources to operate and conduct the
home in accordance with this subchapter and the minimum standards, rules and
regulations promulgated under this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.090)
§ 115.24 REVOCATION OR NONRENEWAL OF LICENSES.
   A license may be revoked, or a renewal thereof denied, for any of the
following reasons:
   (A)   Cruelty or indifference to the welfare of a resident;
   (B)   Misappropriation of the property of a resident;
   (C)   Conversion of the property of a resident;
   (D)   A violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter or of the
minimum standards, rules and regulations promulgated under this subchapter; or
   (E)   Any ground upon which an application for a license may be denied as
prescribed in §
115.23.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.100)
§ 115.25 HEARINGS.
   (A)   The Hearing Board may, upon the petition of an applicant whose
petition for a license required by this subchapter has been denied, upon its
own motion or upon the verified complaint, in writing, of any person setting
forth facts which, if proven, would constitute grounds for the denial of an
application for a license, the refusal of renewal of a license and the
revocation of a license, investigate the applicant or licensee. Before denying
an application, refusing to renew a license or revoking a license, the Board
shall notify the applicant or licensee, in writing, of a hearing to be held
thereon. The notice shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing,
which hearing shall not be held less than ten days after the notice is mailed
or delivered in person. The notice shall also state the nature of the charges
or reasons for the Board’s contemplated actions, denial, refusal to renew or
revocation of the license.
   (B)   The hearing shall be conducted by the board or the majority thereof.
The applicant or licensee may appear in person and be represented by counsel at
the hearing, at which time the applicant or licensee shall be afforded an
opportunity to present all relevant matters in support of his or her
application for a license or renewal of a license or in resisting the
revocation thereof. The hearing may be continued to another date if any witness
whose testimony is relevant to the issues of the hearing is unable to be
present on the initial hearing date.
   (C)   The Board shall not be bound by common law or statutory rules of
evidence or by technical or formal rules of procedure, but shall conduct the
hearing in such a manner as seems best calculated to result in substantial
justice.
   (D)   The Board shall make findings of fact and render a decision which
shall be entered upon the record of the Board. The applicant may review the
decision as provided in this subchapter.
   (E)   All final administrative decisions rendered by the Board shall be
subject to judicial review pursuant to the Administrative Review Act, ILCS Ch.
735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq., and the rules adopted pursuant thereto. The term
“administrative decision” is defined in ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, § 3-101.
   (F)   The Board, at its expense, shall provide a stenographer to take the
testimony and preserve a record of all proceedings under this subchapter. The
notice of hearing, the complaint, all other documents in the nature of
pleadings, written motions filed in proceedings, the transcript of testimony
and the findings of fact and decisions shall be the record of the proceedings.
The Board shall furnish a transcript of the record to any person interested as
a party to the hearing upon payment therefor of $1 per page for each original
transcript and $0.75 per page for each carbon copy thereof. However, the charge
for any part of the transcript ordered or paid for previous to the writing of
the original record shall be $0.50 per page.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.110)
§ 115.26 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BUILDINGS.
   A building used as a nursing home, sheltered care home or home for the aged
shall comply with the building, zoning and fire regulations of the city, and
with the minimum standards for nursing homes, sheltered care homes and homes
for the aged as prescribed by the Health Department. Those buildings in
existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this
subchapter (Ordinance 504, passed July 27, 1970) and used for purposes set
forth in §
115.15, shall have a reasonable time to comply with any provision of this
subchapter affecting zoning, building and fire regulations. The time for
compliance shall be determined by the Department and the Fire Chief, jointly.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.120)
§ 115.27 ACCOMMODATIONS; VENTILATION, SANITATION AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In every nursing home, sheltered care home or home for the aged, each
room occupied or to be occupied by a resident shall be of such dimensions as
will give the resident not less than 400 cubic feet of air space. Every room
shall have at least one window connecting with the external air for each four
beds. The window shall be of such dimensions as will secure to each resident at
least 1,500 cubic feet of fresh air per hour by ventilation. If the window does
not secure 1,500 cubic feet of fresh air per hour by natural ventilation, then
each room shall be fitted with such appliances for ventilation as will secure
to each resident in the room at least 1,500 cubic feet of fresh air per hour.
Each bed shall have at least 40 square feet of floor space. In every room or
dormitory containing more than one bed, the beds shall be arranged so as to
leave a passageway of not less than two feet horizontally on all sides of the
beds.
   (B)   Each ward or wing of the home shall have running water furnished in
one or more places, either in the ward or wing or convenient thereto so that
the same is adequate and convenient to the occupants thereof. The plumbing,
water closets, bathrooms and sanitary appliances and equipment shall be
constructed in accordance with ordinances relating thereto. The floor of the
cellar or basement in the building used as a home shall be properly cemented so
as to be watertight.
   (C)   The halls of each floor shall be open to the external air with
suitable windows and shall have no room or other obstruction at the end
thereof, unless sufficient light and ventilation is otherwise provided for the
halls. The building as a whole shall be provided with adequate and proper fire
escapes, stairways or inclines for exits.
   (D)   All homes, including the culinary department, dining room, laundry,
laboratory, morgue and post-mortem rooms connected with the same, shall be
equipped from May 15 to November 15 with doors, screens and other appliances
necessary for the exclusion of flies.
   (E)   If a single or multiple dwelling is used for a home, and the dwelling
has sleeping accommodations above the first story, it shall be provided with at
least two stairways, each of which shall be not less than three feet wide. Each
such stairway shall be enclosed with walls, partitions, floors and ceilings of
noncombustible construction or of construction consisting of wood studs or wood
joists and a noncombustible surface material providing fire resistance of not
less than one hour, the door openings of which shall be protected by self-
closing Class B fire-resistive doors. A separate door exit shall be provided
for each such stairway and for each exit from the basement to the outside of
the building.
   (F)   Where sleeping accommodations are provided in the third story of a
building, they may not exceed six in number and may be used only for the
manager’s family and staff, if none of them is a patient. No person in any home
shall occupy any part of a basement as a habitable room.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.130) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.28 ISOLATION ROOMS.
   (A)   Each nursing home, sheltered care home or home for the aged shall be
provided with a suitable room, approved by the Health Department, to be used
for cases of serious illness, terminal cases and isolation of cases of
contagious, infectious, epidemic or communicable diseases. The room shall have
a stationary washstand with a hot and cold running water supply.
   (B)   Every person conducting or operating a nursing home, sheltered care
home or home for the aged in the city shall cooperate with the Department in
minimizing the danger of transmission of communicable diseases as set forth in
the rules and regulations promulgated by the Department.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.140)
§ 115.29 REMOVAL OF DEAD PERSONS.
   (A)   There shall be provided in each nursing home, sheltered care home or
home for the aged a suitable room or area, approved by the Health Department,
for the proper care of the dead pending their removal after being pronounced
dead by a duly licensed physician of the state.
   (B)   No person acting as superintendent or manager, or who is otherwise in
charge or control of any nursing home, sheltered care home or home for the
aged, nor any person connected with any such home, in any capacity whatsoever
as a nurse, physician or attendant, shall order, permit or allow the body of
any resident or person who has been under care in the home, and who has died
therein, to be removed from the home at any time within 24 hours after the hour
of death, unless the removal of the body is authorized, in writing, by some
member of the immediate family of the deceased person or by some other person
legally authorized to order or permit the removal. No body shall be kept at any
such home longer than 36 hours after death without permission from the
Department.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.150) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.30 RECORDS.
   (A)   Each nursing home, sheltered care home or home for the aged shall
maintain individual records for each resident. The records shall include the
resident’s admission record, which shall show the name, address, age, sex,
marital status, information required for the filling in of the death
certificate and the date of admission and discharge or disposition of the
resident, a medical record, a physician’s order record, nursing notes and a
list of the resident’s belongings.
   (B)   Accurate records of financial transactions involving use of the
resident’s funds shall be on file in the nursing home, sheltered care home or
homes for the aged.
   (C)   Personnel files shall be maintained for all employees, which files
shall include records of education, experience and findings of physical
examinations as to physical and mental fitness and shall also show freedom from
any communicable disease. Daily work and time schedules of employees shall be
maintained.
   (D)   Each home shall maintain a permanent residents’ registry book in which
the name of each resident is entered in chronological order with the date and
number of entry.
   (E)   All records shall be open at all times to the inspection of the Health
Department or its duly authorized representative.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.160)
§ 115.31 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Nursing homes, sheltered care homes and homes for the aged shall comply with
rules and regulations set forth by the Health Department. In addition, the
Department may adopt and enforce rules and regulations relating to the
operation and conduct of the homes, and to the care, treatment, rehabilitation,
recreation and maintenance of the residents thereof, as it deems necessary.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.170)
§ 115.32 REPORTS OF DISEASES.
   (A)   Every person conducting or operating a nursing home, sheltered care
home or home for the aged in the city shall make reports to the Health
Department as it deems necessary, by telephone and by mail, of all epidemic,
communicable or contagious diseases. The reports shall contain the names and
residences of all persons suffering from the diseases, together with such other
information as may be required by the Department.
   (B)   All reports required under this section shall be made in full upon
forms furnished for that purpose by the Department and shall be signed by the
chief physician, manager or licensee in charge of the home.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.180)
§ 115.33 INSPECTIONS.
   Every nursing home, sheltered care home and home for the aged shall be open
at all reasonable times to inspection by the Health Department, the Building
Department and the Fire Department, as often as is deemed necessary.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.190)
§ 115.34 TREATMENT BY SPIRITUAL MEANS.
   Nothing in this subchapter or in the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
hereto shall be construed as authorizing the medical supervision, regulation or
control of the remedial care or treatment of residents or patients in any home
or institution conducted for those who rely upon treatment by prayer or
spiritual means in accordance with the creed or tenet of any well-recognized
church or religious denomination. A license for such a home is required and all
remaining rules, regulations and minimum standards shall apply.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.200)
§ 115.35 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   Notwithstanding any provision in this subchapter to the contrary, all
persons licensed under this subchapter shall comply with ILCS Ch. 210, Act 45,
§§ 1-101 et seq. Where there is a conflict in standards and regulations of the
Act and this subchapter, the stricter or higher standard or regulation shall
govern.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.210)
§ 115.36 STATE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH STANDARDS, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The following minimum standards, rules and regulations of the State
Department of Public Health are adopted and made a part of this subchapter by
reference:
      (1)   Minimum Standards, Rules and Regulations for the Licensing of
Sheltered Care Facilities;
      (2)   Minimum Standards, Rules and Regulations for the Licensing of
Skilled Nursing Facilities; and
      (3)   Minimum Standards, Rules and Regulations for the Licensing of
Intermediate Care Facilities.
   (B)   Where there is a conflict in the standards, rules and regulations
adopted in division (A) of this section and any provision of this subchapter,
the stricter or higher standard, rule or regulation shall govern. Three copies
of each of the minimum standards, rules and regulations are on file and have
been on file for at least 15 days prior to the passage of the ordinance
codified in this subchapter, for public inspection, use and examination.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.220)
§ 115.37 CONDITIONS FOR CLOSING HOMES.
   (A)   In the event of a conviction by any court of record of any person for
a violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter relating to the health,
safety and accommodations of patients or residents, the Health Department is
authorized to close a nursing home, sheltered care home or home for the aged
and to cause its vacation of all residents or patients therefrom, pending the
repairs, alterations or additions necessary to make it safe and proper for the
occupancy of its patients or residents and to make it comply with this
subchapter.
   (B)   Whenever an inspection of such a home discloses that the continued
operation of the home would be an immediate and serious menace to public health
and safety, the Health Commissioner is authorized to close the home forthwith.
(2000 Code, § 5.40.230)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   In addition to the revocation and suspension of any license, whoever
violates any of the provisions of §§
115.01 and
115.02 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(2000 Code, § 5.04.040)
CHAPTER 116: CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS
Section
Cable Television Franchises
   
116.001   Purposes
   
116.002   Definitions
   
116.003   Rules of construction
Administration and Enforcement
   
116.015   Cable Commission
   
116.016   Franchise required; authority
   
116.017   Compliance with applicable laws and regulations
   
116.018   Diligence of grantee
   
116.019   Notification of City Clerk prior to applications to FCC
   
116.020   Grantee responsible for compliance
   
116.021   Recourse and acknowledgments of grantee
   
116.022   Reimbursement of city expenses
   
116.023   Rights of city
   
116.024   Regulation and administration by city
   
116.025   Transfer of city’s rights, powers and duties
   
116.026   Legal proceedings
   
116.027   Arbitration
   
116.028   Unlawful acts
   
116.029   Amendments
Rules and Regulations
   
116.040   Terms and conditions of franchises
   
116.041   Selection of grantees
   
116.042   Franchise agreement
   
116.043   Cable/video service provider fee and PEG access support fee
   
116.044   Technical standards
   
116.045   Services
   
116.046   Construction of the system
   
116.047   Operation and maintenance of the system
   
116.048   Subscriber privacy
   
116.049   Cable and Video Customer Protection
   
116.050   Rates and charges
   
116.051   Employment discrimination prohibited
   
116.052   Preferential practices prohibited
   
116.053   Records and reports; inspections
   
116.054   Nonliability of city; insurance
   
116.055   Reviews, modifications and renewals of franchise
   
116.056   Revocation of franchise
   
116.057   Conditions for termination of franchise
   
116.058   Procedures following revocation or expiration of franchise
   
116.059   Lesser sanctions
Telecommunications Providers
   
116.070   Definitions
   
116.071   Recitals
   
116.072   Registration of telecommunications providers
   
116.073   Adoption of fee
   
116.074   Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
   
116.075   Collection, enforcement and administration of fee
   
116.076   Audit
   
116.077   Additional regulations
   
116.078   Waiver and fee implementation
   
116.079   Compliance with other laws
   
116.080   Existing franchises and licenses
   
116.081   Additional remedies
   
116.999   Penalty
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
§ 116.001 PURPOSES.
   The purposes of this subchapter, §§
116.015 through
116.029 and
116.040 through
116.059 are to provide for the granting of nonexclusive franchises to
construct, operate and maintain broadband communication networks in the public
ways of the city, to provide specifications, procedures and standards for the
same, to provide for the regulation of the networks and to provide for the
payment to the city for the privilege of exercising the rights granted by the
franchises.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.010)
§ 116.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AFFILIATES OF ANOTHER PERSON.
      (1)   Any person directly or indirectly owning, controlling or holding,
with power to vote, 5% or more of the outstanding voting securities of such
other person;
      (2)   Any person, 5% or more of whose outstanding voting securities are
directly or indirectly owned, controlled or held, with power to vote, by such
other person;
      (3)   Any person directly or indirectly controlling, controlled by, or
under common control with, such other person; and
      (4)   Any officer, director, partner, copartner or executive employee of
such other person.
   ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES. All revenues received by a grantee, its affiliates
and/or subsidiaries, from and in connection with the operation of a broadband
telecommunications network (BTN) in the city, and all revenues generated by the
network or from the use of the network, including, but not limited to, retail
sales of personal property, data transmission, alarm or signal transmission,
advertising revenue, charges to subscribers for basic service, pay service,
two-way service and installation and any and all revenue received from any
source whatsoever for use of the network for the transmission of electronic or
microwave impulses, provided that the revenue may lawfully be included in the
base on which the city may calculate the franchise fee herein. ANNUAL GROSS
REVENUES does not include sales taxes or other taxes or fees which are
separately billed to subscribers by the grantee or which are collected from
subscribers for remittance to a governmental agency or other third party.
   BASIC SERVICE. The service package offered by the grantee to subscribers,
which package includes, but is not limited to, the signals referred to in §
116.050(A) and at least one municipal access channel, at least one educational
access channel and at least one public interest channel. If more than one
service package meets such conditions, then the service package which is
offered at the lowest rate shall constitute the basic service.
   BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK (BTN) or NETWORK. All of the component
physical, operational and programming elements of any NETWORK of cables and
optical, electrical or electronic equipment, including cable television,
designed, constructed, wired or used for the purpose of producing, receiving,
amplifying and transmitting, by coaxial cable, fiber optics, microwave or other
means, audio and/or audio/visual electrical impulses of television, radio and
other intelligences, either analog or digital, for sale or use by the
inhabitants of the city, including, without limitation, antennas, cables,
wires, lines, towers, amplifiers, conductors, converters, equipment and
facilities.
   COMMENCE OPERATION. That time and date when operation of the network is
considered to have commenced, which shall be when sufficient distribution
facilities have been installed so as to permit the offering of full network
service to at least 20% of the potential subscribers in the franchise
territory.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or
elected successor with respect to federal regulation and licensing in
connection with the subject matter of this subchapter.
   FRANCHISE. The nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this subchapter to
construct and operate a broadband telecommunications network along the public
ways in the city. The authorization, in whatever form granted, does not include
any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on
a business within the city as required by other ordinances and laws of the
city.
   FULL NETWORK SERVICE. Basic service and all pay services. FULL NETWORK
SERVICE does not include two-way service.
   GRANTEE. Any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this subchapter and
under the granting franchise ordinance, its present subsidiaries and affiliates
and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.
   PAY SERVICE. Any service package for which a monthly or other service charge
is made.
   PUBLIC SCHOOL. Any public elementary or high school, and any private school
having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in a public elementary or high
school and having no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes.
   REASONABLE NOTICE. Written notice addressed to the grantee at its office,
which notice shall be certified and postmarked not less than four days prior to
the day on which the party giving the notice commences any action which
requires the giving of notice. In computing the four days, Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays recognized by the city shall be excluded.
   SALE. Includes any SALE, exchange, barter or offer for SALE.
   SERVICE PACKAGE. One or more communications channels which are offered as a
unit by the grantee to subscribers and for which a separately identifiable
charge is made.
   STREET. Any of the following ways that have been dedicated to the public or
are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or
by others and located within the city limits: STREETS, roadways, highways,
avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public
ways and extensions and additions thereto, together with such other public
property and areas that the city permits to be included within the definition
of STREET from time to time.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person receiving a service package.
   SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED. That sufficient distribution facilities have been
installed by the grantee so as to permit the offering of full network service
to at least 90% of the potential subscribers in the franchise territory.
   TWO-WAY SERVICE. Any service which involves the transmission of a signal
from a subscriber to a facility maintained by the grantee as part of the
network. TWO-WAY SERVICE includes, but is not limited to, fire, security and
medical alert systems.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.020)
§ 116.003 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   This subchapter shall be construed and interpreted according to the
following principles.
   (A)   All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with this subchapter are
repealed.
   (B)   Words in the present tense include the future.
   (C)   Words importing the singular number may extend to and include the
plural, words importing the plural number may extend to and include the
singular, and words in the masculine gender shall include the female gender.
   (D)   The specification in this section of principles to apply in the
construction and interpretation of this subchapter shall not be a limitation as
to other applicable principles.
   (E)   Whenever this subchapter sets forth any time for any act to be
performed by or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed of the
essence and any failure of the grantee to so perform within the time allotted
shall always be sufficient grounds for the city to terminate, cancel and revoke
the franchise or use other remedies.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.030)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 116.015 CABLE COMMISSION
   (A)   Created. There is hereby created the Cable Commission, which shall be
advisory to the City Council and to city staff as requested by the Council.
   (B)   Intent and purpose. It shall be the intent and purpose of the Cable
Commission to study and evaluate the operation of cable communications systems
within Oak Forest, including the quality and effectiveness of service to cable
customers, pursuant to the cable television franchise regulations and the grant
of any franchise.
   (C)   Commission membership.
      (1)   Appointment. the Cable Commission shall consist of seven members
appointed by the Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council.
The City Administrator, or his or her designee, and an alderperson-liaison
appointed by the Mayor shall be ex officio non-voting members of the
Commission. The Cable Commission shall serve with compensation as may be
determined by the City Council.
      (2)   Vacancies. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same
manner in which original appointments are required to be made.
      (3)   Chairperson. The Mayor shall designate one of the members of the
Commission to be Chairperson. The Chairperson shall be appointed annually in
May of each year.
      (4)   Conflict of interest. Any member who has participated or reasonably
anticipates participating in the production of any program presented for
broadcast on the access channel(s) shall recuse himself or herself from any
Commission deliberations regarding the program, if any.
      (5)   City employees. No person employed by the city to perform services
relating to the government access channel or public access channel may serve on
the Cable Commission.
   (D)   Meetings.
      (1)   Regular meetings. Regular meetings shall be monthly on a day
certain as determined by the Chairperson of the Commission. All regular and
special meetings of the Commission shall be noticed and conducted in a manner
consistent with the Open Meetings Act.
      (2)   Special meetings. Special meetings of the Commission may be called
by the Chairperson, or any three members, from time to time. Requests for
special meetings by three or more members must be received by the Chairperson
no less than five days prior to the requested date of meeting.
      (3)   Quorum. A majority of the Commission members shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum to transact any Commission business at any regular or
special meeting of the Commission, including the conduct of public hearings.
Less than a quorum may adjourn a meeting from time to time until a quorum can
be achieved.
      (4)   Manner of acting. The act of a majority of the members present at a
meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the Commission.
      (5)   Rules of procedure. The Commission shall enact rules of procedure
not inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purpose
of the Commission. In the absence of any contrary rules, Robert’s Rules of
Order shall govern the deliberations of the Commission.
   (E)   Duties. The Commission shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   Counsel and advise the Mayor and City Council on all matters
pertaining to cable communications within the city;
      (2)   Review and evaluate and, upon direction of the City Council,
conduct public hearings on any proposed changes in the rates, fees or service
charges, as required or permitted by the cable television franchise
regulations;
      (3)   Review the internal or external systems and the hardware and
software used, and recommend any upgrading deemed necessary or advisable by the
Commission;
      (4)   Recommend to the Mayor and City Council any proposed changes in the
cable television franchise regulations deemed necessary or advisable by the
Commission;
      (5)   Review the quality of access programming and provide for rules for
the use and operation of the access station(s) made available by the
franchisees;
      (6)    Review and evaluate and, upon direction of the City Council,
conduct public hearings on any alleged violations of the cable regulations, an
ordinance granting a franchise, a franchise agreement or state or federal laws
and regulations, including but not limited to customer service standards, and
recommend any penalty, fine, sanction or liquidated damages.
      (7)   Perform such other duties and functions related to cable
communications as may be requested of it by the Mayor and City Council.
   (F)   Reports and records.
      (1)   The Commission shall keep records and minutes of its meetings,
showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it.
      (2)   The Commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting to
the Mayor and City Council in a timely manner.
      (3)   The Commission shall submit its recommendations to the City
Administrator in writing, together with any findings of fact necessary to
support the recommendations.
(Ord. 2007-06-0108O, passed 6-12-2007)
§ 116.016 FRANCHISE REQUIRED; AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Franchise required. No person shall construct, install, maintain or
operate, on or within any street, any equipment or facilities for the
distribution of television signals, radio signals or other intelligences,
either analog or digital, over a BTN to any subscriber, unless a franchise
authorizing the use of the streets has first been obtained pursuant to this
subchapter, and thereafter only while such person is legally operating under
the terms and provisions of the franchise.
   (B)   Scope of authority. Any franchise granted under this subchapter shall
give to the grantee, subject to this subchapter, the right and privilege, at
its own expense, to construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain in, upon,
along, above, over and under the streets, such towers, antennas, cables,
electronic equipment and other network appurtenances as are necessary for the
operation of the network in the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.050) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.017 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   Each grantee, at its expense, shall comply with all laws, orders and
regulations of federal, state and municipal authorities and with any directive
of any public officer, pursuant to law, who legally imposes any regulation,
order or duty upon the grantee with respect to the franchise.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.060)
§ 116.018 DILIGENCE OF GRANTEE.
   Each grantee shall diligently apply for all necessary permits and
authorizations required in the conduct of its business and shall diligently
pursue the acquisition thereof, including necessary pole attachment agreements,
necessary authorizations from the Federal Aviation Agency to construct such
receiving antenna towers as may be required and necessary authorizations or
waivers from the FCC, and shall assist the city in filing its application to
the FCC for waiver of franchise fee limitations.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.070)
§ 116.019 NOTIFICATION OF CITY CLERK PRIOR TO APPLICATIONS TO FCC.
   No grantee shall apply for a waiver, exception or declaratory ruling from
the FCC or from any other federal or state regulatory agency without prior
written notification to the City Clerk.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.080) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.020 GRANTEE RESPONSIBLE FOR COMPLIANCE.
   A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and
conditions of this subchapter or of the franchise agreement by any failure of
the city, upon any one or more occasions, to insist upon the grantee’s
performance or to seek the grantee’s compliance with any one or more of the
terms and conditions.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.090)
§ 116.021 RECOURSE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS OF GRANTEE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this subchapter, the grantee
shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense
or damages arising out of this subchapter or because of the city’s enforcement
of this subchapter.
   (B)   The grantee shall expressly acknowledge that upon accepting the right,
privilege and franchise granted by this subchapter, it does so relying upon its
own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city in
connection with the BTN and this subchapter. By the acceptance of the franchise
granted by this subchapter, the grantee agrees that it will not, at any time,
set up against the city, in any claim or proceeding, any provision, condition
or term of this subchapter as being unreasonable, arbitrary or void or beyond
the power or authority of the city to make a part of this subchapter, except as
to those matters pre-empted by federal or state law.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.100)
§ 116.022 REIMBURSEMENT OF CITY EXPENSES.
   In connection with the grant of all franchises, each successful grantee
shall reimburse the city for actual expenses incurred by the city in granting a
cable television franchise, including expenses incurred for legal services and
consultants. Upon receipt of all the expenses, the City Treasurer shall
transmit to the grantee an itemized listing of all of the expenses and the
grantee shall then reimburse the city within 30 days after receipt of the
listing.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.110)
§ 116.023 RIGHTS OF CITY.
   (A)   Eminent domain. Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed or
construed to impair or affect, in any way or to any extent, the right of the
city to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the
exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair and just value. Nothing in
this subchapter shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge,
whether for a term or in perpetuity, the city’s right of eminent domain.
   (B)   Legal rights and powers. There is reserved to the city every right or
power which is required to be reserved in this subchapter or provided by law,
and the grantee, by its acceptance of the franchise, agrees to be bound thereby
and to comply with any action or requirement of the city in its exercise of
such rights or powers, whether heretofore or hereafter enacted or established.
Without limitation of the foregoing, the right is reserved to the city to adopt
and enforce, in addition to the terms, conditions and provisions of this
subchapter and of otherwise existing applicable ordinances, such additional
ordinances, rules and regulations as it finds necessary in the exercise of its
police powers, provided that the ordinances, rules and regulations are
reasonable and not in material or substantial conflict with the rights granted
in this subchapter.
   (C)   Waivers. Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision of
this subchapter shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any
governmental right or power of the city, subject to the rights of a grantee
under its franchise and the franchise agreement.
   (D)   FCC jurisdiction. If the FCC or any other federal or state body or
agency now or hereafter exercises any paramount jurisdiction over the subject
matter of any franchise granted under this subchapter, then to the extent that
such jurisdiction pre-empts or precludes the exercise of like jurisdiction by
the city, the jurisdiction of the city shall terminate. However, the city shall
thereupon have the right to modify or amend any of the provisions of this
subchapter and of the franchise agreement to such reasonable extent as may be
necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this subchapter.
   (E)   City’s contract rights. The preemption or preclusion by the state of
the exercise by the city of any of its police powers shall not diminish,
impair, alter or affect any contractual benefit to the city or the grantee or
any contractual obligation of the grantee under any franchise issued under this
subchapter. Any and all rights, powers, privileges and authorizations arising
under this subchapter or any franchise agreement are each and all declared by
the city and any grantee accepting any franchise to be contractual in nature
and to be for the benefit of the city.
   (F)   Rules and regulations. There is reserved to the city the right to
impose rules and regulations, reasonably required, in order to better carry out
the purpose and intent of this subchapter. Before any such rules and
regulations are adopted, the city shall give notice to the grantee and afford
the grantee an opportunity to be heard.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.120)
§ 116.024 REGULATION AND ADMINISTRATION BY CITY.
   (A)   Continuing supervision by Council. Council shall have continuing
supervision over the operation of any franchise granted under this subchapter.
Routine responsibilities in the administration of this subchapter and any
franchise agreement shall be performed by the cable television committee.
   (B)   Responsibility of City Treasurer. The City Treasurer shall review and
audit all reports and filings submitted to the city as required in this
subchapter, insofar as they apply to the financial operation of the BTN.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.130)
§ 116.025 TRANSFER OF CITY’S RIGHTS, POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee or
department of the city, shall be subject to transfer by the city to any other
officer, employee or department of the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.140)
§ 116.026 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS.
   A grantee shall, at its sole risk and expense, upon demand of the city made
by the City Attorney, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions or other
legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative,
legislative or otherwise, brought, instituted or had by third persons or duly
constituted authorities against or affecting the city, its officers, boards,
commissions, agents or employees, and which arise out of or pertain to the
exercise or the enjoyment of the grantee’s franchise or the granting thereof by
the city, provided that neither the grantee nor the city shall make or enter
into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, cause of action,
action, suit or other proceeding without first obtaining the written consent of
the other.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.150)
§ 116.027 ARBITRATION.
   At the option of either the city or the grantee, any matter in controversy
or dispute between the city and the grantee may be submitted to arbitration in
all cases where the judgment of a court of law could be sought. This option
shall be exercised by serving written notice. The arbitration shall be
conducted in accordance with the rules of the American Arbitration Association.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.160)
§ 116.028 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Interception of communications. No person shall make any unauthorized
connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or
otherwise, with any part of a grantee’s BTN, for the purpose of enabling the
person or any other person to receive any signal, information or intelligence
transmitted over the network, without payment to the grantee of the full amount
properly due for the signal, information or intelligence.
   (B)   Tampering with equipment. No person, without the consent of the owner,
shall wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any cable, wire or other equipment
used for the distribution of signals, information or intelligence over a
grantee’s network.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.170) Penalty, §
116.999
§ 116.029 AMENDMENTS.
   Council may amend this subchapter or the franchise agreement whenever
necessary to enable the grantee to take advantage of developments in the field
of transmission of communication signals which will afford it an opportunity to
more effectively, efficiently or economically serve its customers. However,
this section shall not be construed to require the city to make any such
amendment.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.180)
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 116.040 TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF FRANCHISES.
   (A)   Exclusivity. Franchises granted under this chapter are not exclusive.
The city reserves the right to grant other franchises to other persons at any
time.
   (B)   Effective period. Each franchise shall take effect and be in force as
provided in this chapter for 15 years from the effective date as provided in §
116.041(F), subject, however, to the right of the city to terminate the
franchise as provided in this chapter.
   (C)   Noninterference with use of streets. The right and privilege granted
by a franchise shall be exercised so as not to interfere with the use of the
streets by the city and such others as may be designated by the city to use
such streets. The city may demand the removal of cables or equipment that have
been constructed by the grantee when the city believes that the same is
interfering with the use of the streets.
   (D)   Transfers.
      (1)   No franchise shall be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or
disposed of, whether by way of sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise,
without, in each case, the prior written consent of the city, and then only
after the distribution facilities have been substantially completed and under
such conditions as the city may establish. The consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (D)(1) of this section,
a franchise may be mortgaged, pledged or assigned as security for the financing
of the related BTN. The mortgage, pledge or assignment may be made without the
consent of the city, but any such mortgage, pledge or assignment shall be
subject to the terms and conditions of the franchise and the related franchise
agreement and to the rights of the city under this chapter.
      (3)   Reference is made to division (I)(1) of this section for the effect
of changes in ownership or control of the grantee and to division (I)(2) of
this section for rules covering control of a network by a financial
institution.
      (4)   Reference is made to §
116.057 for transfers in connection with insolvency proceedings.
   (E)   Territory.
      (1)   Each franchise shall relate to the territorial limits of the city
and to any area henceforth added thereto during the term of the franchise.
Subject to §
116.046, the grantee shall be required to extend the network to and to offer
the services of the network to potential subscribers within the franchise
territory where there are at least a total of 40 residential dwelling units
and/or occupied commercial or industrial structures per line mile.
      (2)   Where the density of residential dwellings and occupied commercial
or industrial structures, adverse terrain or other factors render extension of
the system and offer of services impractical or technically infeasible, or
create an economic hardship, the city may, upon petition of the grantee, either
waive the extension of the network into such areas or allow the extension and
offer of services on such special terms, conditions and provisions as are
reasonable and fair to the city, the grantee and potential subscribers in the
areas.
   (F)   Specification of privileges and exemptions. No privilege or exemption
shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted except those
specifically prescribed in this chapter.
   (G)   Obligations of grantee to obtain other permits. A franchise shall not
relieve the grantee of any obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit
space from any department of the city, a utility company or others maintaining
utilities in streets.
   (H)   Obligation of successors and assignees. A franchise shall be binding
upon the grantee and all successors, lessees or assignees as may be approved by
the city.
   (I)   Transactions affecting ownership or control.
      (1)   (a)   Express approval of Council, which shall not be unreasonably
withheld, shall be required where ownership or control of more than 10% of the
right of control of or interest in the franchise or the grantee is acquired by
a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already owns or
controls 10% or more of the right of control or interest, singularly or
collectively. Transfer from a subsidiary to a parent corporation or vice versa
shall not be considered change of control.
         (b)   At the time a franchise is granted, and annually thereafter, the
grantee shall file with the city a current list of its owners, partners (both
general and limited), officers and directors, together with a list of
shareholders having 5% or more of its stock if the grantee is a corporation.
      (2)   Any financial institution having a pledge of or other form of
security interest in a franchise, or in the assets of a grantee, for the
advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the BTN, shall
notify the city whenever it or its designee satisfactory to the city takes
control and operates the network. However, the financial institution shall also
submit a plan for the operation that will ensure continued service and
compliance with all franchise obligations during the term the financial
institution exercises control over the network. The financial institution shall
not exercise control over the network for a period exceeding one year, unless
extended by Council, at its discretion, and during the time it shall have the
right to petition the city to transfer the franchise to another grantee. If the
city finds that any transfer, after considering the legal, financial,
character, technical and other public interest qualities of the applicant, is
satisfactory, the city may transfer and assign the rights and obligations of
the franchise consistent with the public interest. The consent of the city to
the transfer shall not be unreasonably withheld.
      (3)   As used in this section, “grantee” does not include any affiliate
of the grantee.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.190) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.041 SELECTION OF GRANTEES.
   (A)   Applications; fee. Applications for an original franchise granted
under this chapter shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable filing fee of $500. The applications shall contain written
information which is responsive to requirements established from time to time
by Council.
   (B)   Acceptance of certain applications. Applications for a franchise which
were submitted to and accepted by the city prior to October 22, 1980, shall be
deemed to be in compliance with division (A) of this section. The provisions
for the filing fee shall not be applicable to the applications.
   (C)   Criteria for evaluation of applications. Applications for a BTN
franchise will be evaluated according to the following criteria.
      (1)   Experience. Preference may be given to applicants that can give
evidence of providing dependable and complete service to other communities and
that have established a record of excellent construction practices, the ability
to meet deadlines and good planning and marketing practices.
      (2)   Financial stability. Preference may be given to applicants that
present evidence of financial resources which will ensure that the applicant
will have the ability to complete the entire network in the franchise area
within the time period set forth in §
116.046(A).
      (3)   System design. Preference may be given to a system which contains
the flexibility to adjust to new technological development and which indicates
that high quality equipment will be used and that high quality maintenance
practices will be followed.
      (4)   Services. Preference may be given to the applicant that proposes to
provide superior programming. In determining what constitutes superior
programming, particular consideration will be given to local origination and
the resources which an applicant proposes to devote to local origination in
order to make it interesting, innovative and financially feasible.
      (5)   Local studio facilities. Preference may be given to applicants that
propose to maintain studio facilities within the city.
      (6)   Rate schedules. Preference may be given to applicants with the most
reasonable installation and subscriber rate schedules. However, the schedules
must be justified in financial pro forma statements by the use of realistic
levels of penetration.
      (7)   Local ownership and control. The degree of local ownership and
control of an applicant may be taken into account.
   (D)   Priority. The criteria set forth in division (C) of this section are
not listed in any order of priority.
   (E)   Procedures for granting a franchise. If Council determines that a
franchise should be granted under this chapter, Council will then proceed as
follows.
      (1)   Council shall, by motion, make a tentative selection of the
applicant. This action shall not constitute the award of a franchise and shall
not confer any rights upon the applicant, except to proceed in accordance with
this division.
      (2)   The proper officers of the city and the applicant shall discuss the
terms of the franchise agreement described in §
116.042.
      (3)   If the city and the applicant reach agreement as to the terms and
conditions of the franchise agreement, the agreement shall be presented to
Council for approval and authorization for execution by the Mayor.
      (4)   Council shall then, by ordinance, grant a franchise to the
applicant.
   (F)   Effective date of franchise. The effective date of a franchise shall
be the date on which the ordinance referred to in division (E)(4) of this
section is adopted by Council.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.200)
§ 116.042 FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Agreement required. No franchise shall be granted under this chapter
unless the applicant and the city have executed a franchise agreement which
shall set forth the terms and provisions of the franchise.
   (B)   Contents. Each franchise agreement shall contain the following express
representations by the grantee:
      (1)   The grantee has carefully read the terms and conditions of this
chapter and the franchise agreement and accepts all of the terms and conditions
and agrees to abide by the same;
      (2)   The grantee acknowledges that it has carefully read the terms and
conditions of this chapter and expressly waives any claim that any provision of
this chapter is unreasonable, arbitrary or void, except as to those provisions
which are pre-empted now or hereafter by superseding provisions of federal or
state law, in accordance with §
116.023(D);
      (3)   The grantee acknowledges that it has not been induced to accept the
franchise by any promise, oral or written, by or on behalf of the city or by
any third person, regarding any term or condition of this chapter or of the
franchise agreement not expressed therein; and
      (4)   The grantee represents that no promise or inducement, oral or
written, has been made to any city employee or official regarding receipt of
the franchise.
   (C)   Additional conditions or provisions.
      (1)   In addition to those matters required to be included in the
franchise agreement by virtue of this chapter, the franchise agreement shall
contain such further conditions or provisions as may be included in the
grantee’s proposal and/or negotiated between the city and the grantee, except
that no condition or provision shall conflict with any provision of this
chapter or other law.
      (2)   In case of such a conflict, or in case of any ambiguity between any
terms or provisions of the franchise agreement and this chapter, the words of
this chapter shall control.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.210)
§ 116.043 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
      COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
      GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including,
without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received
by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable
service or video service within the holder’s cable service or video service
area within the city.
         (a)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
            1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service;
            2.   Event-based charges for cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges;
            3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video
service equipment;
            4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including but not limited to activation, installation and repair
charges;
            5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable
service or video service, including but not limited to service order and
service termination charges;
            6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges
and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments;
            7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service within the
city. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the city
divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional
or national compensation arrangement;
            8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder’s network,
such as a “home shopping” or similar channel, subject to division (a)10. of
this definition;
            9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is
bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or
applications, the portion of the holder’s revenue attributable to the other
services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the GROSS REVENUE
unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the
revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of
business; and
            10.   The service provider fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-801(b).
         (b)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:
            1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad
debt, subject to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi);
            2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service;
            3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder’s books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards or orders;
            4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in
which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser’s subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the city and pay the fee permitted by ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) with respect to the service;
            5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes;
            6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers; and
            7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping” or similar
vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part
of the cable service or video service.
         (c)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of GROSS REVENUES to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
      HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, § 21-401.
      PEG. Public, education and governmental.
      PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this section and ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-801(d) by the holder to the city for the service areas within
its territorial jurisdiction.
      SERVICE. The provision of “cable service” or “video service” to
subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that
has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the
Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.
      SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this section and ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-801 by the holder to a city for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
      VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that
is required for the selection or use of video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to
access content, information, electronic mail or other services offered over the
public internet.
   (B)   Cable/video service provider fee imposed.
      (1)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the city.
      (2)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be 5% of
the holder’s gross revenues.
      (3)   Notice to the city. The holder shall notify the city at least ten
days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the city.
      (4)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the
service provider fee to the city. The holder’s liability for the fee shall
commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt
of the ordinance adopting this section by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this section shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder’s application notice sent pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401
(b)(6) to the city.
      (5)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due
on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
      (6)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the city in which a fee is paid.
      (7)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects
to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)
with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the
amount of the credit from the fees that operator owes under division (B)(2)
above.
   (C)   PEG access support fee imposed.
      (1)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the city in addition to the
fee imposed pursuant to division (B) above.
      (2)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed
hereby shall be 1% of the holder’s gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the city or
its designee for PEG access support in the city.
      (3)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the
city or to the entity designated by the city to manage PEG access. The holder’s
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth
in division (B)(4) above.
      (4)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due
on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
      (5)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects
to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)
shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG
access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had
it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an
incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited
against the fees that the operator owes under division (C)(2) above.
   (D)   Applicable principles. All determinations and calculations under this
section shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
   (E)    No impact on other taxes due from holder. Nothing contained in this
section shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later
be imposed by the city, including any tax that is or may later be required to
be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video
service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the
holder with respect to payment of the city’s simplified municipal
telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service
provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of
government’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
   (F)   Audits of cable/video service provider.
      (1)   Audit requirement. The city will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the city imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
city. If all local franchises between the city and cable operator terminate,
the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the city pursuant to the Local
Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq. No
acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the
amounts are correct.
      (2)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall
be paid within 30 days after the city’s submission of an invoice for the sum.
   (G)   Late fees/payments. All fees due and payments which are past due shall
be governed by ordinances adopted by this city pursuant to the Local Government
Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.
(Ord. 2007-11-0139O, passed 11-27-2007)
§ 116.044 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   General requirements. Except to the extent to which the FCC has pre-
empted the field of technical standards, each BTN for which a franchise is
granted under this chapter shall be designed, installed and operated so as to
meet the following general requirements.
      (1)   The system shall be operationally capable of relaying to subscriber
terminals those television and radio broadcast signals for the carriage of
which the grantee is now or hereafter authorized by the FCC.
      (2)   The system shall consist of a cable network having a minimum
initial forward bandwidth in compliance with the technical standards and rules
of the FCC, provided that if a reverse or feedback circuit is routed through a
subscriber’s premises, it shall be connected so as to permit subscriber
notification and deactivation.
      (3)   The system shall be capable of continuous 24-hour daily operation.
      (4)   The system shall be operated in such a manner as to avoid causing
interference with reception of off-the-air signals by nonsubscribers to the
network.
      (5)   The system shall be designed, installed and operated so as to
comply with all applicable technical standards and regulations promulgated by
the FCC.
      (6)   The system shall be designed, installed and operated so as to
ensure the delivery to all subscribers of standard color and monochrome signals
on the FCC-designated Class I television channels without noticeable picture
degradation or visible evidence of color distortion or other forms of
interference directly attributable to the performance of the network.
      (7)   The system shall be established and constructed in accordance with
the highest standards of the art of cable communications and in accordance with
the highest standards of the code of conduct with respect to businesses of the
size and type of the grantee.
   (B)   Performance monitoring. Except to the extent to which the FCC has pre-
empted the field of performance monitoring, the following rules shall apply to
the grantee.
      (1)   The performance of each network for which a franchise is granted
with respect to the standards set forth in division (A) of this section shall
be monitored in accordance with this division.
      (2)   Test procedures used in verification of the performance criteria
set forth in this section, if not as set forth in Paragraph 76.609, Subpart K,
of the FCC Rules and Regulations, shall be in accordance with good engineering
practice and shall be fully described in an attachment to the annual
certificate filed with the city.
      (3)   To the extent that the report of measurements as required above may
be combined with reports of measurements required by the FCC or other
regulatory agencies, the city shall accept such combined reports, provided that
all standards and measurements herein or hereafter established by the city are
satisfied.
      (4)   Not later than 13 months after any new or substantially rebuilt
portion of the system is made available for service to subscribers, or within
such lesser period of time as may be required by the FCC from time to time,
technical performance tests shall be conducted by the grantee to demonstrate
full compliance with the technical standards of the FCC. The tests shall be
performed by, or under the supervision of, a qualified registered professional
engineer or an engineer with proper training and experience. A copy of the
report shall be submitted to the city describing test results, instrumentation,
calibration and test procedures, and the qualifications of the engineer
responsible for the tests.
      (5)   The city may require additional tests on the basis of complaints
received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or significant
noncompliance, but the tests shall be limited to the particular matter in
controversy. The city will endeavor to arrange its requirements for such
additional tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to the grantee or
to the subscriber.
   (C)   Interconnections.
      (1)   Whenever it is financially and technically feasible, the grantee
shall construct and operate the network so that the network can be
interconnected into all other networks within the city.
      (2)   Whenever it is financially and technically feasible, the grantee
shall construct and operate the network so that the network can be
interconnected into all networks adjacent to the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.230)
§ 116.045 SERVICES.
   (A)   Carriage of Chicago-area television stations. Unless prohibited by
rules and regulations of the FCC, each BTN for which a franchise is granted
under this chapter shall carry the signals of all television broadcast stations
whose specified zone includes the city.
   (B)   Other channel requirements. Whether or not required by the regulations
of the FCC, each such network shall:
      (1)   Have a minimum capacity of 52 channels;
      (2)   Have the capacity for two-way active communications;
      (3)   Provide at least one noncommercial access channel on which use by
educational agencies within the city shall have priority over all other uses;
      (4)   Provide at least one noncommercial access channel on which the city
shall have priority over all other uses;
      (5)   Provide at least one noncommercial access channel on which public
interest programming shall have priority over all other uses; and
      (6)   Provide at least one channel, the use of which is available to the
public on a leased basis.
   (C)   Service packages. Subject to division (D) of this section, a grantee
may offer service packages to subscribers or potential subscribers in such
number, description and content as the grantee determines, provided that all
service packages shall be offered on a nondiscriminatory basis as provided in §
116.051.
   (D)   Basic service. Each grantee shall offer the basic service. The basic
service need not be offered by that name, insofar as subscribers are concerned,
but for purposes of this chapter, the service shall be known as the basic
service. The grantee is not required to provide the basic service to a
subscriber as a condition to the provision of other service packages. This
division shall not be construed as an effort by the city to regulate the
program content of the basic service. The only purpose of this division is to
ensure that the basic service will be offered to subscribers as one of the
grantee’s service packages.
   (E)   Public installations and service.
      (1)   The grantee shall connect the network to each public school and
public library, and to the municipal buildings as the city may designate,
without charge for installation and maintenance of one basic cable outlet per
connection. The installation shall be made within 60 days of completion of the
cable trunk line that would serve the buildings.
      (2)   Any service granted pursuant to division (E)(1) of this section may
be extended by the persons receiving such service to other areas within the
building where the service is granted or its adjacent buildings which are a
part of the total complex receiving the service. The person receiving the
service shall pay all expenses for any such extension and shall complete the
extension so as not to interfere with the operation of the network.
      (3)   The grantee shall provide, without charge, the basic service to
each installation made pursuant to division (E)(1) of this section.
   (F)   Emergency alert override. Each grantee shall incorporate into its
facilities the capability for a remotely activated emergency override alert
system whereby a designee of the city, in times of emergency, may introduce an
audio and/or visual message on all network channels simultaneously. The city
shall hold the grantee harmless and indemnify the grantee for liability
resulting from the emergency use of the network by the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.240)
§ 116.046 CONSTRUCTION OF THE SYSTEM.
   (A)   Schedule.
      (1)   Permits. Within 90 days after the effective date of its franchise,
the grantee shall file with the appropriate governmental authorities, and with
the necessary utility companies, all initial papers, applications, contracts
and other documents necessary to permit the commencement of construction and
operation of the BTN, and shall thereafter make diligent efforts to obtain the
proper execution and delivery of the documents. The grantee shall report to the
city every 30 days on its progress in obtaining necessary permits, contracts
and other necessary documents, as contemplated in this division, and on its
construction progress as specified in the following divisions.
      (2)   Substantial completion. Within 12 months after the commencement of
construction, the grantee shall have substantially completed the network.
      (3)   Midway completion. Within eight months after the commencement of
construction, the grantee shall have installed sufficient distribution
facilities so as to permit the offering of full network service to at least 50%
of the potential subscribers in the franchise territory.
      (4)   Commencement of operation. Within six months after the commencement
of construction, the grantee shall commence operations authorized under this
chapter.
      (5)   Initiation of services. Within three months after the commencement
of construction, the grantee shall have installed sufficient distribution
facilities so as to permit the offering of full network service to at least one
potential subscriber in the franchise territory.
      (6)   Commencement of construction. Within eight months after the
effective date of its franchise, the grantee shall commence construction of the
network.
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   Compliance with safety codes. All construction practices shall be
in accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational Safety and
Health Act of 1970, as amended, as well as all applicable state and local
codes.
      (2)   Compliance with electrical code. All installations of electronic
equipment shall be of a permanent nature, shall be durable and shall be
installed in accordance with the Electrical Code of the city.
      (3)   Antennas and towers. Antenna-supporting structures (towers) shall
be designed for the proper loading zone as specified in the Electronics
Industry Association’s R.S. - 222 City Specifications.
      (4)   Good engineering practices. All of the grantee’s plant and
equipment, including, but not limited to, the antenna site, the head-end and
distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable,
coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances, if and to the extent located within
the city, shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed,
replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good
engineering practices. The work shall be performed by experienced maintenance
and construction personnel so as not to endanger or interfere with improvements
the city may deem proper to make, or to interfere in any manner with the rights
of any property owner, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on city properties.
      (5)   Safety and nuisance requirements. The grantee shall, at all times,
employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted
methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause
damage, injury or nuisance to the public.
      (6)   Personnel. The grantee shall employ only such personnel as have
necessary and sufficient skill and experience or training as to properly
perform their respective jobs and positions.
   (C)   Street occupancy.
      (1)   The grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other
facilities, whenever possible, and shall not construct or install new,
different or additional poles, conduits or other facilities on public property
until the written approval of the city is obtained, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld. The grantee shall not acquire any vested interest in any
location for any pole or wire-holding structure, and the pole or structure
shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the
city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby.
      (2)   The facilities of the grantee shall be installed underground in
those areas of the city where existing telephone and electric services are both
underground at the time of network construction. In areas where either
telephone or electric utility facilities are installed aerially at the time of
network construction, the grantee may install its facilities aerially with the
understanding that at such time as the existing aerial facilities are required
to be placed underground by the city, the grantee shall likewise place its
facilities underground at its own expense.
      (3)   The grantee shall notify the city at least ten days prior to the
time the grantee intends to commence construction in any street. The city shall
cooperate with the grantee in granting any permits required, provided that the
grant and subsequent construction by the grantee shall not unduly interfere
with the use of the street and provided, further, that the proposed
construction is done in accordance with applicable ordinances and regulations
of the city.
      (4)   All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be installed
and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners and shall at all times be kept and maintained in
a safe, adequate and substantial condition and in good order and repair. The
grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and shall install and
maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures
and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the
public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices shall be
used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of the
public. Any pole or other fixture placed in any public way by the grantee shall
be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on the
public way.
      (5)   The grantee shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by
the city, restore to city standards and specifications any damage or
disturbance caused to the public way as a result of its operation or
construction on its behalf. The grantee shall guarantee and maintain the
restoration for one year against defective materials or workmanship.
      (6)   Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary,
in the judgment of the Mayor, the Director of Public Works, the Fire Chief or
the Police Chief, to remove or damage any of the grantee’s facilities, no
charge shall be made by the grantee against the city for restoration and
repair, unless that act amounts to gross negligence on the part of the city.
      (7)   The grantee may trim trees on public property at its own expense as
may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities, subject to the
supervision and direction of the city.
      (8)   The grantee, at its own expense, shall protect, support,
temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove any of its property when, in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works, the same is required by reason of
traffic conditions, public safety, a street vacation, street construction, a
change or establishment of a street grade, the installation of sewers, drains,
waterpipes, power lines, signal lines, transportation facilities, tracks or any
other structure or improvement by governmental agencies, whether acting in a
governmental or a proprietary capacity, or for any other reason, including, but
not limited to, movement of buildings, renewal of areas within the city and any
general program under which the city undertakes to cause all such property to
be located beneath the surface of the ground. The grantee shall, in all cases,
have the privilege, subject to the corresponding obligation, to abandon any of
its property in place. Nothing in this section shall be deemed as taking of the
property of the grantee, and the grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by
reason of any provision of this section.
      (9)   Upon failure of a grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work
required by law or by this chapter to be done in any street, within the time
prescribed and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, the
Director may, at his or her option, cause the work to be done, and the grantee
shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the
Director to the grantee, within 30 days after receipt of the itemized report.
      (10)   The grantee shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts unless they are
absolutely necessary, and then only after written permission has been given by
the Director.
      (11)   The grantee shall install in conduit all cables passing under the
roadway.
   (D)   Letter of credit.
      (1)   The grantee shall furnish to the city an irrevocable letter of
credit in favor of the city in a form approved by the City Attorney, certifying
that $100,000 is and will remain available, until reduced in accordance with
this division, at a sound and reputable banking or financial institution
(selected by the grantee and approved by the city) authorized to issue such
letter of credit. The letter of credit shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance by the grantee of its obligations under this chapter and the
franchise agreement, including timely compliance with the construction schedule
set forth in division (A) of this section, and shall be reduced in accordance
with the following table upon such timely compliance by the grantee.
      (2)   If the following construction phase is timely completed by the
grantee, the dollar amount of the letter of credit shall be reduced as follows:
         (a)   Commencement of construction (eight months after effective date
of franchise): $100,000;
         (b)   Initiation of service (three months after commencement of
construction): $80,000;
         (c)   Commencement of operation (six months after commencement of
construction): $60,000;
         (d)   Midway completion of construction (eight months after
commencement of construction): $40,000; and
         (e)   Substantial completion of construction (12 months after
commencement of construction): $0.
      (3)   When the grantee has substantially completed construction, the
letter of credit shall be released to the grantee.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.250)
§ 116.047 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM.
   (A)   Repair. Any damage caused by the grantee’s negligence shall be
repaired fully by the grantee.
   (B)   Office and phone for service. The grantee shall maintain an office in
the city, which shall be open during all usual business hours, shall have a
locally listed telephone and shall be so operated that complaints and requests
for repair or adjustment may be received at any time. Alternatively, the
franchise may designate an agent who has an office in the city and who is
authorized to receive complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments. In
addition, the grantee shall maintain a convenient service in the city during
normal business hours for the receipt of sums due by its subscribers and shall
provide for regular billing of accounts.
   (C)   Notification of service procedures. The grantee shall furnish each
subscriber, at the time service is installed, written instructions that clearly
set forth procedures for placing a service call, requesting an adjustment or
making a complaint or request.
   (D)   Service response time. The grantee shall use its best efforts to
provide prompt service response for all complaints and requests for repairs or
adjustments. In no event shall response time exceed 24 hours, except in
circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the grantee.
   (E)   Service interruptions and notification. The grantee shall interrupt
system service after 7:00 a.m. and before 1:00 a.m. only with good cause and
for the shortest time possible, and, except in emergency situations, only after
publishing notice of service interruption in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city at least 24 hours in advance of the service interruption. Service
may be interrupted between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. for routine testing,
maintenance and repair, without notification, any night except Friday, Saturday
or Sunday, or the night preceding a holiday.
   (F)   Moving of buildings.
      (1)   The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit issued by the Building Commissioner, temporarily raise or lower
its wires to permit the moving of a building. The expense of such temporary
removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting
the same, and the grantee may require the payment in advance. The grantee shall
be given not less than 15 days’ advance notice of any move contemplated to
arrange for temporary wire changes.
      (2)   The city shall notify the grantee at least ten days prior to the
intention of the city to commence any construction in the streets that requires
the relocation of the grantee’s lines, wires or other network appurtenances so
as not to interfere with the construction.
      (3)   If permanent use of a street is denied to the grantee by the city
for any reason, the grantee shall provide service to affected subscribers over
alternate routes within a reasonable period of time.
   (G)   Subscriber’s right to cancel service.
      (1)   Any subscriber may cancel any or all service packages upon 30 days’
written notice to the grantee.
      (2)   Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the grantee shall
promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the subscriber’s
premises upon his or her request.
   (H)   Abandonment of service.
      (1)   After the grantee has established service pursuant to this chapter
in the franchise area, the service shall not be suspended or abandoned in the
whole or any part of the franchise area unless the suspension or abandonment is
authorized in writing by Council.
      (2)   Whenever the grantee files with Council a written application
alleging that the public interest no longer requires that the grantee furnish
service pursuant to this chapter in the whole or in any part of the franchise
area, Council may take evidence upon that question and make a finding with
respect to it. If Council finds that the public interest no longer requires
that the grantee furnish service, Council may authorize suspension or
abandonment of service upon such reasonable terms and conditions as it may
prescribe.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.260)
§ 116.048 SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.
   (A)   Use of data from subscriber. Neither the grantee nor any other person
shall initiate or use any form, procedure or device for procuring information
or data from a subscriber’s terminal by use of the BTN without prior
authorization from each subscriber so affected.
   (B)   Subscriber lists. The grantee shall not, without prior authorization
from each subscriber so affected, provide any list designating subscribers’
names or addresses to the city or to any other party.
   (C)   Subscriber transmissions. The grantee shall not permit the
installation of any special terminal equipment in any subscriber’s premises
that will permit transmission from the subscriber’s premises of two-way
service, without first obtaining written permission therefor from the
subscriber.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.270) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.049 CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION.
   (A)   Customer service and privacy protection law.
      (1)   Adoption. The regulations of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501 are
hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers
offering services within the city’s boundaries.
      (2)   Amendments. Any amendment to the cable and video customer
protection law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter
shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to
cable or video providers offering services within the municipality’s
boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for
adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the city.
   (B)   Enforcement. The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent
to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the
cable and video protection law with respect to complaints received from
residents within the city.
   (C)   Customer credits. The city hereby adopts the schedule of customer
credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(s) and applied on the statement
issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or
following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is
responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation
to request the credit.
(Ord. 2007-10-0130O, passed 10-9-2007) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.050 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Rates and service schedules. The grantee shall, at all times, maintain
on file with the city a complete and current schedule showing all services
being provided under the grantee’s franchise, the fees and charges for each of
such services, the charges for connections or disconnections and any other
charges which may be made by the grantee in connection with the BTN. The
schedule shall also show the component of the basic service and the pay
service, each on a channel-by-channel basis, the monthly charges for each
service package and reasonably complete descriptions of each service package.
   (B)   Initial rates. The rates and charges initially charged by a grantee
for each of its service packages, as shown in the first schedule filed under
division (A) of this section, shall be the same as those proposed in the
grantee’s application for a franchise. The rates and charges shall not be
increased until the later of the following dates:
      (1)   The date which is 30 months subsequent to the effective date of the
grantee’s franchise; and
      (2)   The date which is two years after the grantee has at least one
subscriber for full network services.
   (C)   Modification of rates. After the later of the date which is 30 months
subsequent to the effective date of the grantee’s franchise, and the date which
is two years after the grantee has at least one subscriber for full network
services, the grantee may modify its rates from time to time by filing a
revised schedule in accordance with division (A) of this section. Each rate
adjustment and the establishment of a charge for a new or different service
shall become effective on the date designated by the grantee in the schedule,
provided that the date may not be less than 60 days from the date on which the
schedule was filed, and provided, further, that this division is subject to the
provisions of division (D) of this section.
   (D)   Regulation of rates. It is the policy of the city not to regulate
rates charged by a grantee for any of its services. However, the city expressly
reserves the right to regulate the grantee’s rates to the extent permitted by
law. At the time of each hearing conducted pursuant to §
116.055(A), the city shall consider whether or not to regulate rates. If the
city determines at any such time to regulate rates, this chapter shall be
amended to provide for appropriate standards and hearings in order that the
rates may be fairly and equitably determined. Each franchise granted under this
chapter shall be subject to the city’s right to amend this chapter for the
purpose stated in this division. The right shall be exercised at the sole
discretion of the city.
   (E)   Disconnections. No charge may be made for disconnection from the
network. However, if a subscriber has failed to pay properly due monthly fees,
or if a subscriber disconnects for seasonal periods, the grantee may require,
in addition to full payment of any delinquent amounts, a reasonable fee for
reconnection to the system.
   (F)   Consideration beyond schedule. A grantee shall not receive any
consideration whatsoever for or in connection with its provision of service to
its subscribers other than as set forth in this section or in the schedule then
on file with the city.
   (G)   Abatement of charges. Upon a subscriber’s request, charges shall abate
pro rata if service to a subscriber is interrupted for more than 48 continuous
hours for any reason whatsoever, except interruption caused by the subscriber.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.280)
§ 116.051 EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   In the carrying out of the construction, maintenance and operation of the
BTN, the grantee shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, creed, color, sex or national origin.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.290) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.052 PREFERENTIAL PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Uniform application of rates, charges and the like. The grantee shall
not, as to rates, charges, services, rules or regulations, or in any other
respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any person, nor subject
any person to any prejudice or disadvantage. This provision shall not be deemed
to prohibit promotional campaigns to stimulate subscription to the network or
other legitimate uses thereof, nor shall it be deemed to prohibit the
establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to
which any customer coming within such classifications shall be entitled,
provided that such schedules have been filed with the city as provided in §
116.050, nor shall it be deemed to prohibit the furnishing of services without
charge or at a reduced charge to the locations specified in §
116.045(E).
   (B)   Fairness of accessibility. The entire network of the grantee shall be
operated in a manner consistent with the principles of fairness and equal
accessibility of its facilities, equipment, channels, studios and other
services to all residents, businesses, public agencies or other entities having
a legitimate use for the network, and no person shall be arbitrarily excluded
from its use. Allocation of the use of the facilities shall be made according
to the rules or decisions of the grantee and any regulatory agencies affecting
the same.
   (C)   Subscribers’ antennas. The grantee is expressly prohibited from
requiring the removal, from offering to remove or from providing any inducement
for the removal of any potential or existing subscriber’s antenna as a
condition for provision of service by the grantee.
   (D)   Sale or service of television and radio receivers. During the period
of the franchise, neither the recipient of the franchise nor any of its
affiliates, subsidiaries, parent organizations, officers, directors or
stockholders holding 10% or more of the outstanding stock of such recipient
shall, within the corporate limits of the city or within ten miles in any
direction, directly or indirectly, engage in the retail sale, rental or repair
of radio or television receivers, or require, encourage or recommend to any
subscriber the purchase, rental or lease of radios or television sets at any
specific business which rents, leases or sells radios or television sets or the
utilization of the services of any special television or radio service business
for the repair or maintenance of the subscriber’s receivers, either radio or
television, wherever located.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.300)
§ 116.053 RECORDS AND REPORTS; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Records required. Each grantee shall maintain, at all times:
      (1)   A record of all complaints received and interruptions or
degradation of service experienced for the preceding three years;
      (2)   A full and complete set of plans, records and as-built maps showing
the exact location of all BTN equipment installed or in use in the city
(exclusive of subscriber service drops); and
      (3)   Financial records of the grantee in connection with its activities
within the city, which records shall be maintained in a manner distinguishing
revenue earned within the city from revenue earned by the grantee in other
municipalities.
   (B)   Reports required. Each grantee shall file with the city the following
reports.
      (1)   Reports to be filed within 90 days after the end of each fiscal
year of the grantee:
         (a)   An “Annual Report of Cable Television Systems” (FCC Form 325,
Schedules 1 and 2);
         (b)   An ownership report indicating all persons who at any time
during the preceding year controlled or benefitted from an interest in the
franchise of 10% or more. This report shall also include all creditors secured
by pledges or other forms of security interest in the network and all unsecured
creditors whose claims with respect to the operation of the franchise in the
city exceed $50,000;
         (c)   A summary list of all complaints and requests, as submitted in
writing to the grantee, and network “down time” received or experienced during
the year. However, the grantee shall maintain, for at least three years,
complete records identifying the person making the complaint or the request,
the subject matter thereof and the resolution of the matter in question or the
action taken by the grantee;
         (d)   A report showing or containing:
            1.   The total number of hours of utilization of each of the
channels described in §
116.045(B)(4);
            2.   The number of persons subscribing to two-way service; and
            3.   A brief statement indicating whether or not the grantee is
planning any new services for the ensuing years as a result of technological
development in the cable television industry.
         (e)   An annual report of the annual gross revenues of the grantee,
prepared, certified and audited by an independent certified public accountant
to be selected by the grantee and approved by the city.
      (2)   Reports or certificates to be filed promptly after the indicated
event occurs:
         (a)   A copy of all petitions and applications filed or submitted by
the grantee with any governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction with
respect to any matter affecting the network or the grantee’s undertakings with
respect to this chapter, and
         (b)   Written evidence of the payment of each premium for each policy
of insurance required by this chapter.
   (C)   Documents required. Each grantee shall file with the city, within 30
days after the end of the grantee’s fiscal year, a true copy of the most
current form of each of the following documents:
      (1)   The letter of credit required by this chapter;
      (2)   All policies of insurance or certificates thereof required by this
chapter; and
      (3)   All rules, regulations and policy statements adopted by the grantee
in operating the network.
   (D)   Filing. When not otherwise prescribed in this chapter, all matters
required to be filed with the city shall be filed with the City Clerk.
   (E)   Inspection of property and records. At all reasonable times, the
grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the
city of all franchise property, together with any appurtenant property of the
grantee situated within or without the city. The grantee shall also permit any
duly authorized representative of the city to examine and transcribe any and
all maps and other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its
control concerning the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the
grantee. If any of the maps or records is not kept in the city, or upon
reasonable request is not made available in the city, and if the Director of
Public Works determines that an examination of the maps or records is necessary
or appropriate to the performance of any of his or her duties, then all travel
and maintenance expenses necessarily incurred in making the examination shall
be paid by the grantee.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.310)
§ 116.054 NONLIABILITY OF CITY; INSURANCE.
   (A)   Indemnification agreement.
      (1)   The grantee shall agree to indemnify, defend and save whole and
harmless the city and its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees
from liabilities and related expenses of any kind which may arise out of or
from the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of the BTN, the
execution and implementation of this chapter, the granting of a franchise to
the grantee by the city or the exercise or enjoyment of its franchise by the
grantee, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and the costs or liabilities of
the city with respect to its employees. The city shall notify the grantee if
any person, in any way, notifies the city of any claim or demand for which the
grantee may be liable under this section or otherwise.
      (2)   The undertaking of the grantee in connection with this division
includes, but is not limited to, liabilities or claims of liability with
respect to property damage, personal injury or death, invasions of the right of
privacy, defamation of any person, the violation or infringement of any
copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, including damages
arising out of any failure by the grantee to secure consents from the owners,
authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by the
grantee’s network, or of any other right of any person, and failure of the
grantee to comply with the provisions of any federal, state or local statute,
ordinance, rule or regulation applicable to the grantee in connection with this
chapter or with its franchise. Without limitation of the foregoing, the
undertaking of the grantee in connection with this division includes, but is
not limited to, accountant fees, expert witness and consultant fees, court
reporter fees, court costs, per diem expenses and traveling and transportation
expenses.
   (B)   Insurance. The grantee shall keep the network continuously insured
against such risks as are customarily insured against by businesses of like
size and type, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Insurance upon a repair or replacement basis, if available, and
otherwise to the full insurable value of the network (with reasonable
deductible provisions) against loss or damage by fire and lightning, with a
uniform standard extended coverage endorsement, limited only as may be provided
in the standard form of extended coverage endorsement at the time in use in the
state;
      (2)   Insurance to the extent of $2,000,000 per occurrence against
liability for bodily injury, including death, and to the extent of $500,000 per
occurrence against liability for damage to property, including loss of use,
occurring on, arising out of, or in any way related to, the network. The policy
shall name, as additional insured, the city and its officers, boards,
commissions, agents and employees;
      (3)   During any period of construction, adequate coverage to meet
liability under the Illinois Structural Work Act;
      (4)   Worker’s compensation insurance within statutory limits and
employer’s liability insurance of not less than $100,000;
      (5)   Comprehensive automobile liability insurance to the extent of
$1,000,000 per occurrence against liability for bodily injury, including death,
and to the extent of $300,000 per occurrence against liability for damage to
property, including loss of use, occurring on, arising out of, or in any way
related to, the network; and
      (6)   This division shall not be a limit on the grantee’s undertaking
provided in division (A) of this section. The insurance shall be issued by a
company mutually acceptable to the grantee and the city in a form satisfactory
to the city.
   (C)   Notice of cancellation or reduction of coverage. The insurance
policies referred to in division (B) of this section hereof shall contain a
broad form contractual liability endorsement and shall also contain the
following endorsement.
 
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be cancelled nor
the amount of coverage thereof reduced until 30 days after receipt by the city
by registered mail of written notice of such intent to cancel or reduce the
coverage.
 
(2000 Code, § 5.12.320)
§ 116.055 REVIEWS, MODIFICATIONS AND RENEWALS OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Three-year reviews. On or about the third, sixth, ninth and twelfth
anniversaries of the effective date of the franchise grant, Council shall
schedule and hold a special public meeting with the grantee to review the
performance by the grantee under the franchise, including future plans of the
grantee regarding operation and performance. In particular, the city may
inquire whether the grantee is supplying a level and variety of services
equivalent to those being generally offered at that time in the industry in
comparable market situations. At the meeting, Council may consider whether the
rates of the grantee should be regulated. The grantee shall make available to
the city, if required by the city, records, documents and information which are
relevant to the meeting and inquiry.
   (B)   Modifications necessitated by FCC regulations. Any changes in the
franchise agreement necessitated by modifications in the FCC’s regulations
shall be incorporated into the franchise agreement within the time limit
provided for in the rules and regulations of the FCC then in force and effect.
   (C)   Franchise Renewal. At least six months prior to the expiration of a
franchise, the city shall schedule and hold a public meeting with the grantee
to review and discuss the performance of the grantee under the franchise. The
grantee shall make available, if requested by the city, records, information
and documents which are relevant to the meeting and inquiry. The city shall
thereupon reissue a franchise to the grantee for another term unless Council
determines that there is a compelling reason not to reissue the franchise.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.330)
§ 116.056 REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Grounds. The city reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted
under this chapter and to rescind all rights and privileges associated with the
franchise in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a
default and breach under this chapter and the franchise agreement:
      (1)   A default by the grantee in the performance of any of its material
obligations under this chapter, under the franchise agreement or under any
document, contract or other term or provision entered into by and between the
city and the grantee pursuant to this chapter;
      (2)   A failure by the grantee to provide or maintain in full force and
effect the liability and indemnification coverage or the letter of credit
required by this chapter;
      (3)   Frequent violations by the grantee of any order or ruling of any
regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the franchise;
      (4)   The grantee’s complete cessation of services for any reason within
the control of the grantee over the BTN. However, the grantee shall not be
declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this
chapter in any case in which performance of a provision is prevented for
reasons beyond the grantee’s control. Fault shall not be deemed to be beyond
the grantee’s control if it lies with a corporation or other business entity in
which the grantee holds a controlling interest, whether held directly or
indirectly. The provisions of this division shall not be construed as any
effort by the city to regulate the program content or program offerings of the
grantee. The only purpose of this division is to ensure that the grantee does
not voluntarily cease to provide service under its franchise;
      (5)   Attempts by the grantee to evade any of the provisions of this
chapter or of the franchise agreement, or the practice of any fraud or deceit
upon the city or subscribers; or
      (6)   Failure by the grantee to establish or construct the network in
compliance with the schedule set forth in §
116.046(A), or failure, for a substantial time, to provide effective
transmission and receiving services and capabilities to subscribers, provided
that if the failure is due to strikes, war, civil commotions, acts of God or
other causes beyond the control of the grantee and without the grantee’s fault,
or causes constituting excusable negligence, the time for the grantee to
establish and construct the network or to meet any other time limit imposed by
this chapter shall be extended by the amount of time of any delay resulting
from the cases. The period of delay shall be determined by the grantee, in
writing, with the consent of the city, which consent shall not be withheld
unreasonably.
   (B)   Procedures prior to revocation. If it appears to Council that one or
more grounds exist for revoking a grantee’s franchise, the following procedures
shall then be followed.
      (1)   The Mayor may make a written demand that the grantee comply with
the requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation which the
Mayor believes to be applicable. The Mayor shall provide Council with a copy of
each written demand.
      (2)   If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for 30
days following the written demand, the Mayor may place a request for
termination of the franchise upon the agenda of the next regular Council
meeting.
      (3)   With or without compliance with the foregoing, the Mayor may cause
to be served upon the grantee reasonable notice, in writing, of his or her
intent to request a revocation of the grantee’s franchise. The notice shall
state the time and place of the Council meeting and notice of the request shall
be published by the City Clerk at least once during the four-day period
preceding the Council meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the
city.
      (4)   Council shall consider the request of the Mayor and shall hear any
persons interested therein, and shall determine, at its discretion, whether or
not any failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause.
      (5)   If the failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just
cause, Council shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner,
and upon such terms and conditions, as are reasonable.
      (6)   If Council determines that the failure, refusal or neglect by the
grantee was without just cause, then Council may, by motion, declare that the
franchise of the grantee shall be revoked and terminated, unless there is
compliance within such period as Council may fix.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.340)
§ 116.057 CONDITIONS FOR TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Insolvency proceedings. The franchise granted pursuant to this chapter
shall, at the option of Council, cease and terminate 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or trustee, however denominated, designated to take
over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in a receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless the
receivership or trusteeship has been vacated prior to the expiration of the 120
day period, or unless both of the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The receivers or trustees have, within 60 days after their election
or appointment, fully complied with this chapter, and the franchise granted
pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees, within the 120 days, have
remedied all defaults under the franchise; and
      (2)   The receivers or trustees shall, within 60 days, execute an
agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises,
whereby the receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and
every term, provision and limitation of the franchise granted.
   (B)   Foreclosure or judicial sale. In the case of a foreclosure or other
judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee, or any part
thereof, including or excluding the franchise granted to the grantee, Council
may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder at
the sale. In this event, the franchise shall cease and terminate within 30 days
after service of the notice, unless:
      (1)   Council has approved the transfer of the franchise as and in the
manner provided in this chapter; and
      (2)   The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the city to
assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the franchise.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.350)
§ 116.058 PROCEDURES FOLLOWING REVOCATION OR EXPIRATION OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Disposition of facilities. If a franchise expires, is revoked or is
otherwise terminated, the city may order the removal of the network facilities
from the city within a reasonable period of time as determined by the city.
   (B)   Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures and
equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that
has been made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good a
condition as prevailed prior to the grantee’s removal of its equipment and
appliances, without affecting the electrical or telephone cable wires or
attachments. The city shall inspect and approve the condition of the public
ways and public places and cables, wires, attachments and poles after removal.
The liability, indemnity and insurance as provided in this chapter shall
continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full
compliance by the grantee with all the terms and conditions of this chapter.
   (C)   Restoration by city; reimbursement of costs. In the event of a failure
by the grantee to complete any work required by divisions (A) and (B) hereof,
or any other work required by city ordinances, within the time established by
the city and to the satisfaction of the city, the city may cause the work to be
done and the grantee shall then reimburse the city for the costs thereof within
30 days after receipt of an itemized list of the costs. The city shall be
permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce this division.
   (D)   Extended operation. Upon either the expiration or the revocation of a
franchise, the city may permit the grantee to continue to operate the network
for an extended period of time, not to exceed six months from the date of the
expiration or revocation, operate the network itself for the period or engage a
third party to operate the network for the period. The person (hereinafter
called the interim operator) shall, as trustee for the grantee’s successor in
interest, use its best efforts to continue to operate the cable television
system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and to
provide services that may be provided at that time. During the interim period,
the interim operator shall not sell any of the system assets, nor shall the
interim operator make any physical, material, administrative or operational
change that would tend to degrade the quality of service to the subscribers,
tend to decrease income or tend to materially increase expenses, without, in
each case, express permission, in writing, from the city. The city shall be
permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce this division.
   (E)   Effect on city’s rights. The termination and forfeiture of any
franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the city under the
franchise or any provision of law, and the grantee may continue to maintain
records and make reports as required by this chapter until such time as all
payments due the city under this chapter have been paid and accounted for to
the reasonable satisfaction of the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.360)
§ 116.059 LESSER SANCTIONS.
   Nothing shall prohibit the city from enforcing its rules and regulations to
impose lesser sanctions or censures for a violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter, rather than revocation.
(2000 Code, § 5.12.370)
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS
§ 116.070 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS CHARGES. The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act
or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the city,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or services costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended,
the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. GROSS CHARGES for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the city, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within the
city, and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel
provided within the city. However, GROSS CHARGES shall not include:
      (1)   Any amount added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made
under:
         (a)   The fee imposed by this subchapter;
         (b)   Additional charges added to a purchaser’s bill under § 9-221 or
§ 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act;
         (c)   Amounts collected under § 811-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
         (d)   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act;
         (e)   911 surcharges; or
         (f)   The tax imposed by § 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
city;
      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment, and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified under § 9-222.1 of the
Public Utilities Act to the extent of the exemption and during the period of
time specified by the city;
      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries
or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory-required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
      (7)   Bad debts (“bad debts” means any portion of a debt that is related
to a sale at retail for which GROSS CHARGES are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards). If the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made;
      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications
devices; or
      (9)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided to the city.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. A municipal street, alley, water or PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements
wherein the city has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the
location of utilities consistent with telecommunication facilities. PUBLIC
RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not include any real or personal city property that is not
specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include city
buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are
situated in the PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE, or any like term.
Any retailer having or maintaining within the state of Illinois, directly or by
a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities,
sales office, warehouse, or other place of business, or any agent or
representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer
or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether the place of business or agent or
other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether the
retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground
systems, and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location of the
customer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or
any other transmission or messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall also include wireless TELECOMMUNICATIONS as
hereinafter defined.
      (1)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value-added services in which
computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and
protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
      (2)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of TELECOMMUNICATIONS
by a TELECOMMUNICATIONS service provider for use as a component part of the
service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates
or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right-of-
access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all
TELECOMMUNICATIONS resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component
of, or integrated into, end-to-end TELECOMMUNICATIONS service shall not be
included in gross charges as sales for resale.
      (3)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable
services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of
1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or
other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the
city through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.
      (1)   Any telecommunications retailer; and
      (2)   any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs,
owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER or RETAILER or CARRIER. Every person engaged in
the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined in this
section. The city may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the
collection of the fee hereby imposed by any RETAILER not maintaining a place of
business within this state, who, to the satisfaction of the city, furnishes
adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the fee. When so
authorized, it shall be the duty of the RETAILER to pay the fee upon all of the
gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a RETAILER maintaining a place of business within the city.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Cellular mobile telephone services, personal
wireless services, as defined in § 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996
(Public Law No. 104-104), 47 U.S.C. § 332(c) (7), as now or hereafter amended,
including all commercial mobile radio services, and paging services.
(2000 Code, § 5.58.010)
§ 116.071 RECITALS.
   The facts and statements contained in the preamble to the ordinance codified
in this subchapter are found to be true and correct and are adopted as part of
this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.58.020)
§ 116.072 REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS.
   (A)   Every telecommunications provider as defined by this subchapter shall
register with the city within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this subchapter or becoming a telecommunications provider,
whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the city; provided, however,
that any telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to §
116.075(C) shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this section.
   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the city
pursuant to division (A) of this section has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by §
116.075(C), as the case may be, to the city within 30 days from the date of the
occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications
provider in the registration form or most recent return on file with the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.58.030)
§ 116.073 ADOPTION OF FEE.
   The city enacts the ordinance codified in this subchapter imposing a City of
Oak Forest municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee.
(2000 Code, § 5.58.040)
§ 116.074 MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.
   (A)   A city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is imposed
upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1% of all gross charges
charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses within the city
for telecommunications originating or received by the city.
   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this subchapter, the city infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights-of-way within the city by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this subchapter
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
   (C)   The city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized
by this section shall be collected, enforced and administered as set forth in §
116.075.
(2000 Code, § 5.58.050)
§ 116.075 COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF FEE.
   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the city infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer’s service address.
   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the City Administrator, the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the city not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the
month in which a bill is issued to the customer, provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2% of the city
infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for expenses
incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the city shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the City Administrator,
which shall contain such information as the City Administrator may reasonably
require.
   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this subchapter and any infrastructure maintenance fee collected by a
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the city. The charge imposed under division (A)
of this section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this subchapter
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for the services.
   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether
as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then the amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to became due,
under this subchapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the
erroneous payment; provided, however, the City Administrator may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such
credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three years
after the date of the erroneous payment unless:
      (1)   The credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by
the city within the applicable statutory period of limitations; and
      (2)   The credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.
   (F)   Amounts paid under this subchapter by telecommunications retailers
shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as
described immediately below:
      (1)   “Gross charges” for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 630 §§ 1 et seq.;
      (2)   “Gross receipts” for purposes of the municipality utility tax as
prescribed in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2, the Illinois Municipal Code;
      (3)   “Gross charges” for purposes of the municipal telecommunications
tax as prescribed in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-17, the Illinois Municipal
Code; and
      (4)   “Gross revenue” for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 2-202, the Public
Utilities Act.
(2000 Code, § 5.58.060)
§ 116.076 AUDIT.
   The city shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books and
records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this subchapter to
determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the
city for the city infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the
amount of the city infrastructure maintenance fee due to the city by the
telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the city plus 5% of the total
amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred by
the city in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed 5% of the total
amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. The sum shall be paid to the
city within 21 days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
(2000 Code, § 5.58.070)
§ 116.077 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   The City Administrator, or his or her designee, may promulgate such further
or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this
subchapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to
time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered
pursuant to §
116.072 of this subchapter of the regulations.
(2000 Code, § 5.58.080)
§ 116.078 WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION.
   (A)   (1)   The city waives all fees, charges and other compensation that
may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the city by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing city franchise, license or
similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the time the city
imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee.
      (2)   This waiver shall only be effective during the time the
infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this subchapter is subject to
being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by the
telecommunications retailer from the customer.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail/
return receipt requested to each telecommunications retailer with whom the city
has a franchise.
   (C)   The city infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this
subchapter shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not
less than 90 days after the city provided written notice by certified mail to
each telecommunications retailer with whom the city has an existing franchise,
license or similar agreement that the city waives all compensation under the
existing franchise, license or similar agreement during such time as the fee is
subject to being lawfully imposed and collected by the retailer and submitted
to the city. The infrastructure maintenance fee shall apply to gross charges
billed on or after the effective date as established in the preceding sentence.
(2000 Code, § 5.58.090)
§ 116.079 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall excuse any person or entity from
obligations imposed under any law, including but not limited to:
   (A)   Generally applicable taxes;
   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under or within, use of, or
repair of the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to free
standing towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as
provided;
   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under or within,
use of, or repair of the public rights-of-way; and
   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over or within the right-of-way.
(2000 Code, § 5.58.100)
§ 116.080 EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES.
   Any franchise, license or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the city entered into before the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this subchapter regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall
remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any fees,
charges or other compensation to the extent waived.
(2000 Code, § 5.58.110)
§ 116.081 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.58.130)
§ 116.999 PENALTY
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   The city, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(r)(1), does hereby
provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and
Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties
provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively
neutral basis and shall not exceed $750 for each day of the material breach,
and shall not exceed $25,000 for each occurrence of a material breach per
customer.
      (1)   Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
      (2)   The city shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30
days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
      (3)   A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in division (B)(2) above.
   (C)   Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter
shall be subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of
this code.
(2000 Code, § 5.58.120) (Ord. 2007-10-0130O, passed 10-9-2007)
CHAPTER 117: LODGING
Section
Motels, Hotels and Rooming Houses
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   License categories and fees
   
117.03   Hotel and motel regulations
Hotel Accommodations Tax
   
117.15   Definitions and construction
   
117.16   Tax imposed
   
117.17   Exemption
   
117.18   Collection
   
117.19   Transmittal of tax revenues
   
117.20   Payment and penalty for nonpayment
   
117.21   Suspension or revocation of licenses
   
117.22   Disposition of funds
   
117.23   Books and records
Residential Rental License
   
117.35   License required
   
117.36   Application for license
   
117.37   License fee
   
117.38   Term of license; transfer prohibited; renewal
   
117.39   Inspection required
   
117.40   Crime-free housing seminar required
   
117.41   Criminal background investigations
   
117.42   Crime-free lease addendum
   
117.43   Periodic inspection
   
117.44   Violation of “Crime-Free Lease Addendum” prohibited
   
117.45   Suspension or revocation of license; hearing; appeal
Short-Term/Vacation Rental
   
117.50   Definitions
   
117.51   License required; license term; exemptions
   
117.52   Application; notice; standards and procedures; renewal; fees
   
117.53   Requirements and standards
   
117.54   Penalty
   
117.55   Revocation; suspension; procedures
   
117.56   Occupancy of dwelling units
MOTELS, HOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXTENDED STAY HOTEL. A place where sleeping accommodations are furnished for
long-term occupancy in excess of 21 days for guests, including facilities known
as corporate apartments. The establishments in this industry may offer laundry
services, parking and recreational services, and limited in-room kitchen
facilities, including sink, microwave and conventional ovens, refrigerators and
freezers.
   EXTENDED STAY MOTEL. An establishment consisting of a group of attached or
detached lodging rooms with adjoining individual bathrooms and where the
lodging rooms are not entered from a common entrance lobby and where a portion
of the lodging rooms are occupied or designed for long-term occupancy in excess
of 21 days for guests. The establishments in this industry may, but need not,
offer laundry services, parking and recreational services, and limited in-room
kitchen facilities, including sink, microwave and conventional ovens,
refrigerators and freezers.
   HOTEL. A place where sleeping accommodations are furnished for occupancy by
transient guests for short-term lodging up to 21 days which provides customary
hotel services, including but not limited to food and beverage services,
recreational services, conference rooms and convention services, laundry
services, parking and other services.
   MOTEL. An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached
lodging rooms with adjoining individual bathrooms and where the lodging rooms
are not entered from a common entrance lobby and where more than 50% of the
lodging rooms are occupied or designed for occupancy by transient automobile
tourists.
(Ord. 2006-12-0073O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 117.02 LICENSE CATEGORIES AND FEES.
   (A)   License required; applications; investigation. No person shall
maintain or operate a motel, extended stay motel, hotel or extended stay hotel
in the city without first obtaining a license therefore. An application for
such a license shall state the maximum number of persons and vehicles to be
accommodated and shall be accompanied by bathroom and kitchen facility plans.
   (B)   License categories and fees.
      (1)   Motel licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter
are divided into the following classes.
         (a)   Class I motel license. The annual fee for a class I motel
license is $50, plus $5 for each lodging unit. No guest shall be permitted to
stay more than 21 consecutive days on the premises in any room or rooms of the
motel, whether it be in the same room or rooms or a combination of rooms.
         (b)   Class II extended stay motel license. The annual fee for a class
II extended stay motel license is $500, plus $50 for each lodging unit. Class
II extended stay motel licensees are permitted to rent, lease or let
accommodations to guests in excess of 21 consecutive days. In the event that
such long-term rental or leasing activity shall be in addition to permitting
guests to stay in lodging rooms for durations shorter than 21 days, operators
must be otherwise duly licensed under the city code and possessing a current,
valid class I motel license from the city.
      (2)   Hotel licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
are divided into the following classes:
         (a)   Class I hotel license. The annual fee for a Class I Hotel
License is $30, plus $5 for each lodging unit. No guest shall be permitted to
stay more than 21 consecutive days on the premises in any room or rooms of the
hotel, whether it be in the same room or rooms or a combination of rooms.
         (b)   Class II extended stay hotel/rooming house license. The annual
fee for a class II extended stay hotel license is $300, plus $50 for each unit
of sleeping accommodations. Class II extended stay hotel licensees are
permitted to rent, lease or let accommodations to guests in excess of 21
consecutive days. In the event that such long-term rental or leasing activity
shall be in addition to permitting guests to stay in lodging rooms for
durations shorter than 21 days, operators must be otherwise duly licensed under
the city code and possessing a current, valid class I hotel license from the
city.
(Ord. 2006-12-0073O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 117.03 HOTEL AND MOTEL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Sanitary requirements. No premises shall be operated as a motel,
extended stay motel, hotel or extended stay hotel unless each lodging unit is
equipped with adequate bathroom facilities. Such premises must be kept clean
and sanitary at all times and all waste material must be removed therefrom at
least once every 24 hours.
   (B)   Lighting. An area or premises of a motel, extended stay motel, hotel
or extended stay hotel that is open to use by the public or by persons staying
in such facility shall be kept adequately lighted at night, provided that such
lights are so shaded or otherwise regulated as to prevent them from shining
upon adjacent premises.
   (C)   Rates for Sleeping Accommodations. No motel, extended stay motel,
hotel or extended stay hotel licensed under this chapter or required to be
licensed under this chapter shall rent any sleeping accommodation for any
period of fewer than 24 consecutive hours; or advertise any rate for a sleeping
accommodation based on a rental period of fewer than 24 consecutive hours.
   (D)   Public disorder. A licensee shall be guilty of maintaining a public
disorder when the licensee or any of the licensee's employees knowingly or
negligently permit prostitution, pimping, gambling or the unlawful sale of
narcotic or controlled substances to be conducted upon the premises or
immediately adjacent to the premises by any person or persons renting a room or
rooms from the licensee. However, no licensee shall be punished for maintaining
a public disorder if the licensee notifies the police that he or she suspects
that the aforementioned conduct is occurring on his or her premises and
terminates the letting of the room or rooms immediately upon learning that the
conduct is occurring upon or adjacent to his or her premises by the person or
persons.
   (E)   Inspections. Before a license is issued to any applicant under this
subchapter, the Fire Chief, Health Commissioner and Building Commissioner shall
inspect or cause to be inspected and approve the premises of each motel,
extended stay motel, hotel or extended stay hotel to ensure compliance with
this subchapter and approve the facility for which the license is sought. The
inspections shall cover all matters pertaining to the condition of the motel,
extended stay motel, hotel or extended stay hotel, rooms and other occupied
spaces with respect to light, heat, ventilation, general sanitation and life
safety systems and escapes, and be sufficiently accurate and complete as to
convince the officials or their duly authorized representatives that the
premises comply in all respects with the provisions of this subchapter, and all
other relevant city codes, ordinances, rules and regulations and the laws of
the State of Illinois pertaining to such establishments. The inspections shall
be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
   (F)   License suspension or revocation. In the event that an inspection
conducted under §
117.39 finds any violation of this subchapter, or other relevant city code,
ordinance, rule or regulation, the Mayor may, after a public hearing conducted
at a regular meeting of the City Council, suspend or revoke any license issued
under this subchapter. The operator of the motel or extended stay motel shall
have an opportunity to be heard and the hearing shall not be held less than
five days after notice of the time and place of the hearing, addressed to the
operator at his or her last known place of business. The suspension or
revocation of any license shall not release or discharge the operator from
civil liability nor from prosecution of an offense.
   (G)   Display license. All licensees under this subchapter must prominently
display a valid, current license or licenses required under this subchapter,
posted in a conspicuous location readily visible and accessible to the public
and city officials.
(Ord. 2006-12-0073O, passed 12-12-2006)
HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS TAX
§ 117.15 DEFINITIONS AND CONSTRUCTION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOOKS AND RECORDS. All data maintained by the operator, including data on
paper, microfilm, microfiche, computer database or any type of machine-sensible
compilation.
   CITY. The City of Oak Forest.
   HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS. A room or rooms in any building or structure located
in the city and kept, used or maintained as or advertised or held out to the
public to be an inn, motel, hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, bed and
breakfast, dormitory or place where lodging or lodging and food, sleeping,
rooming, conference or exhibit accommodations are offered for a consideration
to guests for lease or rent, in which ten or more such accommodations are used
or maintained by guests, lodgers or roomers. The term HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS does
not include any room or rooms in the lodging facility which a person occupies,
or has the right to occupy, for a period longer than 21 continuous days.
Accordingly, accommodations within the buildings or structures which are leased
to the same occupant for a period of more than 21 consecutive days shall be
exempt from the tax provisions of this subchapter.
   OPERATOR. Any person conducting the operation of a hotel accommodation or
receiving consideration for the rental or lease of a hotel accommodation,
including, but not limited to, the owner or manager of a hotel accommodation.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any person who occupies or has the right to occupy any
room or rooms, regardless of whether or not it is the same room or rooms, in a
hotel accommodation for at least 21 consecutive days.
   PERSON. Any natural PERSON, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator,
assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust estate, firm, partnership, joint venture,
club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation, association,
syndicate, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether
mutual, cooperative, fraternal, for profit, nonprofit or otherwise. Whenever
the term PERSON is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the
term as applied to corporations shall include the officers thereof, and as
applied to any other entity, the owners or part-owners thereof.
   TREASURER. The Treasurer of the City of Oak Forest.
(2000 Code, § 3.32.020) (Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 117.16 TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of renting,
leasing or letting of rooms of any hotel accommodations in the city at a rate
of 10% of the gross rental receipts from the rental, leasing or letting. The
liability for payment of the tax shall be that of the operator of the hotel
accommodations. The tax levied in this subchapter shall be in addition to any
and all other taxes levied by the city, county, state or federal governments.
The operator of the hotel accommodations shall have the duty to act as trustee
for and account to the city and to collect the tax from each lessee or tenant
of hotel accommodations and to pay over to the City Treasurer the tax under
procedures prescribed by the Treasurer and as otherwise provided by this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 117.17 EXEMPTION.
   (A)   The tax imposed under this subchapter shall not apply to the renting,
leasing or letting of hotel accommodations to permanent residents.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any person who occupies or has the right to occupy
any room or rooms in the lodging facility for at least 21 consecutive days.
Where an operator provides accommodations for both permanent residents and
guests staying for shorter durations, the gross receipts generated by permanent
residents shall not be included in the computation of the tax due.
(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 117.18 COLLECTION.
   Every operator required to collect the tax levied under this subchapter
shall collect the tax from the lessee or tenant of the hotel accommodations by
separately stating the tax as an additional charge on the lessee’s or tenant’s
statement of charges.
(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 117.19 TRANSMITTAL OF TAX REVENUES.
   (A)   The hotel accommodation tax shall be paid to the City Treasurer by the
operator on a monthly basis. The hotel accommodations tax shall be due on or
before the fifteenth day of the succeeding calendar month.
   (B)   The operator of each hotel accommodation within the city shall file
sworn tax statements with the City Treasurer on a monthly basis at the same
time that the hotel accommodation tax is remitted. The tax statements
accompanying payment of the hotel accommodation tax shall show tax receipts
received with respect to each individual hotel accommodation room in the
preceding monthly period, upon forms provided by the City Treasurer. If an
operator provides accommodations for both permanent residents and other guests
staying for shorter durations, the tax statements shall clearly indicate all
rental, leasing and letting activity with respect to permanent residents and
designate the gross receipts that are exempt from the computation of the tax
due.
(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 117.20 PAYMENT AND PENALTY FOR NONPAYMENT.
   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, or accompanying sworn tax
statements are not filed as provided in §
117.19 of this subchapter, a penalty at the rate of 2% on the amount of tax
which remains unpaid shall be added and collected, calculated per 30 day
period, or portion thereof, from the day of delinquency. Whenever any person
shall fail to timely pay any tax required by this subchapter, the City
Treasurer shall issue written notice to the operator demanding the payment. If,
after 15 days written notice, the tax remains outstanding, the City Treasurer
may request that the City Attorney bring or cause to be brought an action to
enforce the payment of the tax on behalf of the city in any court of competent
jurisdiction with the cost of the enforcement to be borne by the operator of
the hotel accommodations.
(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 117.21 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   Failure to pay the tax imposed by this subchapter and after the 15 day
notice period set forth in §
117.20 of this subchapter, shall constitute grounds for revocation, suspension
or nonrenewal of the operator’s hotel or motel license issued under subchapter
117 of this code; provided, however, that before any revocation, suspension or
nonrenewal, the operator shall have an opportunity to be heard at the next
regular meeting of the City Council after the 15 day notice period set forth in
§
117.20 of this subchapter, but not before five days notice of the time and
place of the hearing, addressed to the operator at his or her last known place
of business. The suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or
discharge the operator of hotel accommodations from civil liability for the
payment of the tax nor from prosecution of the offense.
(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 117.22 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the hotel accommodations tax
provided for under this subchapter, including penalties for delinquent
payments, shall be paid to the City Treasurer and shall be distributed within
30 days after the fifteenth day of the calendar month as follows.
   (A)   Ninety-five percent of 1% of the gross tax revenue collected under
this subchapter shall be paid to the Chicago Southland Convention and Visitors
Bureau for the sole purpose of promoting tourism, meetings, conventions or
other events or activities within the city or otherwise attracting nonresidents
to visit the city and patronize city businesses.
   (B)   The excess over 95% of 1% of the gross tax revenue collected shall be
retained by the city.
(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)
§ 117.23 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   (1)   Every operator of hotel accommodations shall keep accurate books
and records showing the prices, rents or charges made or charged, and
occupancies taxable under this subchapter. The records shall include a daily
sheet showing the number of hotel accommodation rooms rented during every 24-
hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel or motel room where
such shall occur and the actual hotel or motel tax receipts collected for the
date in question.
      (2)   If an operator provides accommodations for both permanent residents
and other guests staying for shorter durations, the operator shall keep
separate books, records and daily sheets for rentals obtained by permanent
residents, which shall not be included in the computation of the tax due under
this subchapter, and rentals of shorter durations, which are subject to the tax
liabilities imposed by this subchapter.
      (3)   If any operator fails to keep separate books or records, he or she
shall be liable to tax at the rate designated in §
117.16 upon the entire gross receipts from his or her hotel.
   (B)   (1)   The City Treasurer, or his or her designate, may enter the
premises of any hotel accommodation between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. for the limited purpose of accessing, inspecting and examining the books
and records and guest registries in order to administer this subchapter, and to
assure enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere
with the City Treasurer or the Treasurer’s authorized representative in the
discharge of the Treasurer’s duties in the performance of this subchapter,
including refusing or causing to be refused admittance or access to authorized
officials for the limited purposes herein set forth.
(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE
§ 117.35 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, corporation or business entity, agent, condominium, townhouse or
homeowners' association shall engage in the business of renting any dwelling
unit to the public, operating a rental dwelling or dwelling unit, rooming house
or rooming unit, unless a valid residential rental license has been issued by
the City Clerk for the specific location. This licensing requirement shall not
apply to group homes governed by the Specialized Living Centers Act, ILCS Ch.
405, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq., dealing with the developmentally disabled, or other
similar uses governed by state or federal laws, rules or regulations.
(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013; Am. Ord. 2020-02-0785O,
passed 2-25-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.36 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Application for a residential rental license shall be made in the name of
the legal owner of the premises to be rented, submitted to the City Clerk on
forms provided by the Clerk. The application shall identify the location of the
property; the name, address, email address and telephone of the owner; the
name, address, email address and 24-hour telephone(s) of the manager or
custodian of the property; the owner's agent for service of process; and such
other information as the Clerk may reasonably require.
(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013; Am. Ord. 2020-02-0785O,
passed 2- 25-2020)
§ 117.37 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for a residential rental license on each physical property
shall be paid at the time of application as follows:
   (A)   One to five dwelling units: $100 per year;
   (B)   Six to ten dwelling units: $150 per year;
   (C)   Eleven to 19 dwelling units: $200 per year;
   (D)   Twenty to 30 dwelling units: $300 per year;
   (E)   Thirty-one to 40 dwelling units: $400 per year; and
   (F)   Forty-one or more dwelling units: $500 per year.
(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013; Am. Ord. 2020-02-0785O,
passed 2-25-2020)
§ 117.38 TERM OF LICENSE; TRANSFER PROHIBITED; RENEWAL.
   A residential rental license shall be issued for a period of one calendar
year. All licenses shall expire on December 31 next after issuance, unless
previously revoked. The license shall not be transferable. Each new owner of
the rental dwelling unit must obtain a license. Application for renewal shall
be made in the same manner as for a new license.
(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013; Am. Ord. 2020-02-0785O,
passed 2-25-2020)
§ 117.39 INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   No residential rental license shall be issued or renewed unless the dwelling
unit(s) and common area(s) in connection with which the license is sought are
found after inspection to meet all applicable laws and regulations. Rental
dwelling units that change ownership shall be required to be inspected before a
new license can be issued. The owner will be provided with an inspection report
describing any condition which constitutes a violation of any applicable law or
regulation, and shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to correct any such
conditions. In the event that more than two follow-up inspections are required
to determine compliance, the applicant shall pay an additional inspection
service charge of $100 for each additional inspection. Payment must be made in
full prior to issuance of the license.
(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013; Am. Ord. 2020-02-0785O,
passed 2-25-2020)
§ 117.40 CRIME-FREE HOUSING SEMINAR REQUIRED.
   A persons applying for a residential rental license or persons
administering, managing or controlling the operation of any rental dwelling
unit must attend a crime-free multi-housing seminar, administered by the Oak
Forest Police Department, or approved agency, prior to issuance of the license.
The seminar may be attended after application has been submitted and the
license will be issued after successful completion. Each licensee shall attend
a seminar every three years.
(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013; Am. Ord. 2020-02-0785O,
passed 2-25-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.41 CRIMINAL BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The intent of this section is to protect and preserve the city
neighborhoods' public health, safety and welfare of the residents by requiring
criminal history/background investigations of prospective tenants.
   (B)   Criminal background checks shall be conducted on all prospective
tenants over the age of 18 prior to occupying a rental dwelling unit.
   (C)   The licensee shall conduct, or have conducted by a reputable agency, a
criminal history/background investigation on prospective tenants of rental
property in the city. It is, however, recommended that all prospective tenants
of rental residential property be required to submit credit checks, and checks
for past evictions prior to entering into a lease agreement.
   (D)   Criminal background checks should be inclusive of the applicant's
entire adult criminal history, screening for criminal convictions that pose a
demonstrable risk to personal safety or property.
   (E)   Criminal background checks shall be completed prior to extending an
offer of housing to an applicant. Criminal background checks may be also
completed when considering to renew or extend a lease.
   (F)   A housing provider may deny an applicant based on any of the
following;
      (1)   The applicant or household member is a current sex offender
required to register under the Sex Offender Registration Act (or similar law in
another jurisdiction);
      (2)   The applicant or household member is a current child sex offender
under residency restriction; or
      (3)   The applicant or household member has a criminal conviction for an
offense that could pose a demonstrable risk to personal safety and/or property.
   (G)   If an applicant is denied due to the results of the criminal
background investigation, the applicant may be provided a copy of the results.
The denied applicant may submit a new application if they wish to provide
mitigating factors for the licensee to consider.
   (H)   Upon demand, results from an applicant's criminal background
investigation shall be forwarded to the City Clerk to ensure compliance.
(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013; Am. Ord. 2020-02-0785O,
passed 2-25-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.42 CRIME-FREE LEASE ADDENDUM.
   Every lease or other agreement for rental of any residential property shall
include a "Crime-Free Lease Addendum" in the following form which must be
signed by all tenants over the age of 18:
City of Oak Forest Crime-Free Housing Lease Addendum
City of Oak Forest Crime-Free Housing Lease Addendum
In consideration for the execution or renewal of a lease of the dwelling unit
identified in the lease, Manager or Owner and Resident agree as follows:
Resident, any member(s) of the resident’s household, a guest or any other person
affiliated with the resident, on or off the resident premises:
1.   Shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate criminal activity on or off
the rental property.
2.   Will not permit the dwelling unit to be used for, or to facilitate criminal
activity, including but not limited to, violent criminal activity or drug related
criminal activity, misdemeanor or felony according to any State Statutes.
3.   “Violent Criminal Activity"” means any criminal activity that has as one of its
elements the use, attempted use or threatened use of physical force against the person
or property of another.
4.   “Drug-related activity” means the illegal manufacture, sale, distribution, use,
or possession with the intent to manufacture, sell, distribute, or use of a controlled
substance or cannabis ( as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act [21
U.S.C. 802]).
5.   One or more violations of Section 1 or Section 2 of this Lease Addendum
constitute a substantial violation of the Lease and material noncompliance with the
Lease. Any such violation is the grounds for termination of tenancy and eviction from
the unit.
6.   Proof of violation shall be by a preponderance of the evidence, unless otherwise
provided by law.
7.   In case of any conflict between provisions of this Lease Addendum and any other
provisions of the Lease, the provisions of this Lease Addendum shall govern.
8.   This Lease Addendum is incorporated into the Lease between the Landlord and the
Tenant.
Resident Signature             Date
_____________________________    __________
Property Manager’s Signature       Date
_____________________________    __________
Property Address:
_____________________________________ _______
 
(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013; Am. Ord. 2020-02-0785O,
passed 2-25-2020)
§ 117.43 PERIODIC INSPECTION.
   Every residential rental property and dwelling unit is subject to periodic
inspection by the city at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to ensure
continuing compliance with all applicable laws and regulations. Whenever it
appears by inspection that conditions or practices exist which are in violation
of the provisions of this subchapter or of any applicable laws and regulations,
the city shall serve the owner or operator with notice of the violation,
stating what action is required to correct the violation and the time period
allowed for correction. The notice shall state that unless the violations cited
are corrected within the time allowed, the residential rental license may be
suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013; Am. Ord. 2020-02-0785O,
passed 2-25-2020)
§ 117.44 VIOLATION OF “CRIME-FREE LEASE ADDENDUM” PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any tenant to occupy any
residential rental property in violation of any provision of the "Crime-Free
Lease Addendum" required by this code.
(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013; Am. Ord. 2020-02-0785O,
passed 2-25-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.45 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING; APPEAL.
   The City Clerk may suspend or revoke any residential rental license, on not
less than five days' notice to the licensee and an opportunity for a hearing,
whenever the Clerk finds that the licensee has failed or refused to correct any
violation of any law or regulation applicable to the property, after reasonable
notice and opportunity to take corrective action. Any person whose license has
been suspended or revoked by the City Clerk shall be entitled to an appeal to
the Mayor as provided in §
110.010 of this code.
(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013; Am. Ord. 2020-02-0785O,
passed 2-25-2020)
SHORT-TERM/VACATION RENTAL
§ 117.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FAMILY.
      (1)   TYPE (A) FAMILY. One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or
adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
      (2)   TYPE (B) FAMILY. Two unrelated persons and their children living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
      (3)   TYPE (C) FAMILY. A group of not more than three unrelated persons
living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
      (4)   TYPE (D) FAMILY. A group of two or more persons containing within
it one or more families, as defined in subsections (1) and (2) of this
definition, including a husband and wife married to one another and their
children, as well as adults, living together in a dwelling unit as a single
housekeeping unit and management, in premises in which the adult occupants are
affiliated with a bona fide not-for-profit-corporation organized for religious
or charitable purposes chartered by the state of Illinois.
   PRIMARY RESIDENCE. To be considered a primary residence, and needs to live
in the property for at least nine months out of a 12 month period.
      (1)   FAMILY. Shall not be construed to mean a club, a lodge fraternity/
sorority house.
      (2)   The State Bed and Breakfast Act provides, in part:
         (a)   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT shall mean an operator-occupied
residence providing accommodations for a charge to the public with no more than
five guest rooms for rent, in operation for more than ten nights in a 12-month
period. Breakfast may be provided to the guests only. Bed and breakfast
establishments shall not include motels, hotels, boarding houses, or food
service establishments.
         (b)   OPERATOR shall mean the owner of the bed and breakfast
establishment, or the owner's agent, who is required by this Act to reside in
the bed and breakfast establishment, or on contiguous property.
         (c)   GUEST ROOM shall mean a sleeping room intended to serve no more
than two transient guests per night.
   SHORT-TERM VACATION RENTAL. A single room, dwelling unit, an allocated
space, or a portion thereof within the primary structure, separate and
segregated from that portion of a residential unit occupied by the owner, in a
residential zoning district offered for rent for a period shorter than 30
consecutive days to any person other than a member of the owner's family. The
term SHORT-TERM/VACATION RENTAL shall not include hotels, motels, or lodging
establishments licensed pursuant to Chapter 117. Any location is limited to one
short-term/vacation rental space per building.
(Ord. 2023-12-1010O, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 117.51 LICENSE REQUIRED; LICENSE TERM; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a short-term/vacation rental, offer
for rent, or advertise for rent a short-term/vacation rental within the City of
Oak Forest without a current, valid license issued pursuant to the terms of
this subchapter.
   (B)   Each license issued shall be valid for one year, and subject to
renewal. Every license issued pursuant to the short-term/vacation rental
provisions of this Chapter 117 will terminate on December 31 following its
issuance, unless suspended or revoked, and must be renewed before operation is
allowed in the following year.
   (C)   A license issued under the short-term/vacation rental provisions of
this Chapter 117 is personal to the licensee and may not be transferred or
otherwise conveyed to a third party. Any transfer or conveyance of the business
or ownership requires the licensee or transferee to reapply and otherwise
qualify for the issuance of a new license. Any transfer of a license or any
interest in a license immediately terminates the license.
(Ord. 2023-12-1010O, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 117.52 APPLICATION; NOTICE; STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES; RENEWAL; FEES.
   (A)   Applications. A property owner who seeks a short-term/vacation rental
license pursuant to this subchapter shall submit a written application that
contains all information required for a registration statement pursuant to this
subchapter.
   (B)   The applicant must sign an affidavit affirming that the applicant will
abide by all the rules and regulations governing short-term rental/vacation.
   (C)   Primary residence.
      (1)   The short-term/vacation rental shall be the owner’s primary
residence. An applicant must be able to demonstrate that the applicant resided
at the property for nine of the past 12 months, or that the applicant plans to
live in the property for nine of the next 12 months.
      (2)   Evidence of primary residence shall include, but not be limited to
an adequate showing of the following:
         (a)   Utility bill.
         (b)   Voter registration.
         (c)   Motor vehicle registration.
         (d)   Deed.
         (e)   Driver's license or state-issued identification.
   (D)   The use must be accessory to a residential unit occupied by the owner
of the property for at least nine months a year.
   (E)   No license shall be issued to or renewed for property that is in
violation of city building codes, property maintenance codes or fire codes;
   (F)   No license shall be issued to or renewed for an applicant who has had
repeated violations or has current violations of city building codes, property
maintenance codes or fire codes with respect to any other property in the city
that the applicant owns or operates.
   (G)   No license shall be issued to or renewed for an applicant who
currently owes the city directly or in any representative capacity any fee,
utility payment or tax, including the hotel tax, that is currently past due.
   (H)   The application shall include the following information regarding the
premises:
      (1)   A site drawing showing any required parking places or area to
accommodate guests.
      (2)   Interior drawing or plan showing location of sleeping room,
bathroom facilities, smoke and CO detectors, and exit paths.
      (3)   The number of sleeping rooms and bathroom facilities available in
the entire residential unit.
      (4)   Written confirmation that the owner will not be providing or
serving food (other than prepackaged as specifically authorized herein).
   (I)   Standards and procedures for license approval. The Community
Development Department will review all applications for short-term/vacation
rentals upon each application with respect to the standards set forth below.
The City Administrator after receiving said report, may refer the application
back to the Community Development Department for additional review, or, may
approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove an application for a short-
term/vacation rental license, upon findings of fact with respect to each of the
standards set forth below:
      (1)   The proposed short-term/vacation rental will not cause a negative
cumulative effect when its effect is considered in conjunction with the effect
of other short-term/vacation rental in the immediate neighborhood. Short -term/
vacation rentals will not be located within 1500 feet of another short-term/
vacation rental.
      (2)   The short-term/vacation rental will not have a substantial adverse
impact on the use, enjoyment, or property values of adjoining properties.
Rentals cannot be operated in violation of Chapter 96 "Chronic Nuisance
Properties" of the Oak Forest Municipal Code.
      (3)   The proposed short-term/vacation rental will comply with all the
rules and regulations contained herein.
      (4)   The proposed short-term/vacation rental shall comply with the
following criteria:
         (a)   No rental or advertisement for rental for a period of time
shorter than 24 hours.
         (b)   No rental may provide for food or beverage to any guests with
the exception of pre-packaged food and drink.
         (c)   A license may be issued only for one short-term/vacation rental
business located at a fixed and certain place and any areas contiguous thereto.
Any person who desires to operate more than one short-term/vacation rental
business must have a license for each location.
   (J)   Renewal. Every renewal application shall satisfy all requirements set
forth in this subchapter.
   (K)   License fee. The annual fee for a license issued pursuant to this
subchapter shall be $50.
   (L)   If the applicant is not a resident of Cook County at the time of the
filing of the application, the applicant shall designate an agent officed or
with a residence in Cook County who shall be authorized to receive notices and
service of process under the terms of these provisions for short-term/vacation
rental in Chapter 117.
   (M)   Regardless of its findings on any or all of the foregoing standards,
the City Administrator may deny a short-term/vacation rental license upon a
finding that such denial is in the public interest.
(Ord. 2023-12-1010O, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 117.53 REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   No short-term/vacation rental owner shall:
      (1)   Rent or lease any short-term/vacation rental for any period of time
shorter than 24 hours.
      (2)   Rent or lease any short-term/vacation rental more than once within
any consecutive 24 hour period measured from the commencement of one rental to
the commencement of the next.
      (3)   Advertise an hourly rate or any other rate for a short-term/
vacation rental based on a rental period of fewer than 24 hours.
      (4)   Cause or permit, by action or failure to act, the short-term/
vacation rental or its use to suffer from and/or create any nuisance or
violation of the following provisions of the City Code as described in Chapter
96 of this Code.
   (B)   Every short-term/vacation rental shall be subject to inspection by
staff members of the city's Fire and Building Departments. The act of applying
for and accepting a short-term/vacation rental license pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter 117 shall be considered consent to the powers of
entry and inspection provided herein.
   (C)   Every short-term/vacation rental shall meet the City and State Fire
Marshal's requirements for one and two-family dwellings, (with the exception of
any sprinkler requirements).
   (D)   A manual extinguishing device/equipment shall be provided on each
floor in accordance with NFPA 10 - Standards for the Installation of Portable
Fire Extinguishers.
   (E)   All trash containers shall be metal and all combustibles or flammable
liquids shall be stored in approved metal containers. No combustible storage in
or under stairways.
   (F)   No cooking facilities shall be permitted in guest rooms.
   (G)   All hallways and stairways shall be adequately lighted.
   (H)   No portable heating devices shall be permitted in guest rooms.
   (I)   Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors shall be provided in
each guest room.
   (J)   Plans for escape in the case of fire shall be posted in all rooms that
accommodate guests and all other public rooms on the premises.
   (K)   Every short-term/vacation rental owner shall keep a register in which
shall be entered the name of every guest and his/her arrival and departure
dates. The owner shall make said register freely accessible to the City
Administrator and Police Department.
   (L)   Every short-term/vacation rental owner shall post, in a conspicuous
place within the short-term/vacation rental, the name and telephone number of
the owner.
   (M)   No short-term vacation rental, as defined herein, shall serve more
than two adults per stay.
   (N)   Access to and from each bedroom shall be accomplished without passing
through any other bedroom. Bedroom doors shall have locks to insure privacy.
   (O)   Each property used for short-term/vacation rental must have at least
one accessible bedroom available for rent that complies with Section 400.320(g)
(5) and (9) of the Illinois Accessibility Code, irrespective of whether the
Illinois Accessibility Code would otherwise apply to the short- term/vacation
rental.
   (P)   Any kitchen rental for or use by guests requires that the kitchen area
be cleaned and sanitized between guests and all food and beverages shall be
discarded. All dishes, utensils, pots, pans and other cooking utensils shall be
cleaned and sanitized between guests.
   (Q)   The owner of every short-term/vacation rental shall change supplied
bed linens and towels therein at least once each week and prior to the renting
of any room to any guest. The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of
all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner. Guests shall be provided
soap, shampoo; clean bath cloths and towels, and clean bed linens in reasonable
condition that are changed between guests and which shall be clean and stored
and handled in a sanitary manner.
   (R)   Rooms in which guests are accommodated shall be cleaned and sanitized
before each new rental period begins and otherwise at least once each week.
Guests shall be advised prior to any stay of any conditions at the property
which could cause allergies or adverse health effects, such as pets. There
shall be no infestations of any kind nor any conditions at the premises that
constitute a health hazard, e.g. mold, radon.
   (S)   The owner must maintain at all times when renting out the property as
a short- term/short-term/vacation rental a general liability insurance policy
in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and a minimum of $2,000,000.00
per aggregate. The owner must provide the city with proof of such policy upon
request.
   (T)   Guests shall not have any additional visitors while they are using the
short-term/ vacation rental.
   (U)   In addition to these regulations for short-term vacation rental in
this Chapter 117, to the extent applicable to owner's operations, the owner
shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Illinois Bed and Breakfast
Act at 50 ILCS 820/1 et. seq. unless otherwise specifically provided otherwise
or not authorized herein.
   (V)   The conditions and restrictions contained in the provisions of this
Chapter 117, applicable to short-term/vacation rentals shall be interpreted as
minimum standards, and shall be in addition to any other applicable city
ordinances and requirements that apply to short- term/vacation rental or the
properties on which they are located.
(Ord. 2023-12-1010O, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 117.54 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any owner, tenant or other person who shall be found to have violated
any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be guilty of an offense
punishable as follows:
      (1)   The fine for a first violation is $200.
      (2)   The fine for a second violation is $500.
      (3)   The fine for a third or subsequent violation is $750.
   (B)   Each day a provision of this subchapter is found to have been violated
constitutes a separate violation subject to the fine schedule set forth herein.
   (C)   Any fines shall be debts due and owing to the city that the city may
collect by means allowed by law, including, but not limited to, filing a lien
against the short- term/vacation rental or the premises containing the short-
term/vacation rental.
   (D)   The fines provided for herein shall not be construed as limiting the
power of a court of competent jurisdiction or an administrative hearing officer
to impose other penalties and/or remedies as provided for by applicable
legislation. In addition, a license found to have violated any provision of
this subchapter may be subject to license revocation, suspension, or non-
renewal.
(Ord. 2023-12-1010O, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 117.55 REVOCATION; SUSPENSION; PROCEDURES.
   (A)   In addition to the above fines, without limitation, the City
Administrator may revoke or suspend a license issued pursuant to the terms of
this subchapter for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   If the owner of the relevant short-term/vacation rental or his/her
agent violates any of the terms of this subchapter;
      (2)   If the owner of the short-term/vacation rental or his/her agent is
deemed to have maintained a nuisance premises therein, in violation of the City
of Oak Forest Code;
      (3)   If the City Administrator deems the short-term/vacation rental, or
the premises wherein it is located, to be a vacant building, as defined
therein; and/or
      (4)   If the city or other governmental agency condemns the short-term/
vacation rental or the premises wherein it is located.
   (B)   Not less than 14 business days prior to a revocation hearing for a
license issued pursuant to the terms of this subchapter, the City Administrator
shall send, via First Class U.S. mail, a notice of revocation hearing to the
owner and his/her authorized agent at the address provided on the most recent
license application. Notice shall be sufficient if sent to the address of the
authorized agent indicated on the license application. Said notice shall
include the following:
      (1)   Description of the short-term/vacation rental, sufficient for
identification;
      (2)   A statement that the license is subject to revocation;
      (3)   If the City Administrator deems the short-term/vacation rental, or
the premises wherein it is located, to be a vacant building, as defined
therein; and/or
      (4)   If the city or other governmental agency condemns the short- term/
vacation rental or the premises wherein it is located.
   (C)   If the City Administrator has reason to believe that immediate
suspension of the license is necessary to prevent the threat of immediate harm
to the city or the neighborhood, the City Administrator may, upon the issuance
of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or
hearing, order the license suspended for not more than seven days. The City
Administrator may extend the suspension during the pendency of a hearing upon a
written determination that doing so is necessary to prevent the previously
mentioned harm to the city.
   (D)   The City Administrator in accordance with procedures drafted by the
City Attorney shall conduct hearings.
   (E)   Within ten business days after the close of the hearing, the City
Administrator shall issue a written decision that shall constitute a final
determination for purposes of judicial review pursuant to the Illinois
Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., as amended. In reaching a
decision, the City Administrator may consider any of the following:
      (1)   The nature of the violation;
      (2)   The nature and extent of the harm caused by the licensee's action
or failure to act;
      (3)   The factual situation and circumstances surrounding the violation;
      (4)   Whether or not the action or failure to act was willful;
      (5)   The record of the licensee with respect to violations.
   (F)   A licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible to
reapply for a new license for one year.
(Ord. 2023-12-1010O, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 117.56 OCCUPANCY OF DWELLING UNITS.
   No dwelling unit that proposes to offer short-term vacation rental hereunder
shall be occupied by more than one type (A), type (B), or type (C) family, as
defined in § 117.50 of this subchapter except as hereinafter provided:
   (A)   Upon written application to the Zoning Administrator, certification or
approval shall be issued for occupancy for a dwelling unit by a type (D) family
in all districts where dwelling units are allowed provided that the application
establishes that the occupancy conforms to the definition of type (D) Family.
   (B)   The members of a type (D) family household shall not keep or store
more than one motor vehicle for each such dwelling unit or for each off-street
parking space lawfully existing in connection with such dwelling unit,
whichever is greater. Certification would be revoked at any time the occupancy
or off-street parking no longer conforms to the definition of a type (D)
family, or if a request for current records is not answered so as to establish
that the type of ownership complies with the definition of a type (D) family.
(Ord. 2023-12-1010O, passed 12-12-2023)
CHAPTER 118: COMMERCIAL RETAIL AND SERVICE PROVIDERS
Section
Service Stations
   
118.001   Definition
   
118.002   License required; fee
   
118.003   Fire extinguishers
   
118.004   Nonbusiness filling stations
   
118.005   Dispensing of fuel; bulk sales
   
118.006   Safety and sanitation
   
118.007   Additional licenses for additional businesses; license revocation
   
118.008   Deceptive trade practices; identification of gasoline and petroleum
products
Sexually Oriented Businesses
   
118.020   Purpose and intent
   
118.021   Definitions
   
118.022   Permit required
   
118.023   Administration and enforcement responsibilities
   
118.024   Permit application
   
118.025   Investigation and application
   
118.026   Issuance or denial of permit
   
118.027   Expiration of permit
   
118.028   Suspension of permit
   
118.029   Revocation of permit
   
118.030   Hearing
   
118.031   Appeal procedure for permit denial, suspension or revocation
   
118.032   Transfer of permit
   
118.033   Sexually oriented business employee license
   
118.034   Regulations pertaining to the exhibition of sexually explicit films
or videos in booths
   
118.035   Sexually oriented businesses featuring nudity or live performance
   
118.036   Prohibitions regarding minors and sexually oriented businesses
   
118.037   Advertising, loitering and lighting regulations
   
118.038   Hours of operation
   
118.039   Additional prohibitions for the operation of a sexually oriented
business without a valid permit
   
118.040   Exemptions
   
118.041   Immunity from prosecution
Tobacco Sales
   
118.055   License required; fee
   
118.056   Sale of cigarettes or alternative nicotine products to minors
   
118.057   Purchase of tobacco products or alternative nicotine products by
minors; misrepresentations
   
118.058   Possession of tobacco products or alternative tobacco products by
minors
Dry Cleaners
   
118.070   Definitions
   
118.071   License required; posting, suspension and revocation; fees
   
118.072   License applications
   
118.073   Buildings
   
118.074   Sanitation
   
118.075   Lighting
   
118.076   Ventilation and exhaust systems
   
118.077   Machines
   
118.078   Machine installation
   
118.079   Dry cleaning solvents
   
118.080   Operations
   
118.081   Safety and testing equipment
   
118.082   Plant and equipment alterations
   
118.083   Inspections by Fire Chief
Landscapers
   
118.095   Permit required; fee
   
118.096   Permit application; issuance or denial of permit
   
118.097   Bond
   
118.098   Inspections by City Engineer before issuance of permit
   
118.099   Grading and drainage
   
118.100   Inspections of completed work
   
118.101   Release of bond
   
118.102   Responsibility of property owners
   
118.103   Maintenance by property owners
Itinerant Merchants, Peddlers and Solicitors
   
118.115   Definitions
   
118.116   License required; prohibited activities
   
118.117   License applications
   
118.118   Investigation; reasons for disapproval of applications
   
118.119   License and permit revocation
   
118.120   Reasons for revocation
   
118.121   Appeals
   
118.122   Service of process
   
118.123   Display of license and badge
   
118.124   Nonprofit organizations; blanket permits and waivers
   
118.125   Request for individuals to solicit on public property on behalf of
nonprofit organizations
   
118.126   Exceptions to subchapter
   
118.127   Hours of operation
   
118.128   Effective period of licenses and permits
   
118.129   License fee; deposit
   
118.130   Prohibited soliciting
   
118.131   Nonliability of city
Scavengers
   
118.145   License required; fee
   
118.146   Vehicle requirements
   
118.147   Disposal or storage of refuse
Secondhand Dealers and Lenders
   
118.160   Definitions
   
118.161   Authorization of subchapter
   
118.162   Exceptions to subchapter
   
118.163   License required; transferability; fee
   
118.164   License applications
   
118.165   Investigation of applicant
   
118.166   Grounds for denial of license
   
118.167   Appeals
   
118.168   Exhibition of licenses; additional licenses and fee
   
118.169   Designation of place of business
   
118.170   Change in business location; license transfer and fee
   
118.171   Purchasing from minors
   
118.172   Performance standards
   
118.173   Electronic reporting of transactions
   
118.174   Records of transactions
   
118.175   Inspection of records and goods by police
   
118.176   Required holding period before disposing of goods; exception
   
118.177   Melting, wrecking or remodeling of articles made from precious metals
   
118.178   Coin collectors and dealers; coin collection swap meets and
conventions
   
118.179   Non-conformance
   
118.180   Suspension and revocation of licenses
Secondhand Articles Drop-off Containers
   
118.190   Definitions
   
118.191   Prohibitions
   
118.192   Licensing and inspection
   
118.193   Regulations
   
118.194   Nonusable container
   
118.195   Application for license
   
118.999   Penalty
SERVICE STATIONS
§ 118.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SERVICE STATION. Any place of business where gasoline or any highly volatile
fuel for a motor vehicle or an internal combustion engine is sold or offered
for sale to the public and where lubricating oil, grease, tires, batteries and
similar accessories and parts also may be offered for sale on the premises, at
retail, including minor services and installations customarily incidental
thereto. SERVICE STATION does not include open sales lots, truck stops or
vehicle repair shops.
(2000 Code, § 5.52.010)
§ 118.002 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)    No person shall maintain or operate a service station in the city
without first obtaining a license therefor.
   (B)   The annual fee for the license required by division (A) of this
section shall be as set forth in §
110.007(B), plus $10 per pump nozzle.
(2000 Code, § 5.52.020) (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.003 FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
   Each service station shall be equipped with at least one chemical fire
extinguisher suitable for oil or gasoline fires, which shall be kept in
serviceable condition.
(2000 Code, § 5.52.030)
§ 118.004 NONBUSINESS FILLING STATIONS.
   Any person maintaining or operating a storage tank for gasoline for the use
of automobiles of an owner, lessee, employee or agent of the person shall
comply with all of the provisions of this subchapter, except that the person
shall not be required to pay a fee for the license required by §
118.002.
(2000 Code, § 5.52.040)
§ 118.005 DISPENSING OF FUEL; BULK SALES.
   No motor fuel shall be dispensed at any service station except into the fuel
tank of a motor vehicle. However, an individual sale of up to five gallons may
be made in a metal receptacle when the receptacle is painted red and labeled in
full conformity with ILCS Ch. 430, Act 20, § 1.
(2000 Code, § 5.52.050) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.006 SAFETY AND SANITATION.
   (A)   No gasoline, naphtha or other flammable liquid shall be kept inside of
a service station, except in an original sealed container.
   (B)   No motor vehicle shall be serviced until the ignition has been turned
off.
   (C)   No open light or flame shall be permitted except within a stove in the
station building.
   (D)   Premises must be kept clean, neat and free from rubbish or trash.
(2000 Code, § 5.52.060) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.007 ADDITIONAL LICENSES FOR ADDITIONAL BUSINESSES; LICENSE REVOCATION.
   The license obtained for a service station shall not entitle the licensee to
conduct any other business without an additional license. If a service station
licensee operates any other business without an additional license, the Mayor
or the Business License Commissioner may revoke any license issued under this
subchapter and such licensee may be fined as provided in §
118.999.
(2000 Code, § 5.52.070)
§ 118.008 DECEPTIVE TRADE PRACTICES; IDENTIFICATION OF GASOLINE AND PETROLEUM
PRODUCTS.
   (A)   No person shall sell or offer for sale, at retail, any gasoline or
petroleum products for use in motor vehicles in any manner which deceives or
tends to deceive a purchaser or prospective purchaser as to price, quality or
identity of the product. The pump, dispensing device or container shall have
the name, brand, symbol, mark, lead content category and minimum antiknock
(octane) index (to be derived from the sum of research and motor octane ratings
divided by two ((R + M) ÷ 2), or the minimum cetane rating, of the gasoline or
petroleum product sold or offered for sale, affixed to the pump, dispensing
device or container, and the product therein shall not be substituted, mixed or
adulterated.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CETANE RATING. The cetane rating described in ASTM Standard
Classifications of Diesel Fuel Oil (D 975 73), as amended, and ASTM Test Method
(D 613).
      LEAD CONTENT CATEGORY. The lead content described in ASTM (D 439 73), as
amended, and shall be determined by ASTM Test Methods (D 3237), (D 3116) and (D
526).
      RESEARCH OCTANE RATING and MOTOR OCTANE RATING. The research octane
rating and motor octane rating described in ASTM (American Society for Testing
Materials) Standard Specifications for Gasoline (D 439 73), as amended, and
ASTM Test Methods (D 2699) and (D 2700).
   (C)    In addition to the fine provided for in §
118.999, any violation of this section may be grounds for revocation of the
license issued by the city under this subchapter. However, nothing in this
section shall be construed to preclude the revocation of any such license for a
violation of any other provision of these codified ordinances.
(2000 Code, § 5.52.080)
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
§ 118.020 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent deleterious effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city.
The provisions of this subchapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent nor effect of this subchapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access
by distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market when such is permitted under the First Amendment. Neither is it
the intent nor effect of this subchapter to in any way condone or legitimize
the distribution of obscene or harmful material to minors.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.010)
§ 118.021 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not the person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of the business or is paid solely by tips
from customers.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement or any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
subchapter;
      (3)   The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in
this subchapter to any other existing sexually oriented business;
      (4)   The relocation of any such sexually oriented business; or
      (5)   The addition of a sexually oriented business to an existing
business which is not a sexually oriented business.
   NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY.
      (1)   the appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female
genitals, pubic region, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or
      (2)   a state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human
buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of
the female breast.
   OPERATOR. The owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, OPERATOR or person
in charge or any permitted, licensed or unlicensed premises.
   PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES. Any premises that requires a permit and/or
license and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
   PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE. A person in whose name a permit and/or license to
operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual
listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity of any kind.
   PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building owned, leased or held by the United States,
the state, the county, the city, any special district, school district or any
other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States, which
building is used for governmental purposes.
   PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION AREA. Any public land which has been designated
for park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas, or
similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation or
management of the city or the park district or other recreation authorities.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any church, synagogue, mosque temple or building
which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE. An area containing single-family homes,
duplexes, townhouses, multiple-family units, a mobile park or subdivision and
campground, as defined in the city zoning ordinance.
   SCHOOL. Any public or private educational facility, including but not
limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools
kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges, and universities. SCHOOL includes the school grounds, administrative
facilities, and the facilities used primarily for other purposes by the SCHOOL.
   SEMINUDE or SEMINUDITY. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more
than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, escort agency or
seminude or nude model studio.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES. Those businesses defined as follows.
      (1)   ADULT ARCADE. An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide
projectors, or similar machines, or other image-producing machines, for viewing
by five or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE. A
commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of
its stock-in-trade in any one or more of the following; or derives a
significant or substantial portion of its revenues from, or devotes a
significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to,
the sale or rental for any form of consideration of any one or more of the
following:
         (a)   Book, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
         (b)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others; and/or
         (c)   An establishment may have other principal business purposes that
do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and
still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video
store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is
offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the specified
materials which depict or describe specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, “bottle club,”
carwash, maid service or similar commercial establishment or business, whether
or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features:
         (a)   Persons who appear seminude or in a state of semi-nudity; and/or
         (b)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of or
by pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which
are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas. An adult cabaret also includes any
business which offers as part of its services or entertainment and for any type
of consideration, dancing with any patron intended for the sexual stimulation
of the patron, by an employee or person hired by the business, while the
employee is in any state of dress or undress;
      (4)   ADULT MOTEL. A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment
which:
         (a)   Offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration,
which provides patrons which closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas and which advertises the availability
of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the
public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising including but
not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets radio or
television;
         (b)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than
ten hours; or
         (c)   Allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the sleeping room for a
time period of less than ten hours.
      (5)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or are regularly shown for any form of
consideration.
      (6)   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity, or live
performances which are characterized by exposure of or by specified sexual
activities.
      (7)   ESCORT. A person who, for any form or consideration, agrees or
offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees
or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for
another person.
      (8)   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
      (9)   MASSAGE PARLOR. Any place where, for any form or consideration or
gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or
magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body
which occurs as a part of or in connection with specified sexual activities, or
where any person providing such treatment, manipulation, or service related
thereto exposes his or her specified anatomical areas or massages the specified
anatomical areas of the customer, unless prescribed by a physician or
registered physical and massage therapist. The definition of sexually oriented
businesses shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed hospital,
nor by a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by any
nurse or technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician,
surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by trainers amateur, semiprofessional
or professional or any athlete or athletic team or school athletic program.
      (10)   SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person, who regularly
appears in a state of seminudity or nudity, is provided for money or any form
or consideration to be observed, sketched drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
      (11)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISH- MENT. A business or commercial
establishment that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration a place where two or more persons may congregate,
associate, or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities when one
or more of the persons is seminude or nude. The definition of sexually oriented
businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state
engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Includes any of the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; and/or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACT. Includes any criminal act or conduct as defined in
the Illinois Criminal Code, United States Code, Criminal Code of any other
state; Criminal Code of any United States Territory; or the City of Oak Forest
codified ordinances, which is defined as or has as one of its elements, any of
the following:
      (1)   Exploitation of a minor;
      (2)   Sexual penetration;
      (3)   Sexual touching;
      (4)   Pornographic images of a minor;
      (5)   Incest;
      (6)   Public sexual activity or indecency;
      (7)   Prostitution or solicitation of prostitution;
      (8)   Pimping;
      (9)   Pandering; and/or
      (10)   Attempt, solicitation or conspiracy of any item on the foregoing
list.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breast
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
      (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence; and/or
      (5)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An increase in the
floor area occupied by the business by more than 15%.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Includes
any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities or objects signifying ownership, which
constitute a substantial or controlling interest in the business, whether by
sale, exchange, gift, or similar means;
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the
ownership or control.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.020)
§ 118.022 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to operate without a
valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the city for the particular
type of business.
   (B)   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a
permit.
   (C)   All permits or licenses issued under this subchapter expire on
December 31 of each year.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.030) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.023 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The City Administrator or his or her designee is responsible for
granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling sexually
oriented business permits for sexually oriented businesses.
   (B)   The city’s economic development coordinator or his or her designee is
responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business for
which a permit is being applied for complies with all location requirements of
the city zoning ordinance, all applicable zoning laws and/or regulations now in
effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this subchapter in the city.
   (C)   The Oak Forest Police Department is responsible for providing
information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
act during the time period set forth.
   (D)   The city’s Code Enforcement Officer is responsible for inspecting a
proposed, permitted or nonpermitted sexually oriented business in order to
ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable statutes and ordinances.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.040)
§ 118.024 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for permit must be made on a form provided by the city.
Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall file with the
city an original and two copies of a sworn permit application on the standard
application form supplied by the City Administrator.
   (B)   The completed application shall contain the following information and
shall be accompanied by the following documents.
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state its legal name and any
aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he or she is 18 years of age;
         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name,
and the names of all general partners, whether the partnership is general or
limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; or
         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the laws of Illinois, the names and capacity of all officers
directors, employees and stockholders, if any, in charge of the day-to-day
operations of the sexually oriented business, and the name of the registered
corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of
process.
      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant must:
         (a)   State the sexually oriented business’s fictitious name; and
         (b) Submit the required Illinois registration documents;
      (3)   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed
pursuant to this subchapter has, within the two- or five-year period as
specified in this subchapter been convicted of a specified criminal act, and,
if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the
place of conviction;
      (4)   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals pursuant to
this subchapter has had a previous permit under the subchapter or any other
similar sexually oriented business subchapters from another city or county
denied suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as
well as the date of and reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation and
whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to this
subchapter has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or
stockholder of a corporation that is permitted under this subchapter whose
permit has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and
location or the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked as well as the date of and reasons for the denial,
suspension or revocation;
      (5)   Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to
this subchapter holds any other permits and/or licenses under this subchapter
or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or
county and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses;
      (6)   The single classification of permit for which the applicant is
filing;
      (7)   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including
a legal description of the property, street address and telephone number(s), if
any;
      (8)   The applicant’s mailing addresses and residential address;
      (9)   A recent photograph of the applicant(s);
      (10)   The applicant’s driver’s license number, Social Security number
and its state or federally issued tax identification number;
      (11)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an occurrence of plus or minus six inches;
      (12)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30
days prior to application by an Illinois registered land surveyor depicting the
property lines and the structures containing any established existing uses
regulated by this subchapter within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified;
the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school,
or public park or recreation area or public building within 1,000 feet of the
property to be certified; and the property lines or any residential zoned area
or residential property within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified. For
purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if
it is in existence at the time an application is submitted;
      (13)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
an individual, he or she must sign the application for a permit as applicant.
If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual who has a 10% or greater interest in the business
must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a corporation is listed
as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity which wishes to
operate such a business, each individual having a 10% or greater interest in
the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant; and
      (14)   If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented business which
shall exhibit on the premises films, video cassettes, or other video
reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, then the person shall comply with the application requirements stated in
this subchapter.
   (C)   Applicants for a permit under this subchapter shall have a continuing
duty to promptly supplement application information required by this section in
the event that the information changes in any way from what is stated on the
application. The failure to comply with the continuing duty within the 30 days
from the date of a change, by supplementing the application on file with the
City Administrator or his or her designee, shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of a permit.
   (D)   In the event that the City Administrator or his or her designee
determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed
the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he or she shall
promptly notify the applicant of that fact and allow the applicant ten days to
properly complete the application. (The time period for granting or denying a
permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an
opportunity to properly complete the application.) In the event that the
applicant knowingly provides false information on the application form, this
provision will not apply.
   (E)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
subchapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance
with Health, Fire and Building Codes and laws.
   (F)   The applicant shall be required to pay a nonrefundable application fee
of $100 at the time of filing an application under this section of this
subchapter for the administrative costs of processing an application.
   (G)   Prior to obtaining any permit to operate any sexually oriented
business deemed in this subchapter, and as part of any application for a permit
under this section, the applicant shall obtain from the city or its designee a
certification that the proposed location of such business complies with the
location requirements of the city zoning ordinance.
   (H)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits
and/or licenses does not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining a
sexually oriented business permit.
   (I)   By applying for a permit under this subchapter, the applicant shall be
deemed to have consented to the provisions of this subchapter and to the
exercise by the City Administrator or his or her designee, the city’s Police
Department and all other city agencies charged with enforcing the laws,
ordinances and codes applicable in the city or their respective
responsibilities under this subchapter.
   (J)   The applicant shall be required to provide the city with the names of
any and all employees who are required to be licensed pursuant to this
subchapter. This shall be a continuing requirement even after a permit is
granted or renewed.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.050)
§ 118.025 INVESTIGATION AND APPLICATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city and upon
payment of the nonfundable application fee, the city or its designee shall
immediately stamp the application as received and shall immediately thereafter
send photocopies of the application to the city’s Police Department and any
other city agencies responsible for enforcement of Health, Fire and Building
Codes and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an
investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed sexually oriented
business in accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth in
this subchapter. The investigations shall be completed within 20 days of
receipt of the application by the city or its designee. At the conclusion of
its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of
the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign
it, and, in the event it disapproves state the reasons therefor. The city shall
only be required to certify the criminal records request check required in this
subchapter. The city’s Police Department shall not be required to approve or
disapprove applications.
   (B)   A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it finds
that the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation or any
provision of any statute, code, subchapter, regulation or other law in effect
in the city. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department
or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the city
or its designee.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.060)
§ 118.026 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The City Administrator or his/or designee shall grant or deny an
application for a permit within 30 days from the date of its proper filing.
Upon the expiration of the thirtieth day, unless the applicant requests and is
granted a reasonable extension of time, the applicant shall be permitted to
begin operating the business for which the permit is sought, unless and until
the city or its designee notifies the applicant of a denial of the application
and states the reason(s) for that denial.
   (B)   Grant of application for permit.
         (1)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall grant the
application unless one or more of the criteria set forth in division (C) of
this section is present.
         (2)   The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address
of the sexually oriented business, whether permitted or not may be subject to
indecency laws pursuant to the United State Supreme Court decision in Barnes v.
Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991). The permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so
that it can be read easily at any time.
   (C)   Denial of application for permit. The City Administrator or his or her
designee shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue on any payment to
the city or any other governmental body of taxes, fees, fines or penalties
assessed against him/her individually or any taxes imposed upon any corporation
or partnership in relation to a sexually oriented business;
      (3)   An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit
by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12
months, or residing with a person whose permit to operate a sexually oriented
business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months;
      (4)   An applicant has failed to provide information required by this
subchapter for the issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form;
      (5)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not
been approved as being in compliance with Health, Fire and Building Codes by
the department or agency responsible under law for investigating the
compliance;
      (6)   The application or permit fees required by this subchapter have not
been paid;
      (7)   An applicant of the proposed business is in violation of, or is not
in compliance with, any of the provisions of this subchapter including, but not
limited to, the zoning locational requirements for a sexually oriented business
under the city zoning ordinance;
      (8)   The granting of the application would violate a statute, ordinance
or court order;
      (9)   The applicant has a permit under this subchapter which has been
suspended or revoked;
      (10)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act for
which:
         (a)   Less than two years has elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal acts;
         (b)   Less than five years has elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a felony offense for the specified criminal acts;
         (c)   Less than five years has elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date if the
applicant has been convicted of two or more misdemeanor offenses for specified
criminal acts occurring within any 24-month period; or
         (d)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on disqualification of the applicant;
      (11)   An applicant who has been convicted of any specified criminal acts
may qualify for a sexually oriented business permit only when the time period
required in division (C)(10) of this section has elapsed; and
      (12)   An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ an employee who
does not have a valid license as required in this subchapter.
   (D)   If the City Administrator or his or her designee denies the
application, he or she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the
reasons(s) for the denial.
   (E)   If a person applies for a permit for a particular location within a
period of 12 months from the date of denial of a previous application for a
permit at the location, and there has not been an intervening change in the
circumstances which could reasonably be expected to lead to a different
decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the application shall be
denied.
      (1)   An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Code
Enforcement Officer, the county’s Health Department, and the Fire Department to
inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for
business or at any other reasonable time.
      (2)   It is unlawful, and a person who operates a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for the
business under this subchapter, or its agent or employee, commits a misdemeanor
if he or she refuses to permit the lawful inspection of the premises at any
time that it is occupied or open for business or any other reasonable time.
      (3)   The provisions or this section do not apply to areas of an adult
motel, as defined in this subchapter, which are currently being rented by a
customer for use as permanent or temporary habitation.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.070) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.027 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Each permit shall expire on December 31 of each year and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in this subchapter (for
renewals, filing of the original survey shall be sufficient).
   (B)   When the City Administrator or his or her designee denies renewal of
the permit, the applicant shall not be issued a permit under this subchapter
for one year from the date of denial. Reasons for the denial of the permit
shall be enumerated by the City Administrator or his or her designee in
accordance with this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.080)
§ 118.028 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall suspend a permit
for a period not to exceed 60 days if he or she determines that a permittee, or
an employee of a permittee, has:
      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this
subchapter;
      (2)   Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages or controlled
substances (not prescribed under the supervision of a licensed physician) while
working on the sexually oriented business premises;
      (3)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises;
      (4)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises;
      (5)   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building,
fire, health or zoning statute, code, subchapter or regulation whether federal,
state or local the determination being based on investigation by the division,
department or agency charged with enforcing the rules or laws. In the event of
a statute, code, subchapter or regulation violation, the city or its designee
shall promptly notify the permittee of the violation and shall allow the
permittee a three-day period in which to correct the violation. If the
permittee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the three-day
period, the city or its designee, shall forthwith suspend the permit and shall
notify the permittee of the suspension;
      (6)    Engaged in a permit transfer contrary to this subchapter. In the
event that the city or its designee suspends a permit on the ground that a
permittee engaged in a permit transfer contrary to this subchapter, the City
Administrator or his or her designee shall forthwith notify the permittee of
the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the applicable
section of this subchapter has been satisfied;
      (7)   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours
of operation as specified in this subchapter;
      (8)   Knowingly employs a person who does not have a valid license as
required in this subchapter;
      (9)   Commits any crime on the premises; or
      (10)   Knowingly employs a minor.
   (B)   The suspension shall remain in effect for the entire period of the
suspension or until the violation of the statute, code, subchapter or
regulation in question has been corrected, whichever is later.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.090)
§ 118.029 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall revoke a permit if
a cause of suspension in this subchapter occurs and the permit has been
suspended within the preceding 12 months.
   (B)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall revoke a permit
upon determining that:
      (1)   A permittee gave false or misleading material information in the
documents submitted during the application process;
      (2)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or
sale of controlled substances in or on the premises;
      (3)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on
the premises;
      (4)   A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the permittee’s permit was suspended;
      (5)   A permittee has been convicted of a specified criminal act for
which the time period required in this subchapter has not elapsed;
      (6)   A person or persons commits an offense, occurring in or which is
shown to have occurred in the appropriate civil administrative procedure, and
the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the
time the offenses were committed. The fact that a conviction is being appealed
shall have no effect on the revocation of the permit;
      (7)   A permittee is convicted of any tax violation;
      (8)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or any other specified
sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; or
      (9)   A permittee has been operating more than one sexually oriented
business under a single roof.
   (C)   When the City Administrator or his or her designee revokes a permit,
the revocation shall continue for one year from the date revocation became
effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the City Administrator or his or her
designee finds that the basis for revocation under §
118.035 has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least
one year has elapsed since the date revocation became effective. If the permit
was revoked under division (B)(6) of this section, an applicant may not be
granted another permit until the number of years required under this section
has elapsed.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.100)
§ 118.030 HEARING.
   (A)   No license or permit shall be revoked, suspended, or nonrenewed except
after a public hearing by the City Administrator with written notice sent to
the licensee or permittee at least three days prior to the hearing affording
the licensee or permittee an opportunity to appear and defend. However, if the
City Administrator has reason to believe that any continued operation of a
particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the
community, he or she may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the
reason for the conclusion, and without notice or hearing, order the licensed or
permitted premises closed for not more than seven days, giving the licensee an
opportunity to be heard during that period.
   (B)   The notice provided hereunder shall include the time, date and place
of hearing and a general description of the alleged cause for the possible
revocation or suspension or the reason for the nonrenewal. At any hearing
hereunder, the licensee shall be entitled to all the protections and rights
allowed by law.
   (C)   The City Administrator shall, within ten days after the hearing, if he
or she determines after the hearing that the license should be revoked,
suspended or nonrenewed, state the reason or reasons for that determination in
a written order of revocation suspension, or nonrenewal, and shall serve a copy
of the order within ten days upon the licensee.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.110)
§ 118.031 APPEAL PROCEDURE FOR PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The permittee or applicant, as the case may be, shall, within ten days
after he or she has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice
of appeal to the City Clerk. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the
City Council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal the date of any
original and amended applications or requests, the date of the adverse decision
(or receipt of notice thereof), the action requested of the City Council, and
the name and address of the applicant or permittee. The clerk shall place the
appeal on the agenda of the next regular Council meeting occurring not less
than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for Council
action.
   (B)   When an appeal is placed on the Council agenda, the Council may take
either of the following actions:
      (1)   Set a hearing date and instruct the City Clerk to give such notice
as may be required by law; and
      (2)   Appoint a Hearing Officer and fix the time and place for hearing.
The Hearing Officer may not be a city employee, and may be appointed for an
extended period of time. The Clerk shall assume responsibility for giving any
notice as may be required by law. If a Hearing Officer is appointed, the
hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this
section.
   (C)   Whenever the city has scheduled an appeal before the City Council, at
the time and date set thereof, the Council shall receive all relevant testimony
and evidence from the permittee or applicant as the case may be from interested
parties and witnesses, and from city staff. The City Council may sustain,
overrule or modify the action of the City Administrator. The action of the City
Council shall be final.
   (D)   The Hearing Officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in
this section or the City Council may receive and rule on admissibility or
evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as may be deemed
advisable.
   (E)   The City Council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the
traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this section.
   (F)   If a Hearing Officer is appointed to hear an appeal, the Hearing
Officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date
such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the City Council. The
report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state
findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with
the City Clerk, and shall be considered public records. A copy of the report
shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it
is filed with the City Clerk, with additional copies furnished to the City
Administrator and the Chief of Police. The City Clerk shall place the Hearing
Officer’s report on the agenda of the next regular Council meeting occurring
not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the
permittee/appellant of the date of the meeting at least ten days prior to the
meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period.
   (G)   The City Council may adopt or reject the Hearing Officer’s decision in
its entirety or may modify the proposed report or recommendation. If the
Council does not adopt the Hearing Officer’s recommendation, it may:
      (1)   Refer the matter to the same or another Hearing Officer for a
completely new hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specific
points, in either of such cases the Hearing Officer shall proceed as provided
in this section; or
      (2)   Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the
Hearing Officer with or without taking additional evidence.
   (H)   Any suspension or revocation appealed pursuant to this section shall
remain in effect unless reversed pursuant to this section.
   (I)   If the denial, suspension or revocation is affirmed upon review, the
administrative action shall be final and subject to such judicial review as
provided for by law.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.120)
§ 118.032 TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the
authority of a permit at any place other than the address designated in the
application for permit.
   (B)   A permittee shall not transfer its permit to another person unless and
until such other person satisfies the following requirements:
      (1)   Obtains an amendment to the permit from the City Administrator or
his or her designee, which provides that he or she is now the permittee which
amendment may be obtained only if he or she has completed and properly filed an
application with the City Administrator or his or her designee, setting forth
the information called for in the application as required by this subchapter;
and
      (2)   Pays a transfer fee of 20% of the annual permit fee set by this
subchapter.
   (C)   No permit may be transferred when the City Administrator or his or her
designee has notified the permittee that suspension or revocation proceedings
have been or will be brought against the permittee.
   (D)   A permittee shall not transfer his or her permit to another location.
   (E)   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in
violation of this section is declared void and the permit shall be deemed
revoked.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.130)
§ 118.033 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   (A)   Each individual to be employed in a sexually oriented business shall
be required to obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. Each
applicant shall pay an annual license fee of $50. The fee is to cover
reasonable administrative costs of the licensing application process.
   (B)   Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the
City Administrator or its designee the following information:
      (1)   The applicant’s name or any other names (including “stage” names)
or aliases used by the individual;
      (2)   Age, date and place of birth;
      (3)   Height, weight, hair and eye color;
      (4)   Present residence address and telephone number;
      (5)   Present business address and telephone number;
      (6)   State driver’s license or identification number;
      (7)   Social Security number;
      (8)   Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least 18 years
of age;
      (9)   Attached to the application form as provided above, a color
photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant’s face, and the
applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the city Police Department. Any
fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant;
      (10)   A statement detailing the license or permit history of the
applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of
the application, including whether the applicant previously was or is operating
or seeking to operate, in Cook County or any other county, city, state or
country and has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business
denied, revoked or suspended, and had any professional or vocational license or
permit denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial,
revocation or suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or denying
jurisdiction, and describe in full the reasons for the denial, revocation or
suspension. A copy of an order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be
attached to the application; and
      (11)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of any specified criminal
act or pleaded nolo contendere (or similar plea) to any charge or performing a
specified criminal act. This information shall include the date, place, nature
of each conviction or plea of nolo contendere and identify the convicting
jurisdiction.
   (C)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall refer the sexually
oriented business employee license application to the city’s Police Department
for an investigation to be made of such information as is contained on the
application. The application process shall be completed within 15 working days
from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the
City Administrator or his or her designee shall issue a license unless the
report from the city’s Police Department finds that one or more of the
following findings is true:
      (1)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license, or in
any report or record required to be filed with the city’s Police Department or
other department of the city;
      (2)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act of
this subchapter or entered a plea of nolo contendere (or similar plea) to any
charge of performing a specified criminal act;
      (4)   The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local, state, or federal law, statute,
rule or regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this subchapter;
and/or
      (5)   The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license
revoked by the city within two years of the date of the current application or
similar license revoked by the state, federal government, any commonwealth or
any other municipality.
   (D)   (1)   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to
annual renewal by the City Administrator or his or her designee upon the
written application of the application and a finding by the City Administrator
or his or her designee and city’s Police Department that the applicant has not
been convicted of or plead nolo contendere to any specified criminal act or
committed any act during the existence of the previous license period which
would be grounds to deny the initial license application. All licenses issued
under this section expire on December 31 of each year.
      (2)   The renewal of the license shall be subject to payment of a renewal
fee of $25.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.140)
§ 118.034 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO THE EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS
OR VIDEOS IN BOOTHS.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than a sexually oriented motel/hotel and regardless of whether
or not a permit has been issued to that business under this subchapter, which
exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of
floor space, a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with
the following requirements.
      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations, the location
of all overhead lighting fixtures, the location of the booths, and designating
any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s
station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area with no dimension greater
than eight feet. The diagram shall also designate the place at which this
permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature or an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some
designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches. The City Administrator or his or her designee may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.
      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s
station or booths may be made without the prior approval of the city or its
designee.
      (4)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager’s station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station to every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises have two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of
the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in
this division must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
      (6)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that
the view area specified in division (A)(5) of this section remains unobstructed
by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or persons
at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of
the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted in the application filed pursuant to this section.
      (7)   It shall be the duty of the owners, operator and of any agents and
employees present on the premises, to ensure that no viewing room may be
occupied by more than one person at any one time.
      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access and an illumination of not less than two footcandle as measured at the
floor level.
      (9)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that
the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present on the premises.
      (10)   It shall be the duty of the owners, operator, and of any agents
and employees present on the premises, to ensure that no act of sexual
intercourse, oral sexual contact, or any other sexual contact, including
masturbation, as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq., occurs in or
on the licensed premises.
      (11)   At no time may any door be attached to the viewing rooms or booths
as specified in this section, and it shall be the duty of the owners and the
operator, and of any employees and agents present on the premises, to ensure
that no doors are placed on the rooms as specified in this section.
      (12)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and of any agents
and employees present on the premises, to ensure that no openings of any kind
exist between viewing rooms or booths. It shall also be a duty of the owners
and operator, and of any agents and employees present on the premises, to
ensure that no openings or holes of any kind, commonly referred to as “glory
holes,” be made or attempted to be made by any person between viewing rooms,
booths, restrooms, or any other room on the premises.
   (B)   A person having a duty under this section commits a misdemeanor if he
or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.150) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.035 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES FEATURING NUDITY OR LIVE PERFORMANCE.
   (A)   A sexually oriented business which features persons who appear in a
state of nudity or seminudity or live performances which are characterized by
the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities
shall be operated in accordance with the following regulations. It is unlawful
for an owner, permittee, or operator, and all agents and employees, to fail to
ensure compliance with these regulations.
      (1)   A person shall not appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or
engaged in a live performance which is characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities except upon a
stage elevated at least 36 inches above floor level. All parts of the stage, or
a clearly designated area thereof within which the person appears in a state of
nudity or seminudity or performs, shall be a distance of at least six feet from
all parts of a clearly designated area in which patrons may be present. The
stage or designated area thereof shall be separated from the area, in which
patrons may be located by a barrier or railing the top of which is at least
four feet above floor level. No person appearing in a state of nudity or
seminudity or engaging in such live performances or patron may extend any part
of his or her body over or beyond the barrier or railing.
      (2)   An employee may not touch the breast, buttocks or genitals of a
patron, nor may a patron touch the breast, buttocks or genitals of an employee.
      (3)   A patron may not place any money on the person or in or on the
costume of any employee.
      (4)   A person below the age of 18 years may not observe or appear in a
state of nudity or seminudity or in such live performances on the premises of a
sexually oriented business.
   (B)   A sign, in a form to be prescribed by the City Administrator and
summarizing the provisions of divisions (A)(1) through (A)(4) of this section,
shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a
manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.160) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.036 PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for the business under this subchapter, and knowingly or with
reasonable cause to know, permits, suffers or allows:
   (A)   Admittance of a person under 18 years of age to the business premises;
   (B)   A person under 18 years of age to remain at the business premises;
   (C)   A person under 18 years of age to purchase goods or services at the
business premises; or
   (D)   A person who is under 18 years of age to work at the business premises
as an employee.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.170) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.037 ADVERTISING, LOITERING AND LIGHTING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or
causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or
not a permit has been issued for the business, under this subchapter, and
advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by any applicable
federal or state statute or local ordinance.
   (B)   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for the business under this subchapter,
and displays or otherwise exhibits the materials and/or performances at the
sexually oriented business in any advertising which is visible outside the
premises. This prohibition shall extend to advertising of the existence or
location of such sexually oriented business.
   (C)   The permittee shall not allow any portion of the interior premises to
be visible from outside the premises.
   (D)   All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually
oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation
with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal
illumination of one footcandle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways.
This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient
illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented
business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the
incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the
required sketch or diagram of the premises.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business
to:
      (1)   Initiate and enforce a no loitering policy within the external
boundaries of the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is
located;
      (2)   Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on
such property; and
      (3)   Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of
persons on the property by visually inspecting the property at least once every
ten minutes or inspecting the property by use of video cameras and monitors.
   (F)   Nothing contained in this section shall relieve the operator(s) of a
sexually oriented business from complying with the requirements of the city,
commonly know as the sexually oriented business ordinance, as it may be amended
from time to time, or any subsequently enacted city ordinances or regulations.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.180) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.038 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she
operated or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for the business under this subchapter,
and allows such business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee
to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale,
provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:
00 a.m. of any particular day.
   (B)   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if, working as an
employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for a business under this subchapter, the employee engages in a
performance, solicits a performance, makes a sale, solicits a sale, provides a
service or solicits a service between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of
any particular day.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.190) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.039 ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS FOR THE OPERATION OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS WITHOUT A VALID PERMIT.
   (A)   In addition to the provisions found at other sections of this
subchapter, the following additional provisions shall also apply to sexually
oriented businesses.
   (B)   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for the business under this subchapter,
and the person knows or should know that:
      (1)   The business does not have a sexually oriented business permit
under this subchapter for any applicable classification;
      (2)   The business has a permit which is under suspension;
      (3)   The business has a permit which has been revoked; or
      (4)   The business has a permit which has expired.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.200) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.040 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this subchapter
that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class
operated:
      (1)   By a college, junior college or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;
      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
      (3)   In a structure:
         (a)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
         (b)   Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class;
         (c)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time; and
         (d)   Where the class is a general art class (not limited to painting
nudes) consisting of at least 16 hours of training instruction.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this subchapter that
an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not it is
permitted under this subchapter, exposed any specified anatomical area during
the employee’s bona fide use of a restroom, or during the employee’s bona fide
use of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.210)
§ 118.041 IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION.
   The city and its designee, the city’s Police Department and all other
departments and agencies, and all other city officers, agents and employees
charged with enforcement or state and local laws and codes shall be immune from
prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon a
sexually oriented business while acting within the scope or authority conferred
by this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.230)
TOBACCO SALES
§ 118.055 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)   No person shall sell tobacco or tobacco products at retail in the city
without first obtaining a license therefor.
   (B)   The annual fee for the license required by division (A) of this
section shall be $100 per year, per establishment.
   (C)   The license obtained under this section shall not entitle the licensee
to conduct any other business on the premises without first obtaining a license
for that business, if and as required.
(2000 Code, § 5.60.010) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.056 SALE OF CIGARETTES OR ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS TO MINORS.
   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products or alternative nicotine products, or any
agent, employee or representative of a manufacturer, producer, distributor,
wholesaler or retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products or alternative
nicotine products shall do any of the following:
   (A)   Give, sell or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco products
or alternative nicotine products to any person under 18 years of age; or
   (B)   Give away, sell or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco products or
alternative nicotine products in any place that does not have posted in a
conspicuous place a sign stating that giving, selling or otherwise distributing
cigarettes, other tobacco products or alternative nicotine products to a person
under 18 years of age is prohibited by law.
(2000 Code, § 5.60.020) (Am. Ord. 2019-02- 0720O, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty,
see §
118.999
§ 118.057  PURCHASE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS BY
MINORS; MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   No person under the age of 18 years shall purchase tobacco products or
alternative nicotine products, misrepresent his or her identity or age, or use
any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco
products.
(2000 Code, § 5.60.030) (Am. Ord. 2019-02- 0720O, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty,
see §
118.999
§ 118.058 POSSESSION OF TOBACCO AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS BY MINORS.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall possess any tobacco or
alternative nicotine products, provided that the possession by a person under
the age of 18 years, under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of
such person, in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home, shall not be
prohibited.
   (B)   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT, as defined under ILCS Ch. 720, Act 675,
§ 1.5(a), is a product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco that
provides for the ingestion into the body of
nicotine by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting or
otherwise.
(2000 Code, § 5.60.040) (Am. Ord. 2019-02- 0720O, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty,
see §
118.999
DRY CLEANERS
§ 118.070 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTENDANT. A person thoroughly trained to supervise a coin-operated dry
cleaning machine plant, to advise customers in the operation of coin-operated
dry cleaning machines and to recognize health and safety hazards.
   BUILDING COMMISSIONER. The Building Commissioner of the city or his or her
duly authorized agent.
   COIN-OPERATED DRY CLEANING MACHINE. Any dry cleaning machine, including
integral parts, originally designed and/or intended for use as a self-service
dry cleaning machine by the general public for a consideration.
   COIN-OPERATED DRY CLEANING MACHINE PLANT.  Any structure in which any number
of coin-operated dry cleaning machines are installed for use as self-service
dry cleaning machines.
   DRY CLEANING. The process of removing dirt, grease, paint and other stains
from wearing apparel, textiles, fabrics, rugs and similar items by the use of
nonaqueous liquid solvents, flammable or nonflammable.
   EQUIPMENT. All mechanical and electrical items within or on the exterior of
a plant necessary for the plant’s operation and includes, but is not limited
to, dry cleaning machines, ductwork, fans, blowers, solvent storage tanks,
pumps, heating devices and refuse containers.
   FIRE CHIEF. The Fire Chief of the city or his or her duly authorized agent.
   HEALTH COMMISSIONER. The Health Commissioner of the city or his or her duly
authorized agent.
   MACHINE. A coin-operated dry cleaning MACHINE.
   PLANT. A coin-operated dry cleaning machine PLANT.
   SPOTTING. The local application of solvent to spots, dirt, grease, paint and
stains for the removal of the same.
(2000 Code, § 5.16.010)
§ 118.071 LICENSE REQUIRED; POSTING, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION; FEES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a plant in the city who does not possess a
license from the city. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place. Only
persons who comply with this subchapter, all applicable state laws and
regulations and local ordinances, rules and regulations shall be entitled to
receive and retain such a license.
   (B)   The license may be suspended by the Mayor upon a violation by the
holder of any of the provisions of this subchapter, or may be revoked, after an
opportunity for a hearing, upon a serious or repeated violation.
   (C)   The license fee for a plant shall apply for each fiscal year or any
portion thereof. This fee shall consist of a base fee of $100 for each plant.
(2000 Code, § 5.16.020) (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.072 LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for the license required by §
118.071 shall be on forms provided by the city, shall be made to the City Clerk
in writing, shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners
if a partnership or by a duly authorized officer thereof if a corporation,
verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain such other information as may
be required by the Mayor and Council at their discretion after the application
has been submitted to the City Clerk. Thereafter it shall be the duty of the
Building Commissioner to issue the license.
(2000 Code, § 5.16.030)
§ 118.073 BUILDINGS.
   Structures intended for use as plants shall conform with all applicable city
zoning and building ordinances, permits, rules and regulations and, in
addition, the following.
   (A)   Such structures shall be single-story with concrete floors in good
condition.
   (B)    Machines shall not be installed in buildings used in whole or in part
as dwellings.
   (C)   Maintenance areas shall be separate from customer service areas.
(2000 Code, § 5.16.040)
§ 118.074 SANITATION.
   (A)   Every room or place of a plant shall, at all times, be kept in good
repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (B)   Separate toilet facilities for men and women shall be provided, as
follows:
      (1)   One water closet and one urinal for men; and
      (2)   One water closet for women.
   (C)   Both employees and customers shall have access to these facilities.
   (D)   Toilet rooms shall be installed with adequate ventilation to the
exterior of the plant and shall be kept unlocked at all times the establishment
is open to the public, except when in use.
   (E)   Handwashing facilities, including lavatory, soap and approved hand-
drying facilities shall be provided in each of the toilet rooms described in
division (B) of this section.
(2000 Code, § 5.16.050)
§ 118.075 LIGHTING.
   All rooms in which coin-operated dry cleaning machines are installed and all
maintenance areas shall be illuminated to a minimum of ten foot candles of
light in all parts of the rooms or places not directly obstructed by equipment.
(2000 Code, § 5.16.060)
§ 118.076 VENTILATION AND EXHAUST SYSTEMS.
   (A)   (1)   The room in which a coin-operated dry cleaning machine is
installed shall be ventilated so that there is a minimum flow of air per
machine from the area to which the public is admitted of at least 500 cubic
feet per minute in a room where there are not more than three machines
installed; 400 cubic feet per minute where there are not more than eight
machines installed; 375 cubic feet per minute where there are not more than 16
machines installed; and 360 cubic feet per minute where there are 17 or more
machines installed.
      (2)   For this purpose, each cleaning cell shall be considered one
machine.
   (B)   (1)   Ventilation facilities shall be constructed so that air is
exhausted from the customer service area either directly to the exterior of the
plant or through properly sized openings in a partition separating the front of
the machine from the maintenance portion of the machines.
      (2)   The openings, if grills are used, shall be sized on the basis of
500 cubic feet per minute per square foot of net grill area, and each opening
shall be located in such a manner that the bottom of the opening is from six to
12 inches above the top of the machine. The exhaust ventilation shall be
provided on a continuous basis while the plant is open to the public or in
operation.
   (C)   The exhaust ventilation equipment shall be wired in such a manner that
machines cannot be placed in operation unless the ventilating equipment is in
operation.
   (D)   (1)   A general dilution ventilation fan shall be installed in the
maintenance area of the plant.
      (2)   The ventilation shall, when combined with the system required in
division (B) of this section, enable the exhausting of air directly to the
exterior of the plant in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Number of  MachinesMinimum Air Flow Rate Per Machine (cubic feet per minute)
1 to 3              1,000
4 to 8              800
9 to 16             750
17 or more          720
 
   (E)   Solvent storage rooms, if separate from maintenance areas, shall be
provided with exhaust ventilation equipment capable of exhausting air directly
to the exterior of the plant at the rate of 1,000 cubic feet per minute.
   (F)   The exhaust system must maintain a minimum flow of 100 cubic feet per
minute face velocity through the loading door whenever the door is open.
   (G)   The discharge stack for the machines and for the room in which the
machines are located shall extend at least two feet above the level of any
window which can be opened, located within 50 feet of the outlet of the stack,
and shall be at least 50 feet away from any fresh air intake leading to any
premises.
   (H)   One scavenger pipe shall be provided for every two machines to provide
adequate local exhaust ventilation around base tanks and machine bases. Each
scavenger duct shall be located in back of and exactly between two machines two
to four inches above the floor line and exhausted to a discharge stack as
described in division (G) of this section.
   (I)   All air required to be exhausted shall discharge to the exterior of
the plant and shall discharge a minimum of 25 feet horizontally from any fresh
air intake.
   (J)   A supply of tempered (heated to a minimum of 60°F) make-up air, equal
to or greater than the total volume of air exhaust from the plant, shall be
provided from the exterior.
(2000 Code, § 5.16.070)
§ 118.077 MACHINES.
   (A)   Any machine used in a dry cleaning business shall be completely
enclosed by a cabinet and shall be vented with the intake at the top and the
outlet at or near the bottom of the machine. Groups of machines may be entirely
enclosed or supported on all open sides by an enclosure topped with a hood
vented as provided for each individual machine.
   (B)   No machine shall have a rated capacity of greater than ten pounds dry
weight.
   (C)   The exhaust system of the machine shall be such as to effect
compliance with this subchapter.
   (D)   The cleaning cycle control shall be such that there is no odor of
solvent or solvent vapor in the material being cleaned at the end of the
complete cleaning cycle.
   (E)   The machine must be constructed so as to prevent the loading door from
being opened during the normal cycle of operation. Each machine shall be
equipped with a transparent door or port to allow visual examination of the
status of the cleaning cycle.
   (F)   Any connection of a machine with the water supply system must be
equipped with an air gap or vacuum breaker in the line upstream from the
condenser with no control valves downstream from such a gap or breaker. Waste
water shall be discharged through an air gap.
   (G)   Each machine must be so designed and constructed as to prevent the
leakage of liquids, gas or vapors.
(2000 Code, § 5.16.080)
§ 118.078 MACHINE INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Machines and filter assemblies shall be installed within either a
liquid tight concrete dike of a four-inch minimum height or within a pan and
piping system to contain the solvent should leakage occur. The floor within the
dike shall be pitched to drain to a six-inch floor drain or a sump well. The
drain or sump well shall be connected to an emergency solvent storage tank and
the tank shall be of sufficient capacity to hold all of the cleaning solvent
contained in all of the machines installed. Storage tanks shall be suitably
vented to the exterior of the building and a minimum of two feet above the roof
line.
   (B)   No machine shall be installed in the same room with any gas, oil or
electrically fired equipment. The combustion equipment shall be so installed
that all combustion air is drawn directly from the exterior of the plant.
   (C)   Machines shall be installed in such a manner that only the fronts of
the machines are exposed in the customer service area. The maintenance portion
of the machines shall be separated from the front of the machines by a solid
partition, except for exhaust vents. The partition shall be a wall so
constructed that the only access to the maintenance portion of the machines is
through one or more doors capable of being locked.
(2000 Code, § 5.16.090) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.079 DRY CLEANING SOLVENTS.
   No cleaning solvent, other than perchlorethylene and water, shall be used in
a plant, provided that the use of such solvent has been approved by the
manufacturer of the coin-operated dry cleaning machine.
(2000 Code, § 5.16.100) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.080 OPERATIONS.
   (A)   No automatic dry cleaning machine shall be operated unless all of the
equipment described in §
118.077 is properly installed and in good operating working condition.
   (B)   No establishment for which a license is required under this subchapter
shall be open for business, and no person shall admit the public or customers
into the room where such a machine is located, unless there is on duty, at all
times, a competent person in charge of the establishment and in charge of the
operation of the machine. There shall be warning signs posted in places of easy
observation, warning of the dangers if leakage of liquids, gas or vapor occurs.
   (C)   No person shall permit any residue containing solvent to flow into the
sewerage system of the municipality. Tightly covered metal containers may be
used for the temporary storage of the waste outside the building. The
containers shall bear labels indicating the contents and dangers involved in
handling, and shall be locked if in an unenclosed place.
   (D)   At least one legible sign shall be maintained in a place available to
customers, giving the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
establishment and the service department or agency responsible for the proper
maintenance of the machines.
   (E)   Customers shall not be permitted in maintenance service areas. The
doors of any such area shall be kept locked at all times, except when the
attendant or other authorized plant personnel are entering, leaving or working
within the area.
   (F)   Complete step-by-step operating instructions shall be posted near the
machines in the customer service area. The instructions shall also include the
following statements: “Notify attendant if any odor of solvent remains in
garment or material” and “Garment or materials bearing the odor of solvent are
dangerous if enclosed in an automobile or other enclosed place”.
   (G)   The attendant shall take all reasonable precautions to see that
materials that cannot be properly cleaned are not placed in machines.
   (H)   All machines shall be inspected by plant personnel daily and any
machine found to be operating improperly or found to be unsafe shall not be
placed in service and shall be clearly marked “Out of Order — Do Not Use”.
   (I)   All pipes, connections and transfer pumps carrying the cleaning
solvent shall be maintained tight and free from leaks.
   (J)   Servicing of machines shall be done only during the operation of the
exhaust ventilation required in this subchapter.
   (K)   Filter residue and other residues containing dry cleaning solvent
shall be stored in tightly covered metal containers outside of the plant in an
area not accessible to the public and shall be collected by a scavenger.
   (L)   Spotting of materials shall be done with no solvent other than water.
(2000 Code, § 5.16.110) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.081 SAFETY AND TESTING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Respiratory protective equipment, approved for use in the plant by the
Fire Chief, shall be provided for attendants and maintenance personnel and
shall be kept in good repair and available for immediate use.
   (B)   Utility fire extinguishers shall be provided. The type, capacity,
number and location of extinguishers shall be designated by the Chief. The
extinguishers shall be maintained properly.
   (C)   Safety goggles, rubber gloves and rubber safety aprons shall be
provided for service personnel.
   (D)   A device for testing the concentration of solvent vapors in the plant
atmosphere shall be provided by the licensee. The device shall be a Kitagawa
Precision Gas Detector, Unico Model No. 400, or its equivalent, and shall be
maintained with not fewer than ten gas detector tubes of the appropriate type.
The equipment shall be kept at the plant and made available for on-site
inspection services by the Building Commissioner, the Health Commissioner and
the Fire Chief.
   (E)   A telephone of the nonpay type shall be available at the plant for
emergency use. City Fire and Police Department numbers shall be posted
conspicuously at the telephone.
(2000 Code, § 5.16.120) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.082 PLANT AND EQUIPMENT ALTERATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall effect an alteration, including an addition or
elimination of equipment for a plant, without first obtaining the approval of
the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   The operation or use thereof shall not commence until an inspection
has been made and approval has been granted by the Building Commissioner.
(2000 Code, § 5.16.130) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.083 INSPECTIONS BY FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   (1)   The Fire Chief or other official designated by the Mayor shall
inspect or cause to be inspected every establishment licensed under this
subchapter at least once every six months.
      (2)   Any violation of this subchapter or of other ordinances relating to
dry cleaners, premises and/or flammable liquids shall be reported to the Mayor.
   (B)   The Fire Chief may enter any building or premises situated in the
city, occupied by any dry cleaning establishment, in order to examine the same
and to determine whether or not the building or premises, or any material,
chemical or compound kept therein or used thereon, or any article or fabric dry
cleaned, dyed, spotted or finished, as received, used, kept, maintained or
stored on the premises or in such building, conforms to the fire ordinances and
regulations of the municipality or constitutes a fire hazard within the
municipality.
(2000 Code, § 5.16.140)
LANDSCAPERS
§ 118.095 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   No person shall engage in the business of landscape contractor within the
city without first obtaining an annual business permit therefor. The fee for an
annual business permit shall be as set forth in §
110.047(A)(14) of this code.
(2000 Code, § 5.32.010) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.096 PERMIT APPLICATION; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   An application for a permit required by §
118.095 shall be obtained from the City Clerk’s office and the permit shall be
issued by the Building Commissioner. On the application, the applicant shall
state who has hired him or her to do the particular work. In addition, the
applicant shall file with the City Clerk a statement listing the training and
experience tending to qualify the applicant for the performance of landscaping.
In the case of firms or corporations, the statement shall cover the training
and experience of responsible officers. The City Clerk shall make an
investigation of the training, experience and general qualifications of the
applicant. If the City Clerk does not approve of the applicant, the
recommendation shall be forwarded to Council, which may approve or disapprove
the application. Any disapproval of an application shall be based on the fact
that the applicant is not qualified to fulfill the requirements in regard to
the business, as set forth in this subchapter and in any rules or regulations
controlling this type of business or activity.
(2000 Code, § 5.32.020)
§ 118.097 BOND.
   No permit required by §
118.095 shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has filed with
the City Clerk a bond as required by §
110.047(A)(14) and §
110.049, with sureties to be approved by Council, conditioned to indemnify the
city and hold it harmless from any loss, damage, claim or liability arising out
of or resulting from the conduct or operation of the business or the doing of
or failure to do any act in connection therewith.
(2000 Code, § 5.32.030)
§ 118.098 INSPECTIONS BY CITY ENGINEER BEFORE ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   Prior to the issuance of a permit required by §
118.095, the City Engineer shall inspect the land or area which is to be
landscaped and shall take a grade reading of the soil. The City Engineer shall
also render his or her opinion regarding any potential drainage problem. If, in
the opinion of the City Engineer, flooding or drainage problems may arise as a
result of the landscaping, no permit shall be issued until the landscape
contractor agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the City
Engineer, make the land and any adjacent land safe from flooding or drainage
problems.
(2000 Code, § 5.32.040)
§ 118.099 GRADING AND DRAINAGE.
   A landscape contractor and the owner of the property being landscaped shall
make certain that the work done on the property does not change the grade of
the soil or cause any flooding or drainage problem to the surrounding or
adjacent land or area.
(2000 Code, § 5.32.050)
§ 118.100 INSPECTIONS OF COMPLETED WORK.
   After a landscape contractor has completed his or her work, he or she shall
notify the City Engineer, who shall then reinspect the land and take a grade
reading of the soil to guarantee that the grade of the soil has not been
changed. The City Engineer shall further inspect the land to see that the
contractor has not caused any flooding or drainage problem to the surrounding
or adjacent land or area. If the City Engineer is not satisfied that the work
was done properly, he or she shall immediately advise the contractor and the
owner, in writing, as to why the work is not satisfactory and what must be done
to correct the situation. A report of the proceedings shall also be sent to the
Mayor’s office. In those cases where the contractor has caused flooding or
drainage problems, the contractor shall have not more than 30 days to correct
any defect. If the contractor fails to correct the situation within the stated
time, then the city may proceed to make the correction using the bond posted
under this subchapter to satisfy any expense involved in making the correction.
(2000 Code, § 5.32.060)
§ 118.101 RELEASE OF BOND.
   The City Engineer shall authorize the release of the bond required by §
118.097 only after he or she is satisfied that the landscape work has been
properly completed according to the provisions of this subchapter and other
city ordinances.
(2000 Code, § 5.32.070)
§ 118.102 RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
   Nothing in this subchapter is meant to relieve an owner of landscaped
property from responsibility for work which is improperly done by a landscape
contractor.
(2000 Code, § 5.32.080)
§ 118.103 MAINTENANCE BY PROPERTY OWNERS.
   An owner of landscaped property has the additional responsibility of
providing adequate and reasonable maintenance of the property.
(2000 Code, § 5.32.090)
ITINERANT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
§ 118.115 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The BUSINESS carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler or solicitor.
   CHARITABLE. Includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service,
health, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, cultural or fraternal, either
actual or purported.
   CONTRIBUTIONS. Includes the words alms, money, pledges, property, or any
donations under the guise of a loan or money or property.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any kind, including but not limited to, goods, wares
or tangible personal property.
   ITINERANT VENDOR. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or consignee, who
transports tangible goods, wares, merchandise or personal property for retail
sale, other than a peddler, as defined herein, and who does not maintain an
established office, distribution house, warehouse, service center or residence
from which such business is conducted.
   PEDDLER. Any person who goes upon any premises in the city, not having been
invited by the occupant thereof, carrying or transporting goods, wares,
merchandise or personal property of any nature and offering the same for sale.
This definition also includes any person who solicits orders and as a separate
transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of the scheme to evade the
provisions of this subchapter. A PEDDLER is not an itinerant merchant.
   PEDDLING. Includes all activities ordinarily performed by a peddler as
indicated under the definition of “peddler” in this section.
   RESIDENCE. A domicile, and includes every separate living unit occupied for
residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of
building or structure.
   SOLICITING. Includes any one or more of the following activities:
      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs or services of any kind, character or description, for
any kind of consideration;
      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase
of insurance of any kind; or
      (3)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
and every other kind of publication.
   SOLICITOR.
      (1)   Any person who goes upon any premises in the city, not having been
invited by the occupant thereof, for the purpose of taking or attempting to
take orders for the sale of goods, merchandise, wares, or other personal
property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be performed in
the future.
      (2)   Political, religious, charitable, and other noncommercial speech
are exempt from the licensing requirements of this subchapter.
      (3)   Sales of newspapers, books, magazines, periodicals and every other
kind of printed publications and material, and subscriptions related to same,
are exempt from the licensing requirements of this subchapter, but are subject
to other reasonable provisions in this subchapter, including, but not limited
to, regulation under §§
118.127 and
118.130.
      (4)   Persons under the age of 17 years engaged in solicitation for
charitable or fund-raising purposes are exempt from the licensing requirements
of this subchapter, but are subject to other reasonable provisions in this
subchapter, including, but not limited to, regulation under §§
118.127 and
118.130.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent or consignee, who is
engaged temporarily in the retail sale of tangible goods, wares, merchandise or
personal property, and in pursuance of such sales occupies any building, room,
vehicle, structure, or unoccupied or unimproved lot for the purpose of
conducting such sale.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.010) (Am. Ord. 2009-09-0259O, passed 9-22-2009)
§ 118.116 LICENSE REQUIRED; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   License required. No person shall engage in peddling or soliciting in
the city without first obtaining a license therefor.
   (B)   Prohibited activities. Itinerant vendors and transient merchants are
prohibited within the corporate limits of the city. The definitions of and
prohibition on itinerant vendors and transient merchants shall not be construed
to apply to:
      (1)   Any person selling vegetables, fruit, foodstuffs or other
perishable farm products at an established city farmers market or other city-
sponsored event or market, or area within the city's corporate municipal
boundaries requiring a business license and/or health inspection (if
applicable), at a church fair or other similar event of limited duration held
by a unit of local government or not-for-profit organization for fund-raising
purposes, or other location on the private property of a consenting owner.
      (2)   Any person delivering goods, wares, merchandise or tangible
personal property who is fulfilling an order for such property which was
selected or placed by mail or other means.
      (3)   Any person meeting the definitions of either “peddler” or
“solicitor” as defined in §
118.115.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.020) (Am. Ord. 2009-09-0259O, passed 9-22-2009) Penalty, see
§
118.999
§ 118.117 LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this subchapter shall file a
written, sworn application with the City Clerk. The application shall be signed
by the applicant if an individual, by a partner if a partnership or by a duly
authorized signatory if a corporation. Applications shall be made on forms
available in the office of the City Clerk. The application shall state:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the city; the local address of the individual, if any; the
permanent address of the individual; and the capacity in which the individual
will act;
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on and, if a corporation, the state and date of
incorporation;
      (4)   The time period during which it is proposed to carry on the
business;
      (5)   The nature, character and quality of goods or services to be
offered for sale or delivered and if goods, their invoice value and whether
they are to be sold by sample as well as from stock, where and by whom such
goods are manufactured or grown and where such goods are at the time of
application;
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
and
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant or the person identified in divisions
(A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section has been found guilty, within the previous
five years, of any felony under the laws of the State of Illinois, any other
state, or the United States, or has been convicted of a misdemeanor for a crime
involving moral turpitude or truth and veracity, under the laws of the State of
Illinois, any other state, or the United States, or of violating any provision
of any previous city regulation regarding peddling, solicitation, or itinerant
vending, of any of the provisions of this chapter, or of any local, state, or
federal regulation relative to peddling, solicitation, canvassing or itinerant
vending, and the nature of any such conviction and penalty assessed. Felonies
based solely on the applicant's participation in a political protest or for
nonviolent crimes that did not involve fraud or dishonesty do not have to be
disclosed.
   (B)   Applications for peddler or solicitor licenses shall state, in
addition to statements required by division (A) of this section:
      (1)   A description of the applicant; and
      (2)   The make, model, license plate and vehicle identification number of
any vehicle proposed to be used in the business.
   (C)   Applicants for licenses required by this subchapter shall attach to
their application the following:
      (1)   Two letters of recommendation from any person residing or doing
business in the county, certifying the applicant’s good moral character and
business responsibility or, in lieu of such letters, other evidence which may
be used by the City Clerk to satisfy his or her duties under §
118.118;
      (2)   Copies of all advertising proposed to be used in connection with
the applicant’s business; and
      (3)   Credentials from the person, if any, for which the applicant
proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as a representative.
   (D)   (1)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to
their application, in addition to attachments required by division (C) of this
section, a statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days
prior to the date of application, certifying that the applicant is free of any
contagious or communicable disease.
      (2)   Foodstuffs offered for sale under this subchapter shall be subject
to the health regulations of the city, County of Cook and State of Illinois.
   (E)   A photograph of the applicant, which shall have been taken within 60
days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, shall be
attached. The photograph shall measure three inches by five inches and show the
head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
   (F)   All solicitors requiring cash deposits or taking orders for cash on
delivery (C.O.D.) purchases or who require a contract of agreement to finance
the sale of any goods, services or merchandise for future delivery, or for
services to be performed in the future, shall furnish a bond in the amount of
$100.
   (G)   A record of all permits issued shall be maintained by the City Clerk
for a period of two years.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.030) (Am. Ord. 2009-09-0259O, passed 9-22-2009)
§ 118.118 INVESTIGATION; REASONS FOR DISAPPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a license required by this
subchapter, the City Clerk shall request the Chief of Police to investigate the
applicant.
      (2)   The Chief is limited to ten days to conduct this investigation.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall approve the application unless the investigation
discloses tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would
pose a substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals or general
welfare. In particular, tangible evidence of any of the following will
constitute a valid reason for disapproval of an application:
      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude;
      (2)   The applicant has made wilful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   The applicant has committed prior violations of ordinances
pertaining to itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors and the like;
      (4)   The applicant has committed prior fraudulent acts; and/or
      (5)   The applicant has a record of continual breaches of solicited
contracts.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.040)
§ 118.119 LICENSE AND PERMIT REVOCATION.
   Any license or permit granted under this subchapter may be revoked by the
City Clerk, after notice and hearing, pursuant to §
118.120. Notice of the hearing for revocation shall be given in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place
of the hearing. The notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or her last
known address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.050)
§ 118.120 REASONS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license or permit granted under this subchapter may be revoked for any of
the following reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Any violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of any misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude; and/or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or general welfare
of the public.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.060)
§ 118.121 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §
118.118 or §
118.120 may appeal to Council. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the
City Clerk, within 14 days after notice of the decision has been mailed to the
person’s last known address, a written statement setting forth grounds for the
appeal. The City Clerk shall set the time and place for a hearing and notice of
the hearing shall be given to the person in the same manner as provided in §
118.120.
   (B)   The order of Council after the hearing shall be final.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.070)
§ 118.122 SERVICE OF PROCESS.
   (A)   Upon receipt of notice of approval of his or her application, the
applicant shall file with the City Clerk an instrument appointing the City
Clerk as his or her true and lawful agent with full power and authority to
acknowledge service of process for and on behalf of the applicant with respect
to any matter arising under this subchapter.
   (B)   Forms for the required statement are available at City Hall. The form
or instrument shall contain recitals to the effect that the applicant consents
and agrees that service of any notice or process may be made upon an agent and,
when so made, shall be taken and held to be as valid as if personally served
upon the applicant, according to the law of this or any other state, and that
the applicant waives all claim or right of error by reason of that
acknowledgment.
   (C)   Immediately upon service of any process upon the City Clerk under this
subchapter, the City Clerk shall send, by registered mail, a copy of such
process to the licensee at his or her last known address.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.080)
§ 118.123 DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND BADGE.
   (A)   A badge shall be issued, by an authorized representative, to each
peddler or solicitor licensed under this subchapter. The badge shall contain
the words “licensed peddler” or “licensed solicitor” the expiration date of the
license, the number of the license, and the peddler or solicitor’s photograph
(supplied by the applicant). The badge shall be worn conspicuously by the
peddler or solicitor during such time as he or she is engaged in the business
licensed.
   (B)   A peddler or solicitor is required to exhibit his or her license at
the request of any resident.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.090) (Am. Ord. 2009-09-0259O, passed 9-22-2009) Penalty, see
§
118.999
§ 118.124 NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS; BLANKET PERMITS AND WAIVERS.
   Nonprofit organizations may secure, by formal letter, a blanket permit by
applying to the Mayor and Council, giving the purpose and date upon which
solicitations or canvassing will be made. The Mayor and Council may waive the
requirements of this subchapter or parts thereof for the organizations. If no
waiver is granted, the nonprofit organization must comply fully with this
subchapter. A nonprofit organization shall be registered with the State
Attorney General before any permit is granted to the organization under this
section, and shall furnish a letter attesting to this registration.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.100)
§ 118.125 REQUEST FOR INDIVIDUALS TO SOLICIT ON PUBLIC PROPERTY ON BEHALF OF
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   In addition to the other requirements of this subchapter all
individuals who wish to solicit funds on public properties, including sidewalks
and street corners, to allow aid or contributions to their participation in any
charitable event, as a walk-a-thon, bike trip, race or other occurrence, must
secure a permit from the city.
   (B)   The application for this permit shall include the following:
      (1)   Name of the individual or individuals participating in the
solicitation;
      (2)   A letter from the nonprofit or charitable organization
acknowledging and authorizing the solicitation;
      (3)   Proof the nonprofit or charitable organization is in full
compliance with the requirements of §
118.124; and
      (4)   Any other documents or proofs the City Council shall deem necessary
to render its decision.
   (C)   If granted, the individual shall fully comply with all applicable
provisions of this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.105)
§ 118.126 EXCEPTIONS TO SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter does not apply to an officer or employee of the municipal,
county, state or federal government, or any subdivision thereof when on
official business.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.110)
§ 118.127 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No person, while conducting the activities of a peddler or solicitor,
whether licensed or unlicensed, shall enter upon any premises, knock on doors
or otherwise disturb persons in their premises between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
to 9:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and 12:01 a.m. to 11:59 p.m. on Sundays,
except when having made a prior appointment with the person being solicited.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.120) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.128 EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   Permits issued under this subchapter are valid for not more than six months
from the date of issuance.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.130)
§ 118.129 LICENSE FEE; DEPOSIT.
   (A)   The fee for the license required by this subchapter is $50 per month.
Multiple peddlers or solicitors representing the same vendor, corporation or
organization will be required to each have an individual license/badge.
   (B)   In addition to the fee set forth in division(A) of this section, an
applicant shall deposit $5 with the city at the time he or she files his or her
license application. This sum will be returned to the applicant when he or she
returns the badge issued to the person under §
118.123.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.140) (Am. Ord. 2009-09-0259O, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 118.130 PROHIBITED SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice regulating soliciting. No person shall solicit at residences or
businesses within the corporate limits of the city if a “NO SOLICITORS” sign
has been posted on the residence or business in accordance with this section.
Every person seeking to secure the protection provided by this section shall
post a notice, no smaller than approximately three inches by four inches in
size, on or near the main entrance door to the residence or business, stating
“NO SOLICITORS”. For purposes of uniformity, the notices shall be provided by
the City Clerk’s office, at no cost, to persons requesting the notices. The
notice, so exhibited, shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of
the determination by the occupant of the residence or business to prohibit
soliciting at that residence or business.
   (B)   Duties.
      (1)   Every solicitor, upon going onto any premises in the city upon
which a residence or business is located, shall first examine the entrance area
thereof to determine if a notice as set forth in division (A) of this section
is attached. If so, he or she, whether licensed or not, shall immediately and
peacefully depart from the premises.
      (2)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence or business,
whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises when requested to do so by the occupant thereof.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.150) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.131 NONLIABILITY OF CITY.
   All peddlers and solicitors, including nonprofit corporations and agencies,
shall hold harmless the city from any liability, damage or injury which is
causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of a peddler or solicitor.
(2000 Code, § 5.30.160) (Am. Ord. 2009-09-0259O, passed 9-22-2009)
SCAVENGERS
§ 118.145 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)   No person shall maintain or operate a scavenger business in the city
without first obtaining a license therefor.
   (B)   The annual fee for the license required by division (A) of this
section shall be $200 for each truck used in the business.
(2000 Code, § 5.48.010) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.146 VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.
   Any vehicle used by a scavenger in his or her businesses shall be watertight
and equipped with airtight covers for portions used for the transportation of
refuse.
(2000 Code, § 5.48.020)
§ 118.147 DISPOSAL OR STORAGE OF REFUSE.
   No scavenger shall dispose of or store any refuse in any place within the
municipality or within one mile thereof, except with the permission of the
Mayor and Council.
(2000 Code, § 5.48.030) Penalty, see §
118.999
SECONDHAND DEALERS AND LENDERS
§ 118.160 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENGAGED IN OR CONDUCTING BUSINESS. The purchase, sale, barter or exchange of
any item set forth in the definition of SECONDHAND DEALER in this section,
including advertising therefor, and including such business conducted by an
established dealer in a permanent location.
   GEM. Any item containing or having any precious or semiprecious stones
customarily used in jewelry or ornamentation.
   JUNK/SCRAP. Manufactured articles or parts that have been discarded or are
useful only as material for reprocessing or recycling.
   PAWNBROKER/PAWNSHOP. Any person engaged in the business of lending money on
the security of pledged goods or engaged in the business of purchasing tangible
personal property on condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the
seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. For the purposes of
this subchapter, PAWNBROKERS, PAWN SHOPS, or the like may be referred to as
SECONDHAND DEALERS.
   PRECIOUS METAL. Any item containing as part of its composition, in any
degree, gold, silver, platinum or pewter.
   SECONDHAND DEALER. An individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture,
trust, association or any other legal entity, however organized, engaged in or
conducting business in the city for purchasing, trading, bartering or
exchanging multiple secondhand personal property items that differ in nature,
gold, silver and other precious metals.
   SECONDHAND GOODS and USED PERSONAL GOODS. Any item of personal property or
object of value, such as gold, silver, jewelry and other precious metals, which
is not purchased or sold as new. SECONDHAND GOODS and USED PERSONAL GOODS do
not include property purchased by one licensed, established merchant in the
normal course of business from another licensed, established merchant.
SECONDHAND GOODS and USED PERSONAL GOODS include, but are not limited to, the
following items:
      (1)   Jewelry of any kind and/or any metal, precious or semiprecious in
nature;
      (2)   Gold, silver and/or other precious metals in whatever identifiable
form, except for numismatic coins or bullions;
      (3)   Any type of gem or precious stone, including diamonds;
      (4)   Office supplies;
      (5)   Furniture fixtures;
      (6)   Electronic equipment such as televisions, radios and stereos; and/
or
      (7)   Appliances.
(2000 Code, § 5.50.010) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 118.161 AUTHORIZATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   All uses and structures defined in this subchapter and the like, are subject
to the following standards, regulations, and requirements at all times in those
zoning districts in which they are permitted, special permitted, or existing as
a non-conformance use as established in Appendix A of the City Zoning
Ordinance.
(Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 118.162 EXCEPTIONS TO SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter does not apply to the following businesses or dealers:
   (A)   Junk;
   (B)   Used motor vehicles;
   (C)   Antique dealers which, for purpose of this exclusion, means any dealer
who engages exclusively in the business or occupation of selling, bartering or
exchanging any painting, furniture, china or other object painted or made more
than 50 years prior to the date of sale, which is valuable primarily by reasons
of age, scarcity or the skill and craftsmanship of the article and artisan.
Antiques do not include family heirlooms made of gold and silver or other
precious metals;
   (D)   Coin collectors or coin shops which engage exclusively in the coin
business or occupation. However, this exclusion does not exempt such dealers or
businesses from compliance with the provisions of this subchapter that relate
to any gold, silver, platinum or other precious metal or jewelry which they may
purchase, trade, barter or exchange in addition to their coin and bullion
operations;
   (E)   Flea markets;
   (F)   Neighborhood garage sales;
   (G)   Nonprofit or charitable secondhand goods or thrift shops; and/or
   (H)   Used furniture stores, used clothing stores, or similar/compatible
uses.
(2000 Code, § 5.50.020) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 118.163 LICENSE REQUIRED; TRANSFERABILITY; FEE.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of dealing in secondhand goods
or used personal property, gold, silver and/or other precious metals without
first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this subchapter. A separate
license shall be required for each location, place or premises used for the
conduct of the business of the secondhand dealer.
   (B)   The privilege extended by the license is a personal privilege and
shall not be transferable to another individual or entity, nor shall there be
any abatement of the fee for such license by reason of the fact that the
license holder has exercised the privilege for any period less than that for
which it was granted.
   (C)   The annual fee for the license required by this section shall be as
set forth in §
110.007(B).
(2000 Code, § 5.50.030) (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006; Am. Ord. 2014-
05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.164 LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applicants for a license under this subchapter shall file a sworn
application, in writing, with the Business License Commissioner, signed by the
applicant if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, by all members of
a joint venture or association and by the president of a corporation.
   (B)   The application shall indicate:
      (1)   The name of the person having the management or supervision of the
applicant’s business;
      (2)   The local address of the person while engaged in the business;
      (3)   The permanent address of the person;
      (4)   The capacity in which the person will act, that is, whether as
proprietor, agent or otherwise;
      (5)   If a corporation, other than a state corporation, the laws of the
state that the same is incorporated under;
      (6)   The place in the city where it is proposed that the applicant’s
business will be conducted;
      (7)   A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising
done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers;
      (8)   Credentials from the person for whom or which the applicant
proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as a representative;
      (9)   Whether or not the person having management or supervision of the
applicant’s business has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or violation
of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishments
assessed therefor; and
      (10)   The place, other than the permanent place of business of the
applicant, where the applicant, within the six months prior to the current
application, conducted a previous business in secondhand or used personal
goods, stating the nature thereof and giving the street address of any building
or office in which the business was conducted.
      (11)   Applicants shall provide the Community Development Department with
a plot plan or plat of survey prepared by a registered engineer or land
surveyor illustrating the nearest lender and single-family residential parcel/
lot line and the distances between each.
      (12)   Prior to license approval, the applicant must submit any zoning
approvals that are required by the City Zoning Ordinance.
      (13)   Applicant must submit an original criminal record history from the
State of Illinois for each owner/partner/principal corporate officers (if a
corporation).
(2000 Code, § 5.50.040) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 118.165 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   Upon receipt of an application for a license, the city, in conjunction with
the Police Department, shall cause an investigation of the applicant’s business
responsibility or moral character to be made as deemed necessary to protect the
public good.
(2000 Code, § 5.50.050) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 118.166 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The city may deny a secondhand dealer’s license if the investigation
required by §
118.165 or the information attained through the application process required by
§
118.164 reveals one or more of the following:
      (1)   Conviction of any felony within five years immediately preceding
the date of the filing of the application of any owner/partner/principal
operator/principal corporate officer (if a corporation);
      (2)   Conviction of any crime of moral turpitude within five years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application of any owner/
partner/principal operator/principal corporate officer (if a corporation);
      (3)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement of facts of material
consequence in the application; and/or
      (4)   Proof of a complaint made to appropriate officials, in the area
where business was pursued within the 12 months preceding the current
application, indicating that the applicant has engaged in a fraudulent
transaction or enterprise.
   (B)   The Business License Commissioner or the Mayor shall send a letter of
rejection of the license application to the applicant’s listed address, by
certified mail, with a statement indicating the reasons for the rejection.
(2000 Code, § 5.50.060) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 118.167 APPEALS.
   (A)   An appeal from the Business License Commissioner’s or the Mayor’s
decision to deny an application for a secondhand dealer’s license shall be made
to Council, in writing, within seven days of the receipt of the decision.
   (B)   The appeal shall state the specific grounds thereof.
   (C)   The applicant will be granted an opportunity to present his or her
evidence at a Council hearing to show why the Mayor’s or the Commissioner’s
decision should not be sustained.
   (D)   The provisions of §§
110.001 through
110.018 relative to appeals shall be applicable to appeals taken under this
section.
(2000 Code, § 5.50.070) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 118.168 EXHIBITION OF LICENSES; ADDITIONAL LICENSES AND FEE.
   (A)   The license issued under this subchapter shall be posted conspicuously
in the place of business named in the license.
   (B)   If the person applying for the license desires to do business in more
than one place within the city, a separate license shall be issued for each
place of business and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business.
A separate $500 fee shall be charged for each additional license issued. A
separate license application is needed for each additional place of business.
(2000 Code, § 5.50.080) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 118.169 DESIGNATION OF PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   Any person(s) applying for a license must first demonstrate that all zoning
requirements and permits have been attained prior to application submittal. Any
license issued under this subchapter shall designate the place in which the
secondhand dealer shall carry on his or her business. The business shall not be
carried on or conducted at any place other than that designated in or by the
license.
(2000 Code, § 5.50.090) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 118.170 CHANGE IN BUSINESS LOCATION; LICENSE TRANSFER AND FEE.
   If a secondhand dealer moves either his or her main or satellite licensed
dealership from an existing location to a new location before the expiration of
his or her current license, he or she shall be permitted to obtain a transfer
license at a fee of $100 per unexpired license, to be valid until his or her
existing license expires.
(2000 Code, § 5.50.100) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 118.171 PURCHASING FROM MINORS.
   No secondhand dealer shall purchase, trade or deal in secondhand articles
with an individual under 18 years of age, or receive any goods or articles from
any such person.
(2000 Code, § 5.50.110) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014) Penalty, see
§
118.999
§ 118.172 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Storefronts shall have glass or transparent glazing in the windows and
doors, and shall be absent of bars or security scissor gates. No more than 10%
of the window or door area shall be covered signs, banners, or opaque covers of
any kind.
   (B)   Days and hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m., seven days a week.
   (C)   The use of buzzer doors that require the business to unlock the door
mechanically/electronically for patrons to enter the business is not permitted.
   (D)   All pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers shall provide a 24-hour video
monitoring and security system that shall clearly record any person(s) that
enter(s) or exit(s) the business, and also record the transaction between the
employee and the customer. The video may be duplicated at the request of the
Oak Forest Police Department.
   (E)   No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall sell, purchase, or accept as
collateral any firearms, or other weapon that requires a license to carry or
sell.
   (F)   Any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer operation shall run criminal
background checks on all new employees and provide the Police Department with
an original of such document. No employee with a felony conviction within the
past five years shall be employed by any pawn shop or secondhand dealer, in
accordance with §§
118.164 and
118.165.
(Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.173 ELECTRONIC REPORTING OF TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   The City of Oak Forest Police Department shall enter into a contract
for service and maintain its contract for service with LeadsOnline, or a
similar entity as designated by the Chief of Police, in order to enhance its
investigative services to protect both pawnbrokers/secondhand dealers and
members of the general public. In the event of a change to its electronic
reporting system, the city will notify all impacted licensees of the change
within a reasonable time prior to such change.
   (B)   Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall operate and maintain a
computer system with inherent access and photographic or video capability
sufficient for the electronic reporting requirements described in this article.
Any failure or malfunction of such equipment on the part of the licensee shall
not exempt the licensee from the recording/reporting requirements outlined in
this section. The licensee shall immediately notify the Police Department of
any such failure or malfunction, and shall have such resolved as soon as
practical. Failure by the licensee to resolve any failure or malfunction of
equipment in a reasonable amount of time will lead to license revocation or
suspension proceedings.
(Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 118.174 RECORDS OF TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   Every secondhand dealer shall keep a record of transactions. Record
system guidelines shall be established in conjunction with the Chief of Police,
for the purpose of promoting uniformity and accessibility to the Police
Department with minimum inconvenience to both the dealer and the Department.
However, under no circumstances will a looseleaf system be considered to be a
proper medium of record keeping.
   (B)   The record of all transactions shall be written in the English
language and in a clear, legible manner.
   (C)   The record maintained by the secondhand dealer shall be made at the
time of the transaction and shall set forth the following information:
      (1)   The name, age, sex and a general description of the individual with
whom the transaction is had, as well as the individual’s residence and his or
her signature on the receipt and permanent record kept by the dealer;
      (2)   Confirmation of identification by a driver’s license number, state
of issuance of the license, a military identification card number with a copy
of such license, and the account number of a major credit card account, if used
for purchase;
      (3)   The price or consideration paid or received at the time of the
transaction;
      (4)   A description of every article (except newspapers, magazines,
wastepaper, rags and clothing) received, purchased, sold or exchanged by the
dealer, including the manufacturer’s name and other marks of identification
appearing on the article, including, but not limited to, the serial number, if
any, on the article;
      (5)   If the property is delivered by motor vehicle, the license number
of the delivering vehicle and the issuing state of the license; and
      (6)   The signature of the person making the entry.
      (7)   A detailed receipt, in duplicate, for any purchases made by the
dealer shall be signed by the dealer and/or the individual making the purchase
on behalf of the dealer. One copy will be provided to the seller and one copy
retained by the dealer made available to the Chief of Police or his or her
designated agent in accordance with §
118.172.
   (D)   The record shall be retained for one year from the date of the
transaction.
   (E)   A digital photograph(s) of each non-junk/scrap article purchased or
received as trade, barter, pledge, or pawn by a pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer, sufficiently detailed to allow reasonable identification of each
article. If each article contains any identifying numbers, marks, writing,
engraving, etc., or any other distinguishing characteristics, the digital image
(s) shall capture the same. Such digital photographs shall be made available to
the Police Department upon request and shall be posted on a city designated
LeadsOnline system on the same business day acquired.
   (F)   All video attained through the 24-hour video monitoring system shall
be retained for 15 calendar days and made available to the Police Department
upon request.
(2000 Code, § 5.50.120) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014) Penalty, see
§
118.999
§ 118.175 INSPECTION OF RECORDS AND GOODS BY POLICE.
   (A)   Every secondhand dealer shall make out and make available for the
inspection of the Chief of Police or his or her designated agent, before 12:00
p.m. each and every business day, a copy of the records required to be kept
under this subchapter, reflecting the completed transactions of the previous
day.
   (B)   The record book and the goods, articles or things purchased, received
or kept for sale or exchange by every secondhand dealer shall be open to
inspection by any member of the Police Department at all reasonable business
times or by any person duly authorized, in writing, by the Chief of Police, to
make the inspections.
(2000 Code, § 5.50.130) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 118.176 REQUIRED HOLDING PERIOD BEFORE DISPOSING OF GOODS; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Every dealer in secondhand goods must keep, without concealment for 15
calendar days, subject to inspection by any police officer, all goods, wares
and merchandise, purchased or received from any person, before selling,
shipping or otherwise disposing of the same.
   (B)   Any goods, wares or merchandise purchased or received from any person
may be sold, shipped or otherwise disposed of prior to the expiration of such
15 calendar days if the goods, wares or merchandise have been sooner inspected
by the Chief of Police or his or her designated agent and written clearance for
such further disposition has been received.
(2000 Code, § 5.50.140) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-17-2014)
§ 118.177 MELTING, WRECKING OR REMODELING OF ARTICLES MADE FROM PRECIOUS
METALS.
   No secondhand dealer shall melt any watch, watchcase, jewelry or other
identifiable article composed or manufactured, in whole or in part, of gold,
silver, platinum or other precious metal, until the dealer has made a record of
his or her intention to do so, along with all other data required to be
recorded, as set forth in §
118.171, and has reported the same to the Chief of Police or his or her
designated agent within the burglary and theft division of the Police
Department, and unless and until he or she has kept the article intact, in his
or her licensed place of business, for inspection, for 15 calendar days after
the report provided for in §
118.172(A) has been made available to the Chief of Police or his or her
designated agent. However, the identifiable article may be melted down, wrecked
or remodeled if it has been sooner inspected by the Chief or his or her
designated agent and written clearance for the melting, wrecking or remodeling
has been received from the Chief.
(2000 Code, § 5.50.150) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014) Penalty, see
§
118.999
§ 118.178 COIN COLLECTORS AND DEALERS; COIN COLLECTION SWAP MEETS AND
CONVENTIONS.
   (A)   Coin collectors and coin dealers are not subject to the extensive
record keeping and goods retention requirements for secondhand goods or used
personal property dealers to the extent of their actual dealings in coins.
However, if any such coin establishment also purchases, trades, barters or
exchanges any other type of secondhand personal property, including gold,
silver and/or other precious metals or jewelry, in conjunction with its coin
dealership, the establishment shall be subject to the extensive record keeping,
licensing and goods retention requirements of this subchapter so far as the
items of gold, silver and/or other precious metals or jewelry are concerned.
   (B)   Coin collectors and coin dealers, although not subject to the record
keeping, licensing and goods retention requirements of this subchapter so far
as their coin dealings are concerned, are nevertheless required to meet the
following conditions as they relate to their coin business.
      (1)   All coin dealers and/or collectors who conduct a coin business and
no other precious metal business are required to register with the Business
License Commissioner.
      (2)   The sponsor of a coin swap meet or convention is required to
register with the Commissioner not later than three days before the scheduled
date of the swap meet or convention. The sponsor is required to submit the
following information at the time of registration:
         (a)   The type of swap meet to be conducted;
         (b)   The location of the swap meet or convention;
         (c)   The time and date of the swap meet or convention and its
expected duration; and
         (d)   The approximate number of participants.
(2000 Code, § 5.50.160) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 118.79 NON-CONFORMANCE.
   Any existing pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall meet the standards of
Section 10-102 regulating non-conforming uses of land and non-conforming uses
in structures designed for a permitted use.
   (A)   All standards and procedures established herein shall be enforced for
all zoning non-conformities except for the following standards which will be
enforced one year from the approval date of this section:
      (1)   Twenty-four hour video surveillance.
      (2)   Online network established for electronic reporting of
transactions.
(Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 118.180 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Upon conviction of any person for a violation of any of the provisions
of this subchapter, the license granted to the person under this subchapter
shall be suspended for not less than one year, at the end of which period the
individual must obtain a clearance from the Business License Commissioner
verifying the expiration of the suspension period.
   (B)   Upon a second conviction for a violation of any of the provisions of
this subchapter, the license granted under this subchapter shall be revoked
permanently and the licensee shall not be able to reapply within the city
limits.
(2000 Code, § 5.50.180) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
SECONDHAND ARTICLES DROP-OFF CONTAINERS
§ 118.190 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SECONDHAND ARTICLES DROP-OFF CONTAINER. Any receptacle, box or holder used
to collect secondhand articles. Whenever the words “container” or “containers”
are used in this subchapter, they shall mean a SECONDHAND ARTICLES DROP-OFF
CONTAINER. Examples of these containers are the containers placed by Good Will,
Amvets and other organizations for the collection of secondhand articles.
(2000 Code, § 5.74.010)
§ 118.191 PROHIBITIONS.
   Secondhand articles drop-off containers are prohibited in all zoning
districts except the manufacturing districts.
(2000 Code, § 5.74.020) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.192 LICENSING AND INSPECTION.
   All containers located in the city must be inspected and licensed by the
city. The inspections shall be conducted annually by the city’s Fire Department
The annual fee for such a license and inspection shall be $250 for the first
container owned by the entity and $50 for each additional container owned by
the entity that is located in the city.
(2000 Code, § 5.74.030)
§ 118.193 REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to all such containers:
   (A)   No articles shall be permitted to accumulate outside of the container;
   (B)   The container must not block any public road or sidewalk;
   (C)   The container must not impede motorists’ line of sight;
   (D)   No flammable or hazardous materials or perishable items should be
placed or kept in the container;
   (E)   The container shall be no larger than 60 cubic feet;
   (F)   The container shall be anchored to the ground in such a manner that it
cannot be easily tipped over;
   (G)   The container and the area surrounding it shall be kept clean and free
from trash and debris;
   (H)   The container shall be kept freshly painted and no rust shall be
allowed to show; and
   (I)   The container shall be equipped with a lid and/or doors that
automatically close after articles are deposited in the container.
(2000 Code, § 5.74.040)
§ 118.194 NONUSABLE CONTAINER.
   Once a container becomes unusable, or does not pass inspection by the Fire
Department, it must be immediately removed. If it is not removed within 14 days
of the Fire Department’s notice to remove, the city may remove and dispose of
same and charge the licensee its costs of removal and disposal.
(2000 Code, § 5.74.050) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.195 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   An applicant for a license must submit an application form provided by
the city. The application must be signed by the applicant. In the event the
applicant is a corporation or partnership, it must be signed by the president
and secretary of the corporation, if a corporation, and by the partners, if a
partnership. All such signatures shall be under oath.
   (B)   The application shall contain, at a minimum, the following information
and documents:
      (1)   Name and principal street address of applicant;
      (2)   A statement that the applicant is a not-for-profit entity
(documentation evidencing same shall be furnished);
      (3)   A description of where the used articles are sent and the ultimate
disposition of same;
      (4)   Whether the used articles are sold, and if so, an explanation why;
      (5)   A statement as to how long the entity has been in business;
      (6)   A color photograph of the proposed container; and
      (7)   A site plan showing the proposed location of the container.
(2000 Code, § 5.74.060)
§ 118.999 PENALTY
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under the
Illinois Criminal Code, if a person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or
violates any of the provisions of §§
118.020 through
118.041 or §
118.160 through
118.180 the person, upon conviction of an offense, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $750 or by
imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, in the discretion of the court.
Each violation or noncompliance shall be considered a separate and distinct
offense. Further, each day of continued violation or noncompliance shall be
considered as a separate offense.
      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the city from
taking such other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance. Other lawful
actions shall include, but shall not be limited to, an equitable action for
injunctive relief or an action at law for damages.
      (3)   All remedies and penalties provided for in this division (B) shall
be cumulative and independently available to the city and the city shall be
authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this division (B) or
other applicable law to the full extent allowed by law.
(2000 Code, § 5.54.220)
   (C)   Whoever violates §§
118.057 and
118.058 shall be referred, by a juvenile officer, to the Adolescent Smoking
Awareness Program. The program will run on the second Monday of each month at
the Family Care Center in Tinley Park (Ingalls Wellness Center). The cost of
the program, $30, will be paid by the offender. Subsequent offenses will
require the violator to perform community service.
(2000 Code, § 5.60.050)
   (D)   The general penalty provisions of §
10.99 of the City of Oak Forest Codified Ordinances shall be applicable to
violations of this subchapter. Additionally, the city shall be entitled to
recover all costs and expenses, including its reasonable attorneys fees, that
it may incur in enforcing the provisions of this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.74.070) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)
CHAPTER 119: GARAGE AND RUMMAGE SALES
Section
   
119.01   Number and duration of sales
   
119.02   Obstruction of streets and sidewalks; hours of sales
   
119.03   Items for resale prohibited
   
119.04   Permit required; display
   
119.05   Exceptions to chapter
§ 119.01 NUMBER AND DURATION OF SALES.
   No person shall conduct a rummage, garage or other similar sale more often
than three times a year from the same premises, nor shall any person conduct
such a sale for more than three consecutive days.
(2000 Code, §5.22.010)
§ 119.02 OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; HOURS OF SALES.
   No sidewalk or public parkway shall be obstructed as a result of a rummage,
garage or other similar sale. No such sale shall commence before 9:00 a.m. or
extend beyond 8:00 p.m.
(2000 Code, §5.22.020)
§ 119.03 ITEMS FOR RESALE PROHIBITED.
   Sale items purchased for intentional sale or resale may not be sold from a
private residence.
(2000 Code, §5.22.030)
§ 119.04 PERMIT REQUIRED; DISPLAY.
   No person shall conduct a garage or rummage sale pursuant to this chapter
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Clerk, which permit
shall be granted at no cost to the applicant. The applicant shall post this
permit in a conspicuous place on his or her residence while the garage or
rummage sale is being conducted.
(2000 Code, §5.22.040)
§ 119.05 EXCEPTIONS TO CHAPTER.
   All nonprofit church and school organizations located in residential areas
are excepted from this chapter.
(2000 Code, §5.22.050)
CHAPTER 120: PET SHOPS
Section
   
120.01   Definitions
   
120.02   Restrictions on the sale of animals
 
   
120.99   Penalty
§ 120.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL CARE FACILITY. An animal control center or animal shelter, maintained
by or under contract with any state, county, or municipality, whose mission and
practice is, in whole, or significant part, the rescue and placement of animals
in permanent homes or rescue organizations.
   ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION. Any not-for-profit organization which has tax-
exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue
Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the
rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes. This term does not include
an entity that is a breeder or broker or one that obtains animals from a
breeder or broker for profit or compensation.
   BREEDER. A person that maintains a dog or cat for the purpose of breeding
and selling their offspring.
   BROKER. A person that transfers a dog or cat from a breeder for resale by
another person.
   CAT. A member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
   DOG. A member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris.
   OFFER FOR SALE. To sell, offer for sale or adoption, advertise for the sale
of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a dog or cat.
   PET STORE. A retail establishment where dogs or cats are sold, exchanged,
bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public at retail.
Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal rescue
organization, as defined.
(Ord. 2021-01-0822O, passed 1-26-2021)
§ 120.02 RESTRICTIONS ON THE SALE OF ANIMALS.
   No pet store shall sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, auction, give
away, or otherwise transfer or dispose of cats or dogs. Nothing in this section
shall prohibit pet stores from collaborating with animal care facilities or
animal rescue organizations to offer space for such entities to showcase
adoptable dogs or cats provided the pet store shall not have any ownership
interest in the animals offered for adoption and shall not receive a fee for
providing space for the adoption of any of these animals.
(Ord. 2021-01-0822O, passed 1-26-2021)
§ 120.99 PENALTY.
   A pet store that violates this section shall be subject to a civil penalty
of $500, and each dog or cat offered for sale in violation of this section
shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 2021-01-0822O, passed 1-26-2021)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
130.   OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
         
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY
         
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
         
133.   OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
         
134.   WEAPONS
         
135.   OFFENSES PERTAINING TO ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
Section
   
130.01   Impersonating officers or employees; obstructing official business
   
130.02   Aiding and abetting escape from authority
§ 130.01 IMPERSONATING OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES; OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person shall falsely represent himself or herself to be an officer
or employee of the city or, without being duly authorized, exercise or attempt
to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of any officer or employee
of the city.
   (B)   No person shall hinder, obstruct or otherwise interfere with any city
officer or employee in the discharge of his or her official duties.
(2000 Code, § 9.04.010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.02 AIDING AND ABETTING ESCAPE FROM AUTHORITY.
   No person shall attempt to rescue from any officer of the city any person in
the officer’s lawful custody who is convicted of or charged with the commission
of a misdemeanor. No person shall aid, abet, or encourage the rescue or escape
from a penal institution or custody of any person lawfully committed thereto
because that person has been convicted of a misdemeanor or is charged with the
commission of a misdemeanor, or convey into the institution or transfer to the
prisoner anything for use in escaping.
(2000 Code, § 9.04.020) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY
Section
Miscellaneous Offenses
   
131.01   Loitering
   
131.02   Public urination or defecation
   
131.03   Assault
   
131.04   Disorderly conduct
   
131.05   Fighting in public areas
   
131.06   Loudspeakers and amplifiers
   
131.07   Excessive noise
   
131.08   Disturbing lawful meetings
   
131.09   Boisterous parties or gatherings
   
131.10   Tricks and games
   
131.11   Drug paraphernalia
   
131.12   Possession of cannabis
Sex Offenses
   
131.25   “Public place” defined
   
131.26   Soliciting
   
131.27   Pandering
   
131.28   Obscenity
   
131.29   Public indecency
   
131.30   Adult uses
   
131.99   Penalty
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
§ 131.01 LOITERING.
   (A)   No person shall loiter or prowl in any public or private place at a
time, in a manner or under circumstances which warrant alarm for the safety of
persons or security of property in the surrounding area. Without limitation,
the following circumstances may be considered in determining whether the alarm
is warranted:
      (1)   The flight of a person upon the appearance of a police officer;
      (2)   Attempted concealment by a person upon the appearance of a police
officer; and/or
      (3)   The systematic checking by a person of doors, windows or other
means of access to buildings, houses or vehicles.
   (B)   Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances make it impractical,
a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section,
afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be
warranted, by requesting him or her to identify himself or herself and explain
his or her presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense
under this section if the police officer did not comply with the preceding
sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the actor was
true, and if believed by the police officer at the time, would have dispelled
the alarm.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LOITERING.  Includes the following activities: lingering, hanging around,
delaying, sauntering and moving slowing about, where the conduct is not due to
physical defects or conditions.
      PRIVATE PLACE. Places privately owned but open to the public generally,
such as shopping centers, retail stores, transportation terminals, movie
theaters, office buildings, restaurants and all distinctly private places such
as homes or private residences and apartment houses.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Public streets and alleyways, public restrooms, public
sidewalks, public parks and public buildings.
      SURROUNDING AREA. The area easily and immediately accessible to the
person under observation.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.010) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.02 PUBLIC URINATION OR DEFECATION.
   (A)   No person shall urinate or defecate upon any street, sidewalk, public
way, yard, side or wall of any building, structure, bush, tree or other public
place. Only facilities provided within a public or private restroom shall be
used for such purposes.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DEFECATION.  The voiding of one’s bowels.
      URINATION. The voiding of one’s bladder.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.020) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 ASSAULT.
   No person shall commit an assault or assault and battery upon any other
person in the city.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.030) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   No person shall knowingly:
   (A)   Do or make any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture or
display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and present danger of a
breach of the peace or an imminent threat of violence;
   (B)   Refuse or fail to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or activity
likely to produce a breach of the peace where there is an imminent threat of
violence and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to protect the
otherwise peaceful conduct and activity and have requested that the conduct and
activity be stopped and explain the request if there is time;
   (C)   Fail to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by him or
her to be a peace officer under circumstances where three or more persons are
committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are
likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm;
   (D)   Assemble with three or more persons for the purpose of using force or
violence to disturb the public peace;
   (E)   Go about begging or soliciting funds on the public ways, except as
provided by ordinance;
   (F)   Appear in any public place manifestly under the influence of alcohol,
narcotics or other drugs, not therapeutically administered, to the degree that
he or she may endanger himself or herself or other persons or property or annoy
persons in his or her vicinity;
   (G)   Carry in a threatening or menacing manner, without authority of law,
any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto, knuckles,
slingshot, object containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas or substance or
other dangerous weapon, or conceal such a weapon on or about his or her person
or vehicle;
   (H)   Picket or demonstrate on a public way within 150 feet of any primary
or secondary school building while the school is in session, one-half hour
before the school is in session and one-half hour after the school session has
been concluded, provided that this division does not prohibit the peaceful
picketing of any school involved in a labor dispute;
   (I)   Picket or demonstrate on a public way within 150 feet of any church,
temple, synagogue or other place of worship while services are being conducted,
one-half hour before the services are to be conducted and one-half hour after
services have been concluded, provided that this division does not prohibit the
peaceful picketing of any church, temple, synagogue or other place of worship
involved in a labor dispute; or
   (J)   Picket any establishment in a manner that would impede or restrict
access by the public or those engaged in legitimate business with the
establishment, or in a manner that would restrict or impede the movement of the
public upon a public way.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.040) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.05 FIGHTING IN PUBLIC AREAS.
   (A)   No person shall engage in any physical fight or congregate for the
purpose of participating in or gathering in order to view a physical fight in
any public place within the city.
   (B)   PUBLIC PLACE is defined as recited in §
131.01. Nothing in this section is intended to restrict classes or licensed
exhibitions.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.045) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.06 LOUDSPEAKERS AND AMPLIFIERS.
   No person shall play, operate or use any sound-amplifying device from a
sound truck or from the outside of any building within the business district,
or any loudspeaker, sound amplifier, radio or phonograph with a loudspeaker or
sound amplifier, or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud
and raucous noises and which is attached to any building within the business
district or upon any vehicle, unless the person in charge of the vehicle or
building has first applied to and received permission from the Chief of Police
to operate the loudspeaker, amplifier or other instrument.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.050) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.07 EXCESSIVE NOISE.
   (A)   No person shall operate and/or maintain a motor transportation engine,
truck engine, reefer and/or refrigeration unit, or allow a motor transport
engine, truck engine, reefer and/or refrigeration unit to be operated on one’s
property, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in any place within the
city in which the majority of the buildings within a radius of 300 feet are
used exclusively for residential purposes.
   (B)   No person shall operate a loading dock, by actively performing loading
and/or unloading functions in relation thereto, between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. in any place within the city in which the majority of the
buildings, within a radius of 300 feet, are used exclusively for residential
purposes.
   (C)   No person shall conduct any building operations (construction, repair,
reconstruction or maintenance) or property maintenance work (including, but not
limited to landscaping and landscaping maintenance work) which involves the
operation of any steam shovels, pneumatic hammers, steam electric hoists,
hammers, tractors, power lawnmowers or other apparatus, the use of which is
attended with loud or unusual noise, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. at any location within the city in relation to which the majority of the
buildings, within a radius of 300 feet, are used exclusively for residential
purposes, or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. at any location
within the city in relation to which the majority of the buildings, within a
radius of 300 feet, are used for other than residential purposes. The
provisions of this division shall not be applicable to emergency situations
where the building operations or property maintenance work are being undertaken
in response to a situation that poses an immediate threat to the health, safety
and welfare of the surrounding residents.
   (D)   No persons shall in other ways than as recited in the previous
divisions to this section make any loud or boisterous noise within the city, or
cause the same to be done by any natural or mechanical method. The ringing of
bells or moderate sounding of chimes by any religious institution between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. is exempted from this prohibition.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.060) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.08 DISTURBING LAWFUL MEETINGS.
   No person shall willfully interrupt or disturb any school, Council meeting,
commission meeting, public hearing or other assembly of people who are meeting
for any lawful purpose.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.070) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.09 BOISTEROUS PARTIES OR GATHERINGS.
   (A) Prohibited actions. It is unlawful for any persons who are in possession
of, or are record owners of a premises, to permit guests, tenants, invitees,
visitors or trespassers to engage in any of the following activities:
      (1)   Create such noise as disturbs and interrupts the peace, quiet and
repose of the neighborhood;
      (2)   Amplify music or other sounds to disturb the peace, quiet and
repose of the neighborhood;
      (3)   Litter public property;
      (4)   Trespass onto adjacent private property without specific consent of
the owners of that private property;
      (5)   Litter private property without consent;
      (6)    Block or obstruct public rights-of-way;
      (7)   Allow harmful, offensive or noxious odors to permeate the air of
adjacent property; and
      (8)    Engage in fighting, boxing, wrestling or any martial art.
   (B)   Authority to order dispersal. Any police officer of the city may order
all persons present at any such boisterous party or gathering, wherein any or
all of those persons present are engaging in any of the foregoing prohibited
activities, to disperse immediately.
   (C)   Duty of owners or occupants to abate disturbance. Owners or occupants
of the premises, upon being given a dispersal order by any police officer,
shall immediately abate the disturbance within 30 minutes, and failing to do
so, shall be in violation of this section.
   (D)   Resumption of party constitutes second offense. In the event that the
boisterous party or gathering on the premises reconvenes within two hours of
the order of abatement by any police officer, the resumption shall be
considered a second offense.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.080)
§ 131.10 TRICKS AND GAMES.
   No person shall manage, use or practice any trick, slight-of-hand, game or
device with the intent to win or procure the money or property of another
person by inducing him or her to bet, loan, deposit or stack money or property
upon the result of the trick or game.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.090) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.11 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind
which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of law. It
includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any species of plant which is a
controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
         (b)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;
         (c)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
         (d)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances;
         (e)   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
         (f)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, marmite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances;
         (g)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
         (h)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
         (i)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
         (j)    Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended
for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances
into the human body; and
         (k)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing cocaine into the human body, such as:
            1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic
pipes, with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured
metal bowls;
            2.   Water pipes;
            3.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
            5.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
            6.   Chamber pipes;
            7.   Carburetor pipes;
            8.   Electric pipes;
            9.   Air-driven pipes;
            10.   Chillums;
            11.   Bongs; and
            12.   Ice pipes or chillers.
   (B)   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or
other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following:
      (1)   Statements by an owner, or by anyone in control of the object,
concerning its use;
      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of
the object, under any city, state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of state law relating to controlled substances;
      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows,
or should reasonably know, intending to use the object to facilitate a
violation of state law relating to controlled substances. The innocence of an
owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of state
law relating to controlled substances, shall not prevent a finding that the
object is intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
      (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
      (11)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (12)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
      (13)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   (C)   No person shall use, or possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia
to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of law.
   (D)   No person shall deliver, sell, possess with intent to deliver or sell,
or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia, knowing that
it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of law.
   (E)   No person shall place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other
publication any advertisement knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in
whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for
use as drug paraphernalia.
   (F)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, practitioners,
pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct was in
accordance with state law. This section shall not be construed to prohibit any
possession, manufacture or use of hypodermics made lawful by state law.
   (G)   Any drug paraphernalia used in violation of this section shall be
seized and forfeited as provided in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, § 505.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.100) (Am. Ord. 2019-12- 0778O, passed 12-10-2019) Penalty,
see §
131.99
§ 131.12 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CANNABIS. Marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as
including any parts of the plant cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the
seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant,
its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction,
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction
and chemical synthesis. CANNABIS does not include the mature stalks of the
plant; fiber produced from the stalks; oil or cake made from the seeds of the
plant; any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom); fiber,
oil or cake; or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place where a person could reasonably be expected to be
observed by others. A PUBLIC PLACE includes all parts of buildings owned in
whole or in part, or leased, by the state or a unit of local government. A
PUBLIC PLACE does not include a private residence unless the private residence
is used to provide licensed child care, foster care or other similar social
service care on the premises.
   (B)   For an Illinois resident who is 21 years or older, the possession
limit is any combination of the following:
      (1)   Thirty grams of raw cannabis;
      (2)   Cannabis-infused product or products containing a total of no more
than 500 mg of THC; or
      (3)   Five grams of cannabis product in concentrated form.
   (C)   For individuals who register as qualifying patients under the state's
existing medical cannabis program only:
      (1)   Up to five cannabis plants and the cannabis produced from those
five plants, secured within the residence or dwelling unit (no matter how many
people reside in a residence, only five plants are allowed per residence). If
the plants produce more than the 30 grams of raw cannabis that one individual
is allowed to possess, the excess cannabis product must remain in the
residence. Qualifying patients are allowed to possess any combination of the
amounts indicated above for Illinois residents. Additionally, if they have
plants that yield more than the 30 grams, the excess must remain secured in the
residence or residential property it is grown.
   (D)   For a person who is 21 year of age or older and who is not a resident
of Illinois, the possession limit is any combination of the following:
      (1)   Fifteen grams of raw cannabis;
      (2)   Cannabis-infused product or products containing a total of no more
than 250 mg of THC; or
      (3)   Two and one-half grams of concentrated cannabis. A non-resident may
not possess cannabis plants.
   (E)   A person is restricted from possessing cannabis in the following
locations:
      (1)   Possessing cannabis on a school bus;
      (2)   Possessing cannabis on the grounds of any preschool or primary or
secondary school unless approved as a medical cannabis patient;
      (3)   Possessing cannabis in any correctional facility;
      (4)   Possessing cannabis in a vehicle not open to the public unless the
cannabis is in a reasonably secured, sealed, tamper-evident container and
reasonably inaccessible while the vehicle is moving; and
      (5)   Possessing cannabis in a private residence that is used at any time
to provide licensed child care or other similar social service care on the
premises.
   (F)   A person is not permitted to engage in consuming cannabis in the
following:
      (1)   On a school bus;
      (2)   Consuming cannabis on the grounds of any preschool or primary or
secondary school unless authorized in the medical cannabis program;
      (3)   Consuming cannabis in any correctional facility;
      (4)   Consuming cannabis in any motor vehicle. Consuming cannabis in a
private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed child care or
other similar social service care on the premises;
      (5)   Consuming cannabis in any public place or knowingly in close
physical proximity to anyone under 21 years of age;
      (6)   Consuming cannabis in any public place where a person could
reasonably be expected to be observed by others; or
      (7)   Consuming cannabis in any location where smoking is prohibited by
the Smoke Free Illinois Act (410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.), including hospitals,
restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, etc.
   (G)   Possession and consumption of cannabis as defined by this section is
prohibited by persons under 21 years of age.
   (H)   This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any person who has been authorized by the Department of Mental
Health and Developmental Disabilities, with the approval of the Department of
Law Enforcement, to possess and deliver substances containing cannabis; or
      (2)   Persons registered under federal law to conduct research with
cannabis.
   (I)   A court may impose a sentence of supervision upon any person who
violates this section if, due to the nature and circumstances of the offense
and to the history, character and condition of the person, the court is of the
opinion that the penalty provided for in this chapter is inappropriate.
      (1)   When a person is placed on supervision, the court shall enter an
order for supervision, specifying the period of the supervision, and shall
defer further proceedings in the case until the conclusion of the period.
      (2)   The period of supervision shall be reasonable under all the
circumstances of the case, but may not be longer than one year.
      (3)   The court may, in addition to other considerations, require that
the person:
         (a)   Make a report to, appear in person at or participate with the
court or any such court, person or social agency as directed by the court in
the order of supervision;
         (b)   Work or pursue a course of study or vocational training;
         (c)   Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment or treatment for drug
addiction or alcoholism;
         (d)   In the case of a minor, reside with his or her parents or in a
foster home;
         (e)   In the case of a minor, attend school;
         (f)   In the case of a minor, attend a nonresidential program for
youths;
         (g)   Perform some reasonable public service work such as, but not
limited to, picking up litter along public highways or maintaining public
facilities; or
         (h)   Pay a fine in an amount provided for in §
10.99.
      (4)   The court shall defer entering any judgment on the charges until
the conclusion of the supervision.
      (5)   At the conclusion of the period of supervision, if the court
determines that the person has successfully complied with all of the conditions
of supervision, the court shall discharge the person and enter a judgment
dismissing the charges.
      (6)   Discharge and dismissal upon a successful conclusion of a
disposition of supervision shall be deemed to be a discharge without
adjudication of guilt or innocence and shall not be deemed to be a conviction
for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon
conviction of a crime. A person may have his or her record of arrest expunged
as may be provided by law.
      (7)   No person assigned to a public service employment program shall be
considered an employee for any purpose, nor shall the city be obligated to
provide any compensation for the person.
   (J)   (1)   It is declared to be the policy of the city that a parent or
legal guardian of a minor shall be notified and required to appear in court
whenever the minor is charged with a violation of this section. To this end, it
is directed that a notice, in substantially the following form, shall be sent
to the parents or legal guardians of the minor:
 
LEGAL NOTICE
TO: (Parents' or Legal Guardians' Names)
FROM: City of Oak Forest
You are hereby notified that (minor's name) has been involved with a violation
of an ordinance prohibiting the possession of cannabis, and which requires the
appearance of the minor in court. You are further notified that one of the
parents or legal guardians of the minor must appear in court before the case
will be tried or disposed. If you fail to appear, the City Attorney has been
directed to have issued a subpoena to bring you into court. Failure to obey a
subpoena can result in contempt of court, with a fine or imprisonment as the
penalty.
 
      (2)   The City Attorney is directed to have subpoenas issued whenever a
parent or legal guardian of a minor does not appear in court after the first
two times the minor’s case has been before the court.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.110) (Am. Ord. 2019-12-0777O, passed 12-10-2019) Penalty,
see §
131.99
SEX OFFENSES
§ 131.25 “PUBLIC PLACE” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park,
driveway, parking lot or transportation facility, or the doorways and entrance
ways to any building which front on any such place, or a motor vehicle in or on
any such place or any other area generally visible to public view.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.120)
§ 131.26 SOLICITING.
   No person shall remain in or wander about a public place and repeatedly
beckon to, or repeatedly attempt to stop, or repeatedly attempt to engage
passers-by in conversation, or repeatedly interfere with the free passage of
other persons in that place for the purpose of prostitution, as defined in ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-14, or of soliciting for a prostitute, as those terms are
defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-15.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.130) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.27 PANDERING.
   (A)   No person shall remain in or wander about a public place and
repeatedly beckon to, or repeatedly stop, or repeatedly interfere with the free
passage of other persons in that place for the purpose of “pimping,” as that
term is defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-19.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be prosecuted in accordance with
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.140) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.28 OBSCENITY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      A REASONABLE BONA FIDE ATTEMPT. An attempt to ascertain the true age of a
minor by requiring production of a driver’s license, marriage license, birth
certificate or other governmental or educational identification card or paper
and not relying solely on the oral allegations or apparent age of the minor.
      HARMFUL TO MINORS.  The quality of any description, exhibition,
presentation or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct,
sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse, when the material or performance,
taken as a whole, has the following characteristics:
         (a)   The average adult person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find that the material or performance has a predominant
tendency to appeal to a prurient interest in sex to minors;
         (b)   The average adult person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find that the material or performance depicts or describes
nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse in a manner
that is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community with
respect to what is suitable for minors; and
         (c)   The material or performance lacks serious literary, scientific,
educational, artistic or political value for minors.
      KNOWINGLY. Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief
which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
         (a)   The character and content of any material or performance which
is reasonably susceptible to examination by the defendant; and
         (b)   The age of the minor. However, an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of the minor.
      MATERIAL. Any paper, handbill, card, drawing, magazine, book, newspaper,
poster, pamphlet, ballad, printed paper, phonographic record or tape, recording
tape, videotape, motion picture film, print, picture, figure, image,
description or other tangible thing capable of being used to arouse interest
through sight or sound or in any other manner.
      MINOR. Any unmarried person under the age of 18 years.
      NUDITY. The showing, representation or depiction of human male or female
genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering, of any
female breast with less than a full, opaque covering or any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple or of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
      PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, preview, play, show, skit, dance or
other exhibition performed before an audience.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or other
legal entity of any kind.
      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person, or
the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Masturbation, homosexuality, lesbianism, sadism,
masochism, natural or unnatural sexual intercourse or any physical contact with
a person’s clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if the
person is a female, breast.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in
a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (B)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, distribute, circulate or give
away any obscene material or show or exhibit any obscene performance. Any
material or performance shall be considered obscene if, to the average adult
person applying local contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of
the material, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest in sex and
portrays sexual conduct in a patently offensive way and if, taken as a whole,
the material or performance lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
   (C)   No person having custody, control or supervision of any commercial
establishment shall knowingly:
      (1)   Display material which is harmful to minors in such a way that
minors, as a part of the invited general public, will be exposed to view the
material, provided, however, that a person shall be deemed not to have
displayed material harmful to minors if the material is kept behind devices
commonly known as “blinder racks” so that the lower two-thirds of the material
is not exposed to view;
      (2)   Sell, furnish, present, distribute, allow to view, or otherwise
disseminate to a minor, with or without consideration, any material which is
harmful to minors; or
      (3)   Present to a minor or participate in presenting to a minor, with or
without consideration, any performance which is harmful to a minor.
   (D)   It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this
section that the material or performance involved was displayed, presented or
disseminated to a minor at a recognized and established school, church, museum,
medical clinic, hospital, public library, governmental agency or quasi-
governmental agency by persons acting in their capacity as employees or agents
of the institutions and organizations, which institutions and organizations
display, present or disseminate the material or performance for a bona fide
governmental, educational or scientific purpose.
   (E)   No person shall violate, disobey, neglect or refuse to comply with, or
reject the enforcement of, any of the provisions of this section.
   (F)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of this
section and any provision of state law, the state law provision shall prevail.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.150) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.29 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   Any person who knowingly or intentionally, in a public place, engages
in sexual intercourse, engages in deviate sexual conduct, appears in a state of
nudity or fondles the genitals of himself or herself or another person, commits
an act of public indecency.
   (B)   No person shall commit an act of public indecency within the city.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      NUDITY. The exposure of male or female genitals, pubic area, female
breasts with less than a full opaque covering of the nipples thereof, human
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered, or that portion of the buttocks which would be covered by a properly
worn thong-type bikini bottom.
      PUBLIC PLACE.
         (1)   Any location frequented by the public, or where the public is
present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected
to be observed by members of the public. PUBLIC PLACE includes, but is not
limited to, streets, sidewalks, pools, business and commercial establishments
(whether for-profit or not-for-profit and whether open to the public at large
or where entrance is limited by a coverage charge or membership requirement),
hotels, motels, restaurants, nightclubs, country clubs, cabarets and meeting
facilities utilized by social, fraternal or similar organizations. Premises
used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or temporary in routine,
shall not be deemed a PUBLIC PLACE. PUBLIC PLACE shall not include enclosed
single-sex public restrooms, enclosed single-sex functional showers, locker
and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms designed
and intended for sleeping accommodations, doctors’ offices, churches,
synagogues or similar places when used for circumcisions, baptisms or similar
religious ceremonies, portions of hospitals or similar places in which nudity
or exposure is necessarily and customarily expected outside of the home, or a
modeling class, in which a person appears in a state of nudity, which class is
operated by a proprietary school licensed by the state, a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation or a private
college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in
which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation or an accredited private college.
         (2)   The definition of PUBLIC PLACE set forth herein shall be
interpreted to be no broader than the definition of PUBLIC PLACE set forth in
ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-9 (formerly Ill. Rev. Stat., Ch. 38, § 11-9), as
upheld by the Illinois Supreme Court in People v. Garrison, 8211.2d 444, 412
N.E.2d 483 (1980).
   (D)   This section is patterned after and shall be interpreted in the same
manner as the Indiana Public Indecency Statute held constitutional by the
United States Supreme Court in Barnes v. Glen Theatre. Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 111
S.Ct. 2456 (1991).
(2000 Code, § 9.08.160) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.30 ADULT USES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ADULT BOOKSTORE.  An establishment having, as a substantial or
significant portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for
rent, sale or viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin-
operated means, and periodicals which are distinguished by or relate to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; an establishment
with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of materials; or an
establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of the
materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence
of video preview or coin-operated booths, exclusion of minors from the
establishment’s premises or any other factors showing that the establishment’s
primary purpose is to purvey the material.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET. A public or private establishment which
features topless dancers, strippers or male or female impersonators; which not
infrequently features entertainers who display specified anatomical areas;
which features entertainers who by reason of their appearance or conduct
perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient
interest of the patron; or which features entertainers who engage in or are
engaged in explicit simulation of specified sexual activities.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or area used for presenting
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons therein.
      ADULT USE. Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult
entertainment cabarets and other similar uses.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, a buttock or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; and fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, the pubic
region, a buttock or female breasts.
   (B)   No person shall permit, allow, maintain, conduct or provide an adult
use within 1,000 feet of any residence, school, church or park.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.170) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of the
sex offenses subchapter shall be fined not less than $750 for each offense.
Unless otherwise provided, a separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (B)   Except as may be otherwise provided in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 8-2 and
8-4, every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit or aids
or abets in the commission of any act declared in the sex offenses subchapter
to be an offense, whether individually or in connection with another person, or
as principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of an offense. Every person
who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces,
requires, permits or directs another to violate any provision of the sex
offenses subchapter shall likewise be guilty of an offense.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.180)
      (1)   The penalties for violation of §
131.09 shall be:
         (a)   First offense: $150;
         (b)   Second offense: $250; and
         (c)   Third offense: $500.
      (2)   Any person found guilty of violating any division of §
131.09 shall be responsible and reimburse the city for all actual costs in
excess of normal patrol expenses incurred in dispersing and/or controlling and
cleaning public property following any such boisterous party or gathering.
(2000 Code, § 9.08.080)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
132.01   Theft
   
132.02   Vandalism
   
132.03   Injuring, damaging or defacing public or private property; false fire
alarms
   
132.04   Billposting
   
132.05   Destruction of posted bills, notices and the like
   
132.06   Unauthorized cutting, trimming and the like, of vegetation
   
132.07   Graffiti
   
132.08   Deposits on public ways and places and on private property
   
132.09   Accumulations of garbage and rubbish on private property
   
132.10   Storage of lumber, crates and the like, on private property; nuisance
   
132.11   Junk vehicles
   
132.12   Open burning
   
132.13   Snow removal from multi-family and commercial parking facilities
   
132.14   Playing games in streets
   
132.15   Obstructing public ways
   
132.16   Obstruction of fire hydrants prohibited
   
132.17   Theft of cable services
   
132.99   Penalty
Cross reference:
   Chronic nuisance property, see
Ch. 96
§ 132.01 THEFT.
   (A)   No person shall commit theft.
   (B)   A person commits theft when he or she knowingly:
      (1)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of another;
      (2)   Obtains, by deception, control over property of another;
      (3)   Obtains, by threat, control over property of another; and/or
      (4)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have
been stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce
him or her to believe that the property was stolen, and:
         (a)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit
of the property;
         (b)   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing that
the use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently
of the use or benefit; or
         (c)   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such a
manner as to permanently deprive the owner of the use or benefit.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.010) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.02 VANDALISM.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN. A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor
by a circuit court of the state, but does not include a person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act.
      MINOR. A person who has attained 11 years of age but who has not yet
reached 18 years of age.
      PROPERTY. Any real estate, including improvements thereon, and tangible
personally.
   (B)   Offenses. No person shall:
      (1)   Knowingly or recklessly damage or cause to be damaged any property
of another person without his or her consent; or
      (2)   Knowingly and without authority enter into or obtain control over
any motor vehicle, bicycle, aircraft or watercraft, or any part thereof, of
another person without his or her consent.
   (C)   Penalty; court supervision; restitution.
      (1)   If a minor is found guilty of an offense under division (B) of this
section, he or she may be punished as provided in §
10.99. In addition thereto, or in lieu thereof, a court may, without entering a
judgment of guilty, place that person under court supervision for any period
not exceeding one year. The supervision may include any of the conditions
provided for in division (C)(2) of this section, as the court determines
appropriate. If the person completes the period of supervision without
violating the conditions imposed by the court, the court shall discharge the
defendant from supervision and dismiss the charge against him or her. If the
person, while under court supervision, is convicted of, or pleads guilty or no
contest to, any criminal offense in any jurisdiction, and the state’s attorney
or the city prosecutor, as the case may be, moves for termination of
supervision, the court shall terminate the supervision and enter a judgment of
guilty on the plea or finding.
      (2)   The conditions of court supervision may require that the defendant:
         (a)   Work or pursue a course of study or vocational training;
         (b)   Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed the
total of the actual loss or damage to the property and the actual pecuniary
loss, combined, or $2,500, whichever is less;
         (c)   Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment, or treatment for drug
addiction or alcoholism; and/or
         (d)   If a minor, reside with his or her parent or in a foster home;
attend school; attend a nonresidential program for youth; or contribute to his
or her own support at home or in a foster home.
      (3)   When a court orders restitution or reparation as a condition for
court supervision, the court shall determine the amount and conditions of
payment. When the conditions of payment have not been satisfied, the court, at
any time prior to the expiration of termination of the period of court
supervision, may impose an additional period of not more than two years to make
restitution or reparation. Only the conditions of payment shall continue to
apply during the additional period. The court shall retain all of the incidents
of the original sentence, including the authority to modify or enlarge the
original conditions and to revoke the penalty of court supervision if the
conditions of payment are violated during the additional period.
      (4)   When the petition is filed charging a violation of a condition
imposed for court supervision, the court:
         (a)   May order a summons to the offender to appear, or order a
warrant for the offender’s arrest where there is danger of his or her fleeing
the jurisdiction or causing serious harm to others or when the offender fails
to answer a summons. The issuance of such a warrant or summons shall stay the
sentence of court supervision until the final determination of the charge, and
the term of court supervision shall not run so long as the offender has not
answered the summons or warrant;
         (b)   Shall conduct a hearing of the alleged violation. The court may
admit the offender to bail pending the hearing;
         (c)   Shall receive evidence in open court with the right of
confrontation, cross- examination and representation by counsel. The city has
the burden of going forward with the evidence and proving the violation by a
preponderance of the evidence;
         (d)   Shall not revoke court supervision for failure to comply with
conditions of a sentence which impose financial obligations upon the offender,
unless the failure is due to his or her willful refusal to pay; and/or
         (e)   May modify the conditions of court supervision on motion of the
city, on its own motion or at the request of the offender after notice to all
parties and a hearing.
      (5)   If the court finds that the offender has violated a condition at
any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period, it may continue
the offender on the existing period, with or without modifying or enlarging the
conditions, or may impose any other penalty that was available at the time of
the initial penalty.
      (6)   A judgment revoking a sentence of court supervision is a final
appealable order.
   (D)   Liability of parent or legal guardian of minor offender. The parent or
legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with the parent or legal
guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition of restitution or reparation
imposed by a court upon a minor for a violation of this section, provided that
the minor has not paid the fine or made restitution or reparation within the
time ordered by the court, and provided, further, that the parent or legal
guardian has been served with a summons or notice to appear in the original
cause against the minor and all proceedings thereafter.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.020) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.03 INJURING, DAMAGING OR DEFACING PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY; FALSE FIRE
ALARMS.
   (A)   No person shall willfully injure or damage any sign, signpost,
structure or property owned by the city by any unusual, improper or
unreasonable use thereof, or by careless driving or use of any vehicle thereon,
or by mutilation, defacing or destruction thereof, or cause, encourage, direct
or permit another to do the same.
   (B)   No person shall negligently or willfully injure, destroy or deface any
bridge, crossing, sidewalk, lamppost, tree, shrub, plant or other property of
the city, or cause, encourage, direct or permit another to do the same.
   (C)   No person shall willfully destroy, injure or deface any engine or
other fire apparatus belonging to the city, or cause, encourage, direct or
permit another to do the same.
   (D)   No person, except a person connected with the management of the Fire
Department, shall open any signal box or otherwise cause a fire alarm to be
sounded, unless an actual fire emergency exists, or break, cut, deface, derange
or in any other manner meddle or interfere with any signal box, fire alarm or
telegraph or telephone wire, or cause, encourage, direct or permit another to
do the same.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.030) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.04 BILLPOSTING.
   No person shall paste, post, paint, print, nail or otherwise fasten any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind, or cause the same
to be done, on any curbstone, flagstone or any portion or part of any sidewalk
or street, or upon any tree, lamppost, telegraph pole, hydrant, bridge, pier,
building, vehicle, fence or structure within the limits of any street in the
city, except as may be required by the ordinances of the city or the statutes
of the state, without the express consent of proper city authority.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.040) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.05 DESTRUCTION OF POSTED BILLS, NOTICES AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall willfully tear, mutilate, deface, remove or render illegible
any notice, handbill, poster, ordinance or other public document lawfully
posted in any public place in the city, or cause, encourage, direct or permit
another to do the same.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.050) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.06 UNAUTHORIZED CUTTING, TRIMMING AND THE LIKE, OF VEGETATION.
   No person shall, in any manner, cut, trim or mutilate any tree or shrub
standing upon any private property in the city and not belonging to the person
without first obtaining the consent of the owner of the property, or cause,
encourage, direct or permit another to do the same. No person shall cut, trim
or mutilate any tree or shrub growing upon any public street or road without
the consent of the city, or cause, encourage, direct or permit another to do
the same.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.060) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.07 GRAFFITI.
   (A)   Placement without owner’s permission. It is unlawful for any person to
place graffiti upon the property of another, whether publicly or privately
owned, real or personal.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      GRAFFITI. Any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word,
diagram, sketch, picture or letter, placed, without the express, written
permission of the owner, upon the real or personal property of the owner.
   (C)   Placement with owner’s permission. It is unlawful for an owner and/or
occupant of property which is in the public view to place or give permission to
place any graffiti on the property if the graffiti incites violence by
reference to gang or criminal activity, depicts or expresses obscenity by
referring to sexual activity or contains defamatory material about a public or
private person.
   (D)   Possession of equipment with intent to create or allow graffiti. It is
unlawful for any person to possess spray paint containers, paint, ink, marking
pens which contain a non-water soluble fluid, brushes, applicators or other
materials for marking, scratching or etching, with the intent to use the
materials to violate division (A) or (B) of this section.
   (E)   Removal of graffiti. Upon notification by the city, the owner of
property upon which graffiti has been illegally placed shall remove the
graffiti within 72 hours of the date of notice. Failure to remove the graffiti
within the specified time shall cause the summary abatement of this nuisance,
and costs therefor shall be assessed to the owner. This remedy shall be in
addition to the penalty provided in §
10.99. If the graffiti is deemed an issue adversely affecting the public safety
by the Mayor, upon the advice of the Chief of Police, the city is authorized to
remove the graffiti at once at its cost. Any such decision shall immediately be
reported to Council.
   (F)   Mandatory restitution. In addition to the remedies provided in
division (D) of this section and in addition to the penalty provided in §
10.99, a mandatory restitution requirement shall be imposed by any court
finding a person guilty of violating division (A), (B) or (C) of this section.
As a condition to any probation or supervision, the court shall order full and
complete restitution to be made to the owner of property upon which graffiti
has been illegally placed for expenses incurred in the removal of the material
and for the repair of any structure, wall or other property.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.070) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.08 DEPOSITS ON PUBLIC WAYS AND PLACES AND ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall place, deposit or dump any solid or liquid waste, yard
waste, ashes, branches, trees, stone, sand, dirt, building materials, debris or
material of any kind in any city street, walk, path, alley, parkway or area
under the control, ownership or custody of the city, or in any place or area
for which the city has the responsibility of care and maintenance, except where
the same is authorized by a permit obtained pursuant to §§
151.215 through
151.223 of this code.
   (B)   No person shall place or deposit or cause to be placed or deposited in
any street, sidewalk, drainage ditch, creek or culvert, or upon any sidewalk or
public grounds in the city, any solid or liquid waste, yard waste, ashes,
branches, trees or other rubbish.
   (C)   No person shall place or deposit or cause to be placed or deposited in
any street, sidewalk, drainage ditch, creek or culvert, or upon any sidewalk or
public grounds in the city, any manure, filth or substance emitting an
unwholesome or offensive smell, or any garbage, trash, old iron, brickbats,
ashes, papers, tin cans or other rubbish.
   (D)   No person shall place, deposit, dump or attempt to dispose of any
solid or liquid waste, yard waste, ashes, branches, trees, sand, dirt, stone,
building materials or debris in any public, municipally-owned or privately-
owned area within the city other than in the receptacles or other lawful
containers located on that person’s own property.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.080) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.09 ACCUMULATIONS OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate and control the
accumulation, removal and disposal of garbage, debris and yard waste and to
eliminate unhealthy, unsanitary and unsightly conditions in the city.
   (B)   Garbage, debris and yard waste defined. For the purpose of this
section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GARBAGE AND DEBRIS.  Rejected food wastes, including every waste
accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food and
such paper as may necessarily be used for wrapping the same, and all solid
wastes including GARBAGE, ashes, rubbish, dead animals, paper, sweepings, solid
market and industrial wastes, cans, metalware, glass, crockery, boxes, lumber,
wood, abandoned machines and litter of any kind.
      YARD WASTE. Lawn and grass cuttings or clippings, sod, dirt, leaves,
branches, twigs, cuttings from trees or shrubbery and other plantings or
vegetation.
   (C)   Responsibilities of owners, occupants and lessees.
      (1)   The owner, occupant or lessee of any premises in the city shall
cause to be removed from the premises all garbage, debris and yard waste; and
shall keep the premises, at all times, free and clean from any accumulation
thereof, except when in proper containers for the refuse collector. Yard waste
may not be intermingled with garbage and debris, and must be kept in separate
containers.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         COMPOSTING OPERATION. A compost pile or area upon one’s land designed
for the purpose of composting yard waste, and designed to accommodate yard
waste from one’s own land. A COMPOSTING OPERATION shall be an allowable
alternative method for disposing of yard waste. The COMPOSTING OPERATION must
be maintained in accordance with the recommendations contained in the Illinois
Department of Energy and Natural Resources Pamphlet Number ILENR/RR-89/03, or
as amended from time to time.
   (D)   Removal by city. The corporate authorities may cause to have removed
from private property all garbage, debris, yard waste or composting operations
after five days’ written notice is given to the owner of record of that private
property by the Health Commissioner. The written notice shall state the purpose
and intent of the city and the reason for the action, as well as notification
that any and all costs incurred by the city in the execution of the stated
action shall be placed as a lien against the real estate. The owner, occupant
or lessee shall have five days to comply with the city’s request or the city
will initiate the action.
   (E)   Collection of costs. Upon the removal of garbage, debris, yard waste
or composting operations from private property pursuant to this section, the
corporate authorities may, within 60 days after the cost therefor is incurred,
file notice of a lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds or with the
Registrar of Deeds of the county. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement
setting out a description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof, the amount of money representing the cost incurred or payable for the
service and the date when the cost was incurred or by the city. However, the
lien of the city shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to
the real estate have arisen subsequent to the removal and prior to the filing
of the notice, and the lien of the city shall not be valid as to any mortgage,
judgment, creditor or other lien or whose rights in and to the real estate
arise prior to the filing of the notice. Upon payment of the cost by the owner
of the property or by persons interested in the property, after notice of the
lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the city or the person in
whose name the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of record as in
the case of filing a notice of lien. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to
foreclose as in the case of mortgages or mechanics’ liens. A suit to foreclose
a lien shall be commenced within two years after the date of filing of the
lien.
   (F)   Other prohibited acts. No person shall:
      (1)   Deposit, permit to be deposited or cause to be deposited upon any
public way or upon the property of another any garbage, debris, yard waste or
composting operation. This provision shall not prohibit the setting out of
garbage, debris or yard waste in approved containers and properly separated
upon the parkway or driveway for collection by the refuse collector;
      (2)   Place for collection any garbage or debris from which yard waste
has not been separated;
      (3)   Conceal in or mix yard waste with any garbage or debris that has
been or is to be placed for collection;
      (4)   Store, for a period of longer than ten days, yard wastes upon one’s
own property, except when the storage is part of a composting operation as
defined in division (C) of this section. Nothing herein shall prohibit the
leaving of cuttings upon one’s own property for mulching purposes;
      (5)   Fail to maintain a composting operation by appropriate turning,
wetting and aerating in accordance with the recommendations as specified in
division (C) of this section; and/or
      (6)   Deposit, place, permit to be deposited or allow any dumpster to
remain on single-family residential property, where a certificate of occupancy
has been issued, other than by permit. For the purpose of this division, the
following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         DUMPSTER. Any covered or uncovered disposal container of a 100-gallon
capacity. Permits shall be issued, without fee, by the appropriate licensing
department upon application. No permit may be issued for longer than one week.
No resident shall be granted more than three permits in any one calendar year.
   (G)   Violations as nuisance. Any violation of any of the provisions of this
section is hereby declared a nuisance.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.090) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.10 STORAGE OF LUMBER, CRATES AND THE LIKE, ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; NUISANCE.
   (A)   No person shall use, keep, maintain or operate any yard, lot, premises
or part thereof for the purpose of storing lumber, metal, secondhand material,
dismantled motor vehicles or part thereof, crates, cases, boxes or other
discarded material, unless the storage is for business purposes in a location
zoned for business, for which location a business license has been duly issued.
   (B)   Storage and accumulation of wood for burning in stoves, furnaces or
fireplaces shall be permitted only under the following circumstances.
      (1)   The maximum volume of wood allowed to be stored shall not exceed
four face cords or its volume equivalent.
      (2)   The wood shall be kept in cut and split pieces stacked in rows not
higher than four feet from the ground.
      (3)   Breather and access rows between rows of wood shall be no less than
two feet wide.
      (4)   Wood shall be stored in rear yards and not closer than two feet
from any lot line.
      (5)   Stores of wood shall be kept free and clean from insect nests,
rodents or other animals.
   (C)   A violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is declared to be a
nuisance.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.100) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.11 JUNK VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABANDONED VEHICLE.
         (1)   Any vehicle which is without a current valid license, and/or is
in a wrecked, dismantled, partly dismantled, inoperative, or junked condition.
         (2)   An ABANDONED VEHICLE is also a motor vehicle from which, for a
period of at least seven days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been
removed, or which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged
or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its
own power, or has been unmoved for a period of at least seven days, or is in
such a condition that would leave it incapable of being licensed to be driven.
However, nothing in this section shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept
within a building nor does it apply to any motor vehicle on the premises of a
place of business engaged in the wrecking or abandoning of motor vehicles.
      MOTOR VEHICLE.
         (1)   Every vehicle which is propelled otherwise than by muscular
power, including but not limited to motorcycles, motor-driven cycles,
reconstructed vehicles, motor tractors, buses, semi-trailers, special mobile
equipment, specifically constructed vehicles, trailers, trucks and truck
tractors. MOTOR VEHICLES which are designed and used for the carrying of not
more than seven persons shall be classified as “MOTOR VEHICLES of the first
division”.
         (2)   Those MOTOR VEHICLES that are designed and used for pulling and
carrying freight or are used for the carrying of more than seven persons, shall
be called “MOTOR VEHICLES of the second division”.
      MOTORCYCLE. A motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
      PROPERTY. Real property within the city which is not a street or highway.
   (B)   Vehicle declared a nuisance. All abandoned vehicles, whether on public
or private property, are declared a nuisance, and any person who violates a
provision of this chapter pertaining thereto or who fails to obey a notice
which states that the person is to dispose of that vehicle under his or her
control shall be subject to the fines and penalties provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (C)   Requirement to garage certain vehicles. Unless otherwise provided for
in this chapter, all unregistered, including able or abandoned vehicles, shall
be garaged in a residential district.
   (D)   Depositing, storing abandoned vehicles prohibited. It is unlawful for
any person to deposit, store, park or abandon any abandoned vehicle or parts of
any abandoned vehicle upon any street or other public or private property
within the city, and in view of the public, for more than a period of seven
days.
   (E)   Repair or demolition of vehicles. Unless otherwise provided for, no
motor vehicle which is in a state of major disassembly, disrepair or which is
being stripped or dismantled shall be permitted on any property located within
a residential district for more than seven days. Commercial repairs are not
allowed within a residential zone. Any vehicle being repaired must be licensed
to the property owner or family member.
   (F)   Sale of vehicles. The offering for sale of two or more vehicles at the
same time on private property located within a residential district is
prohibited. At no time and under no circumstances is the offering for sale of
an abandoned vehicle, or sale of vehicle parts, permitted in open areas on
private property in residential districts, or nonresidential districts unless
the property is zoned and licensed for that use.
   (G)   Parking of vehicles in residential district. All vehicles parked in a
residential district shall be parked on a street, clearly delineated driveway
or within a garage. At no time shall a motor vehicle be parked, stored or in
any manner be placed on the front, side or rear yards or otherwise allowed to
create a nuisance to adjoining property owners by placing the vehicle in areas
other than herein provided. Vehicles as defined in this section shall not apply
to boat or RV-type vehicles which are elsewhere regulated.
   (H)   Removal and impoundment of vehicles. After seven days from the
issuance of a warning, a member of the Police Department may enter upon public
or private property and remove any abandoned vehicle, or parts thereof, for the
purpose of disposing of same. The cost for the removal shall be paid by the
owner of the property. However, nothing in this section shall apply to any
vehicle that is kept within a building, nor does this section apply to properly
licensed operable historic vehicles over 25 years of age, or to vehicles on the
premises of a place of business engaged in the wrecking or storing of abandoned
vehicles.
   (I)   Redemption after impoundment. Before the owner or any person entitled
to the possession of a legally impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove
the same from the pound, the person shall furnish evidence of ownership or
right to possession and shall pay for costs of towing or removal to the pound
and the cost of storage.
   (J)   Trailers and able vehicles. This section shall apply to trailers and
to able vehicles where they meet the definition in division (A) of this
section.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.110) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.12 OPEN BURNING.
   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire, rubbish fire or any other
kind of fire, or knowingly authorize or permit the same to be done, within the
jurisdiction of the city or the fire district.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.120) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.13 SNOW REMOVAL FROM MULTI-FAMILY AND COMMERCIAL PARKING FACILITIES.
   No person who owns an apartment building, condominium development or
commercial property in the city shall fail to maintain a snow free access route
across its parking facilities. This route shall be no less than 16 feet in
width adjacent to the structure or nearest curb to the improvement and be fully
cleared within 24 hours after any three-inch snow fall.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.130) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.14 PLAYING GAMES IN STREETS.
   No person shall play ball or engage in any sport or exercise in such a
manner or place as to obstruct the passing of vehicles or otherwise injure the
person or property of others.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.140) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.15 OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   No person shall place a box, post, sign, bicycle, motor vehicle or
other article that may interfere with the free passage of pedestrians over any
sidewalk, or that may interfere with or obstruct the passing of vehicles upon
any street, on any sidewalk or street in the city, without authority from the
city to do so.
   (B)   No person shall park a motor vehicle, trailer or other motorized
device within ten feet of a freestanding mail box.
   (C)   No person shall place or maintain any obstruction on any public street
or parkway or other public place.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      OBSTRUCTION. A structure, device or object, other than a freestanding
mail box having a height prescribed by the U.S. Postal Service and a stand of
not more than one foot in area.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.150) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.16 OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or dump any snow
or ice onto or within 12 inches of any fire hydrant.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or place any waste or
debris or otherwise obstruct any fire hydrant.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.160) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.17 THEFT OF CABLE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to attach or affix, or to cause to be
attached or affixed, any equipment or device which allows access to or use of
the cable television system without payment to the grantee for same.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.170) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (C)   Any person who violates or fails to comply with §
132.16 shall be fined in an amount as allowed by §
10.99 or any successor statutes.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.160)
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §
132.17 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500. Each day a violation
continues or occurs shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to limit such other legal remedies as may be
available to the city as otherwise provided by law.
(2000 Code, § 9.12.170)
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
Section
   
133.01   Minors’ curfew
   
133.02   Truancy
   
133.03   Parental responsibility
 
   
133.99   Penalty
§ 133.01 MINORS’ CURFEW.
   (A)   Definitions. In this section:
      CURFEW HOURS means:
         (a)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;
         (b)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday; and
         (c)   Between 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following day, Sunday to
Thursday, inclusive.
      EMERGENCY means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      ESTABLISHMENT means any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited including but not limited to any place of
amusement or entertainment.
      GUARDIAN means:
         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court.
      MINOR means any person under 18 years of age.
      PARENT means a person who is:
         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another
person; or
         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian
to have the care and custody of a minor.
      PUBLIC PLACE means any place to which the public or a substantial group
of the public has access and includes but is not limited to streets, highways,
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
      REMAIN means to:
         (a)   Linger or stay; or
         (b)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk
of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   (B)   Offenses.
      (1)   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place
or on the premises of any establishment during curfew hours.
      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in custody or
control of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits the minor
to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment during
curfew hours.
   (C)   Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under division (B) that the
minor was:
         (a)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or other person in
custody or control of the minor;
         (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
         (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
         (d)   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
         (e)   Involved in an emergency;
         (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor's presence;
         (g)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental
agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental agency, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor;
         (h)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
         (i)   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation of Minors Act.
   (D)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section,
a law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for
being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances,
no defense in division (C) is present.
   (E)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
(Ord. 2010-06-0296O, passed 6-8-2010)
§ 133.02 TRUANCY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN. Any foster parent, person appointed guardian or given
custody of a minor by a circuit court of this state or person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the State Juvenile Court Act, but
shall not include any person appointed guardian only to the estate of a minor.
      MINOR, MINOR CHILD or WARD.  Any person over five years but not yet 18
years of age.
      PARENT. The father and/or the mother of a minor child, whether by birth
or adoption, or the PARENT having legal custody of the minor if the PARENTS are
divorced or separated. PARENT, as used in this section, also means legal
guardian.
   (B)   Truancy prohibited. No minor enrolled in a public, private or
parochial school within the city shall absent himself or herself from
attendance at school without permission of his or her parent or legal guardian.
Emergency or unforeseen absences due to illness or other causes beyond the
control of the person so absenting himself or herself from school without
permission of his or her parent or legal guardian shall not constitute truancy
if permission for the absence has in substance been obtained from the parent or
legal guardian and the permission is confirmed, in writing and/or by a personal
telephone call to the proper school authorities, within 24 hours after the
absence.
   (C)   Parental responsibility. No parent or legal guardian shall suffer or
permit his or her minor child or ward to violate division (B) of this section.
(2000 Code, § 9.16.020) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.03 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACTS WHICH CAUSE INJURY. Acts that directly or proximately bring about or
are the reason for the damage or harm.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN. A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor
by a court, but does not include a person appointed guardian or given custody
to a minor under the Juvenile Court Act (ILCS Ch. 705, Act 405, § 1-1), as
amended. The term LEGAL GUARDIAN does not include a guardian ad litem.
      MINOR. Any person above the age of 11 but not 18 years of age.
      PARENT. The father and/or the mother of a minor child, whether by birth
or adoption, or the PARENT having legal custody of the minor if the PARENTS are
divorced or separated. PARENT, as used in this section, also means legal
guardian.
      WILLFUL OR MALICIOUS CONDUCT. Conduct that involves the same mens rea as
required for criminal conduct. WILLFUL OR MALICIOUS CONDUCT consists of the
intentional commission of a wrongful and illegal act with an intent to cause
damage or harm.
   (B)   Illegal acts. It shall be unlawful for the parent or legal guardian of
an unemancipated minor residing with the parent or legal guardian to fail to
exercise proper parental responsibility by allowing, failing to supervise, or
permitting the minor to commit any violation of a city ordinance or state
statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property, including, but not limited to, assault, battery, disorderly conduct
resulting in injury or property damage, theft, damage or defacing public or
private property, graffiti, and vandalism. The parent or legal guardian of an
unemancipated minor residing with the parent or legal guardian shall be
presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to
exercise proper parental responsibility and the minor shall be deemed to have
committed the acts described below with the knowledge and permission of the
parent or guardian, in violation of this section, upon the occurrence of the
events described in division (C) of this section.
   (C)   Violation. A parent or legal guardian shall be in violation of this
section if an unemancipated minor residing with the parent or legal guardian
shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property,
or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency,
peace officer, police officer or conservator of the peace resulting from an
admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting
willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property.
   (D)   Damage to persons or property.
      (1)   Liability of parent. The parent or legal guardian of an
unemancipated minor who resides with that parent or legal guardian is liable
for actual damages for the willful or malicious acts of the minor which cause
injury to a person or property, up to $20,000 for each person or entity for
each occurrence of the willful or malicious acts by the minor causing injury,
in addition to court costs and attorney’s fees incurred in enforcement of this
section, and any attorney costs and fees, court costs or administrative fees,
if any, incurred by the city in the prosecution of the minor for a violation of
any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing
injury to a person or property, if the minor is convicted of violating such a
law.
      (2)   Common law damages. Nothing in this section shall affect the
recovery of damages in any other cause of action where the liability of the
parent or legal guardian is predicated on a common law basis.
(Ord. 2007-08-0120O, passed 8-28-2007; Ord. 2010-06-0296O, passed 6-8-2010)
Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribes shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   In addition to or in lieu of the penalty set forth in §
10.99, a period of community service not to exceed 160 hours may be imposed
upon a minor who violates any of the provisions of §
133.02.
(2000 Code, § 9.16.020)
   (C)   Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of §
133.03 shall be fined an amount equal to the damages or pecuniary loss
resulting from each violation described in §§
133.03(C), and in addition may be sentenced to probation or conditional
discharge with the conditions being that the parent or legal guardian make
restitution or reparation up to $20,000, but not to exceed actual loss or
damage to property or pecuniary loss. The court or administrative adjudication
process shall determine the amount and conditions of payment. Where the
conditions or payment have not been satisfied, the court may, at any time prior
to the expiration or termination of the period of probation or of conditional
discharge, impose an additional fine. The City Attorney, at his or her
discretion, shall seek to nonsuit and ask for dismissal of charge upon
satisfactory termination of the conditions of conditional discharge as set
forth by the trial judge.
(Ord. 2007-08-0120O, passed 8-28-2007)
CHAPTER 134: WEAPONS
Section
   
134.01   Possession and discharge of firearms and other weapons
   
134.02   Sale and possession of knives and other weapons
   
134.03   Air rifles
   
134.99   Penalty
§ 134.01 POSSESSION AND DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall have or carry any shotgun, rifle, pistol, revolver,
air gun or any other firearm, unless the same is unloaded and in a case if
carried.
   (B)   No person shall discharge any shotgun, rifle, pistol, revolver, air
gun or any other firearm in the city, and the Chief of Police may confiscate
the unlawfully discharged firearms.
   (C)   No person shall discharge any arrow from a bow except at an inanimate
archery target.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any officer of the law while in the
performance of his or her duty, or to persons lawfully summoned by an officer
to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while so engaged in
assisting the officer, or to any resident discharging a firearm when lawfully
defending his or her person or property.
(2000 Code, § 9.24.010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.02 SALE AND POSSESSION OF KNIVES AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (A)   Sale or transfer.
      (1)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, loan or give to any person
any knife, the blade of which is released by a spring mechanism, including
knives known as switch-blades, any blackjack, slungshot, sand-club, sand-bag,
metal knuckles or bludgeon.
      (2)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, loan or give to any person 18
years or under any type or kind of knife, any blade of which is two inches in
length or longer.
   (B)   Possession.
      (1)   No person shall carry or possess any knife, the blade of which is
released by a spring mechanism, including knives known as switch-blades, any
blackjack, slungshot, sand-club, sand-bags, metal knuckles or bludgeon.
      (2)   No person shall carry or possess any knife, the blade of which is
in excess of two and one-half inches in length.
      (3)   No person 18 years of age or under shall carry or possess any
knife, the blade of which is two inches in length or longer.
   (C)   Concealment.
      (1)   No person shall carry concealed on or about his or her person a
dagger, stiletto, bowie knife, commando knife, razor, or any blade which is
released by a spring mechanism, including knives known as switchblades, or any
other type or kind of knife, any blade of which is more than two and one-half
inches in length.
      (2)   No person 18 years of age or under shall carry concealed on or
about his or her person any knife, the blade of which is two inches in length
or longer.
   (D)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section as to the possession of
knives in excess of two and one-half inches shall not apply to officers while
engaged in the discharge of their official duties or to sheriffs, police
officers duly constituted police officers; nor to the following employees or
agents while engaged in the discharge of the duties of their employment:
traders, baggage handlers, messengers, drivers, watchpersons, special agents
and police officers employed by railroads or express companies; nor to persons
lawfully summoned by an officer to assist in making an arrest or preserving the
peace, while so engaged in assisting the officer.
   (E)   Confiscation. In addition to the penalty provided in §
134.99, weapons used in violation of this section shall be forfeited to and
confiscated by the city. The city shall thereafter destroy the weapons.
(2000 Code, § 9.24.020) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.03 AIR RIFLES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AIR RIFLE. Any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun,
paint ball gun, pellet gun or any implement that is not a firearm which impels
a breakable paint ball containing washable marking colors or a pellet
constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard materials with a force
that can reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm.
      DEALER. Any person, copartnership, association or corporation engaged in
the business of selling, at retail, or renting any of the articles included in
the definition of “air rifle” as provided in this division.
   (B)   Selling, renting or transferring prohibited. It is unlawful for any
dealer to sell, lend, rent, give or otherwise transfer an air rifle to any
person in the city.
   (C)   Carrying or discharging on public streets. It is unlawful for any
person to carry on his or her person or within the passenger portion of a motor
vehicle any air rifle on the public streets, roads or highways or on public
lands within the city. It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle
from or across any street, sidewalk, road, highway, public land or public
place, except on a safely constructed target range.
   (D)   Permitted uses. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, it is
lawful for any person to have in his or her possession any air rifle if it is:
      (1)   Kept within his or her house of residence or other private
enclosure;
      (2)   Used by the person and he or she is a duly enrolled member of any
club, team or society organized for educational purposes and maintaining, as
part of its facilities, or having written permission to use, an indoor or
outdoor rifle range under the supervision, guidance and instruction of a
responsible adult, and then only if the air rifle is actually being used in
connection with the activities of the team or society under the supervision of
a reasonable adult; and/or
      (3)   Used in or on any private grounds or residence under circumstances
where the air rifle is fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to
endanger any person or property, and then only if the air rifle is used in such
a manner as to prevent the projectile from passing over any grounds or space
outside the limits of the grounds or residence.
   (E)   Sales. The provisions of this section do not prohibit sales of air
rifles:
      (1)   By wholesale dealers or jobbers;
      (2)   To be shipped out of the city; or
      (3)   To be used at a target range operated in accordance with division
(D) of this section or by members of the Armed Services of the United States or
veterans’ organizations.
   (F)   Seizure and removal. The police shall seize, take, remove or cause to
be removed, at the expense of the owner, any air rifle sold or used in any
manner in violation of this section.
(2000 Code, § 9.24.030) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §
134.02 shall be subject to a fine of $500 for each offense, or imprisonment for
a period not to exceed six months, or both a fine and imprisonment.
(2000 Code, § 9.24.020)
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES PERTAINING TO ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
135.01   Public intoxication; commitment to detoxification facility
   
135.02   Open containers prohibited; exception
   
135.03   Possession or consumption by minors
   
135.04   Furnishing alcohol to underage persons
   
135.99   Penalty
§ 135.01 PUBLIC INTOXICATION; COMMITMENT TO DETOXIFICATION FACILITY.
   (A)   No person shall be upon any public street or public place if he or she
is intoxicated.
   (B)   If a person who appears to be intoxicated upon a public street or
public place consents, he or she may be assisted to his or her home or to a
detoxification, public treatment, private treatment or other health facility,
either directly by the police or through an intermediary person.
   (C)   A person who appears to be incapacitated by alcohol while upon a
public street or public place, and who shows symptoms of the physical,
emotional or social disabilities associated with alcoholism, shall, on probable
cause shown, be taken into protective custody by the police and forthwith
brought to a detoxification facility or other facility customarily available
for detoxification. If no detoxification facility is readily available, he or
she shall be taken to an emergency medical service customarily used for
incapacitated persons. The police, in detaining the person and in taking the
person to a detoxification facility, are taking him or her into protective
custody and shall make every reasonable effort to protect his or her health and
safety. In taking the person into protective custody, the detaining officer may
take reasonable steps to protect himself or herself. A taking into protective
custody under this section alone is not an arrest. No entry or other record
shall be made to indicate that the person has been arrested or charged with a
crime, unless there has been an arrest for another incident unrelated to the
person’s status as an alcoholic.
   (D)   An intoxicated person who, as a direct result of his or her excessive
use of alcohol, has threatened, attempted or inflicted physical harm on another
and is likely to inflict physical harm on another unless omitted, or is
incapacitated by alcohol and shows symptoms of the physical, emotional or
social disabilities indicative of alcoholism, may be committed to a
detoxification facility for emergency treatment. A refusal to undergo treatment
does not constitute evidence of lack of judgment as to the need for treatment.
   (E)   No authorized person acting in good faith and without negligence in
connection with the preparation of petitions, applications, certificates or
other documents for the apprehension, taking into protective custody,
transportation, examination, treatment, detention or discharge of an individual
under this section shall incur any liability, civil or criminal, by reason of
his or her actions under this section.
(2000 Code, § 9.20.010) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.02 OPEN CONTAINERS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   No person shall carry or otherwise have in his or her possession any
alcoholic beverage on any public street, highway or place, or in any motor
vehicle, if the can, bottle or container is not in its original package and the
seal unbroken. This prohibition may be waived by Council for certain social
gatherings, upon submission of an application by a city resident 21 years of
age or older. The application shall contain the date time and place of the
social gathering and a guarantee by the applicant that alcoholic beverages will
not be served to or provided for persons under the age of 21.
(2000 Code, § 9.20.020) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.03 POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION BY MINORS.
   (A)   No person under 21 years of age shall consume, purchase or accept
delivery of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her possession,
unless one of the following is true:
      (1)   The possession and dispensing or consumption by the person is in
the performance of a religious service or ceremony;
      (2)   The consumption by the person is under the direct supervision and
approval of the parent or guardian of the person and in the privacy of the
parent’s or guardian’s home; and/or
      (3)   The possession and delivery is pursuant to the person’s employment
by a licensee as allowed by state law.
   (B)   No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor
shall sell, give or deliver the alcoholic liquor to another person under 21
years of age, except as allowed in division (A) of this section.
   (C)   No parent or guardian shall knowingly suffer or permit his or her
child or ward under 21 years of age to violate any of the provisions of this
section.
   (D)   No owner or occupant of any premises located within the city shall
knowingly allow any person under 21 years of age to remain on the premises
while in the possession of alcoholic liquor or while consuming alcoholic liquor
in violation of any of the provisions of this section.
   (E)   All statutes of the state, or any parts thereof, which are in conflict
with any of the provisions of this section are superseded by this section,
which is enacted under the home rule power of the city.
(2000 Code, § 9.20.030) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.04 FURNISHING ALCOHOL TO UNDERAGE PERSONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person to, in the city:
      (1)   Sell, give, deliver or dispense alcoholic liquor to an underage
person;
      (2)   Knowingly permit or knowingly or negligently fail to prevent, on
premises under his or her control, the consumption of alcoholic liquor by an
underage person;
      (3)   Knowingly permit or knowingly or negligently fail to prevent the
operation of a motor vehicle in his or her control by an underage person when
the person knows or in the exercise of ordinary judgment should have known that
the underage persons had consumed any amount of alcoholic liquor within two
hours prior to when the permission was granted or prior to the operation;
      (4)   Sell, give or furnish to an underage person a false or fraudulent
identification card of the underage person;
      (5)   Sell, give or furnish to an underage person an identification card
of any other person; and/or
      (6)   Pay for or rent a hotel or motel room or facility for the purpose
of or knowing that the room or facility is to be used by an underage person for
the unlawful consumption of alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(1) and (2) of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   The giving, delivering or dispensing of alcoholic liquor to an
underage person, or the permitting of the consumption of alcoholic liquor by an
underage person, in the performance of a religious service or ceremony; or
      (2)   The giving, delivering or dispensing of alcoholic liquor to an
underage person, or the permitting of the consumption of alcoholic liquor by an
underage person, under the direct supervision and approval of that underage
person’s parent in the privacy of a home.
   (C)   The following shall apply to division (B)(2) of this section: In any
prosecution of a person for the commission of any state or local offense when
the person was an underage person, the prosecutor, upon reasonable grounds to
so believe, may request a ruling as to whether the consumption of alcoholic
liquor, as permitted by the person’s parent, caused the commission of the
offense. If it is so determined in the affirmative, then divisions (A)(1) and
(2) of this section shall apply.
(2000 Code, § 9.20.040) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §
135.03 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 or imprisoned not
more than six months, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(2000 Code, § 9.20.030)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   CITY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
         
151.   BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
         
152.   EROSION, DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER
         
153.   BURGLARY PREVENTION REQUIREMENTS
         
154.   CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
         
155.   FIRE LIMITS
         
156.   BROADCASTING EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES
         
157.   SWIMMING POOLS
         
158.   MOBILE HOME PARKS
         
159.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
         
160.   ZONING
         
161.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: CITY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Section
City Comprehensive Plan
   
150.01   Adoption
CITY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
§ 150.01 ADOPTION.
   The corporate authorities hereby approve the Comprehensive Plan and declare
it to be the Official Comprehensive Plan of the City of Oak Forest.
(Ord. 2008-02-0153O, passed 2-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2020-02-0784O, passed 2-25-
2020; Am. Ord. 2021-08-0861O, passed 8-10-2021)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Section
Adoption of Codes
   
151.001   International Building Code
   
151.002   International Residential Code
   
151.003   Construction requirements
   
151.004   Decks, additions, patios, porches, gazebos or other accessory
structures
   
151.005   International Energy Conservation Code
   
151.006   Plumbing codes adopted
   
151.007   National Electrical Code
   
151.008   International Fuel Gas Code
   
151.009   International Mechanical Code
   
151.010   Occupancy permits
   
151.011   Permits on file with township assessor
   
151.012   Fees and deposits
   
151.013   Damage to public improvements
   
151.014   Compliance required
   
151.015   Plat of survey
   
151.016   Razing buildings
   
151.017   Paved areas
   
151.018   Sidewalk required
   
151.019   Individual lot grading plan requirements
   
151.020   Safety and work requirements
   
151.021   Exterior wall construction
   
151.022   Retaining walls
New Residential Buildings or Structures and Other Related Activities;
Construction
   
151.035   Fees and deposits
Nonresidential Buildings or Structures and Other Related Activities;
Construction
   
151.050   Fees and deposits
Utility Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way; Construction
   
151.065   Preambles
   
151.066   Purpose and scope
   
151.067   Definitions
   
151.068   Annual registration required
   
151.069   Permit required; applications and fees
   
151.070   Action on permit applications
   
151.071   Effect of permit
   
151.072   Revised permit drawings
   
151.073   Insurance
   
151.074   Indemnification
   
151.075   Security
   
151.076   Permit suspension and revocation
   
151.077   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status
   
151.078   General construction standards
   
151.079   Traffic control
   
151.080   Location of facilities
   
151.081   Construction methods and materials
   
151.082   Vegetation control
   
151.083   Removal, relocation or modifications of utility facilities
   
151.084   Clean-up and restoration
   
151.085   Maintenance and emergency maintenance
   
151.086   Variances
   
151.087   Enforcement
   
151.088   Severability
Burial of Cables
   
151.100   Burial of cables and pipes required
Elevators, Dumbwaiters, Escalators and Moving Walks
   
151.115   National Standard Safety Code
   
151.116   Conflict of laws
Fallout Shelters
   
151.130   Construction standards
   
151.131   Permit fees
Multiple-Owner Complexes
   
151.145   Preambles
   
151.146   Definitions
   
151.147   Multiple ownership/multiple unit inspection review board
   
151.148   Registration/conversion of structures constructed prior to 1996
   
151.149   Multiple ownership/multiple unit development registration
requirements
   
151.150   Dwelling unit registration requirements
   
151.151   Additional inspections
   
151.152   Suspension or revocation of certificates of registration
   
151.153   Failure to register
   
151.154   Guarantees
Rental Multi-Family Dwelling Structures
   
151.165   Definitions
   
151.166   Fees, penalties and other charges
   
151.167   Certificate of housing inspection prerequisite to operation, lease or
sale; term
   
151.168   Application procedures for certificates of registration
   
151.169   Certificate of registration
   
151.170   Consent to inspection; scope of inspection; limitations; warrants
   
151.171   Building inspection review board
   
151.172   Building inspection review board procedures; appeals
Sewer System Connection Charge
   
151.185   Preambles
   
151.186   Connection charge
Signs
   
151.200   Mobile signs
   
151.201   Signs at the rear of shopping centers
Storage of Construction Materials
   
151.215   Permit required; application and deposit
   
151.216   Time limits for removal of debris
   
151.217   Notice of hearing
   
151.218   Extension of time limits
   
151.219   Use of deposit for removal by city
   
151.220   Appeals
   
151.221   Excess or deficiency in deposit; liens
   
151.222   Inspection; refund of deposit
   
151.223   Liability for damages
Small Wireless Facilities
   
151.300   Purpose
   
151.301   Interaction with other code provisions and laws
   
151.302   Definitions
   
151.303   Zoning
   
151.304   Permits; application process
   
151.305   Construction
   
151.306   Permit duration
   
151.307   Height limitations
   
151.308   General requirements
   
151.309   Stealth, concealment and design standards
   
151.310   Reservation of city utility pole space
   
151.311   Applicability of existing agreements
   
151.312   Collocation on city-owned infrastructure
   
151.313   Notice of sale or transfer
   
151.314   Abandonment
   
151.315   Dispute resolution
   
151.316   Indemnification
   
151.317   Insurance
   
151.318   Maintenance of small wireless facilities
   
151.319   Revocation of permit
   
151.320   Exceptions to applicability
   
151.321   Conflict of laws
 
   
151.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building Department, see §§
32.590 through
32.593
   Use of groundwater as potable water supply prohibited, see § 50.08
ADOPTION OF CODES
§ 151.001 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. The city adopts the 2018 International Building Code and
Referenced Standards and Appendices, as published by the International Code
Council, as the Building Code of the City of Oak Forest.
   (B)   Amendments to the 2018 International Building Code.
      (1)   Section 101.1 [Name of Jurisdiction]
         Insert: The City of Oak Forest.
      (2)   Section 1612.3 [Name of Jurisdiction]
         Insert: The City of Oak Forest.
      (3)   Section 1612.3 [Date of Issuance]
         Insert: 1974.
      (4)   Building Heights, Areas and Types of Construction.
         a.   Refer to the City of Oak Forest zoning code for allowed building
heights and areas per zoning district.
         b.   Delete reference to Type B construction. Only Type A fire
sprinkler protected buildings are allowed.
         c.   Type V (wood) construction is not allowed in R-1 (hotel/motel)
and R-2 (apartment/multifamily) occupancy classifications.
      (5)   Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit: delete numbers 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed 2-22-
2011; Am. Ord. 2019-04-0727, passed 4-9-2019)
§ 151.002 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. The city adopts the 2018 International Residential Code and
Referenced Standards and Appendices, as published by the International Code
Council, as the Residential Code of the City of Oak Forest.
   (B)   Amendments to the 2018 International Residential Code.
      (1)   Section 101.1 [Name of Jurisdiction]
         Insert: The City of Oak Forest.
      (2)   Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit: Delete numbers 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 7, 9, 10.
      (3)   For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas as established
on local flood insurance rate maps, locally adopted floodplain ordinances shall
apply.
      (4)   Delete all references to wood foundations throughout the code, they
are not allowed.
      (5)   ASCE 32-01 shallow foundation frost protection (FPSF) is not
allowed.
      (6)   Exterior wall sheathing to a minimum of 7/16" thickness.
      (7)   Roof sheathing to be a minimum of ½" thickness.
      (8)   Provide 6-inch curb at the garage service door, or construct garage
floor six inches (6") lower than adjoining floor. If a stairwell occurs in a
garage a six inch (6") gas curb shall be provided around stairwell. The
foundation wall can serve as the gas curb provided the highest elevation of the
garage floor is six inches (6") below the top of foundation.
      (9)   An oil interceptor shall be required if a floor drain is installed
in the floor of a garage.
      (10)   Gutters and Downspouts: All structures shall be provided with
gutters and downspouts unless omission is specifically permitted by the
Building Official.
      (11)   SWIMMING POOLS.
         1.   A pool or pool deck may not be located closer than six feet (6')
from the property lines.
         2.   No portion of the pool shall be located at a distance less than
ten feet (10') away from the main structure and/or any accessory structure or
building.
         3.   No portion of the pool shall be located at a distance less then
ten feet (10') away from any overhead power lines and five feet (5') away from
underground power lines.
         4.   All pumps and filters, and pool water disinfection equipment
installations shall not be less than six feet (6') from any property line, are
not permitted in the side yard and may not be located less than ten feet (10')
away from any structure.
         5.   All pools must be enclosed by a fence and all entries must be
enclosed with gates not having a height less than four feet (4'). The fence
enclosures shall not have openings in excess of four inches (4") in length. All
gates shall be a self-closing and self latching type.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed 2-22-
2011; Am. Ord. 2019-04-0727, passed 4-9-2019)
§ 151.003 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, alteration
or repairs, other than ordinary repairs, using application forms furnished by
the Building Official.
   (B)   (1)   No permit shall be issued pursuant to this chapter for new
construction before a certified final plat of subdivision, assessment or
planned unit development, as required by this code, for the lot or parcel has
been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in the county in which the
lot or parcel is situated.
      (2)   Upon completion of the foundation walls and any structural elements
which are necessarily part of the construction of the foundation walls, and
before proceeding with further construction, the applicant shall file a survey
prepared, signed and sealed by an Illinois professional land surveyor, showing
the location of the structure and the elevation of the top of the foundation
walls at all four corners, or the average top of foundation for which a permit
has been issued. This survey shall also include a (plus or minus one inch)
lowest basement floor elevation.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)
§ 151.004 DECKS, ADDITIONS, PATIOS, PORCHES, GAZEBOS OR OTHER ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES.
   The following requirements shall be applicable to all attached and detached
single-family, townhouse, duplex and multi-family construction within the city:
   (A)   Applications for a building permit for a deck, room addition, patio,
porch, gazebo or any other accessory structure added to a residential structure
shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   The proposed structure drawn on a full sized copy of a registered
plat of survey of the property (usual scale 1:20 or 1:30) also showing the
location of any electric meter; location of any electric service line; location
of all basement escape windows; and any additional accessory structures not
shown on that recorded plat of survey; and
      (2)   A construction plan of the proposed deck, addition, patio and the
like, as specified in the application package.
   (B)   No portion of the structure shall obstruct any electric facility,
including access to the meter or the underground service line.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)
§ 151.005 INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. The city adopts the 2018 International Energy Conservation
Code and Referenced Standards and Appendices, as published by the International
Code Council, and regulated by the State of Illinois as "The Illinois Energy
Conservation Code" as published by the Capital Development Board of the State
of Illinois (Section 600 of Title 71 of the Illinois Administrative Code), as
the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Oak Forest.
   (B)   Amendments to the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code. 
      (1)   Section 101.1 Title. Insert: The City of Oak Forest.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-03-0724, passed 3-12-2019)
§ 151.006 PLUMBING CODES ADOPTED.
   That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of
the City Clerk, being marked and designated as the Illinois Plumbing Code, be
and is adopted as the Plumbing Code of the city, providing for the issuance of
permits and the collection of fees thereof; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, collections and terms of the Plumbing Code
on file in the Office of the City Clerk are referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this section with the additions,
insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, as found in Ord. 2015-11-0569O.
(Ord. 2015-11-0569O, passed 11-24-2015) Penalty, §
151.999
§ 151.007 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. The city adopts the 2018 Chicago Electrical Code (based on
the 2017 National Electrical Code), as published by the NFPA, as the Electrical
Code of the City of Oak Forest.
   (B)   Amendments to the 2018 Chicago Electrical Code.
      (1)   The "City of Oak Forest" shall be substituted for "City of
Chicago".
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-03-0724, passed 3-12-2019)
§ 151.008 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. The city adopts the 2018 International Fuel Gas Code and
Referenced Standards and Appendices A, B, C and D, as published by the
International Code Council, as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Oak Forest.
   (B)   Amendments to the 2018 International Fuel Gas Code.
      (1)   Section 101.1 Title: Insert: the City of Oak Forest.
      (2)   Section 106.6.2 Fee Schedule: Delete in its entirety.
      (3)   Section 106.6.3 Fee Refunds: Delete in its entirety.
      (4)   Section 108.4 Violation Penalties: Change to read:
         a.   Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters
or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law and/or subject to permit fees, including double the cost for
inspections and administrative fees as outlined in Fees for Construction, in
the City of Oak Forest Code, and shall be subject to a stop work order until
such time a permit is obtained.
      (5)   Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders: Insert amounts to read: not less
than $100.00 and not more than $750.00.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed 2-22-
2011; Am. Ord. 2019-03-0724, passed 3-12-2019)
§ 151.009 INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. The city adopts the 2018 International Mechanical Code and
Referenced Standards and Appendix A, as published by the International Code
Council, as the Mechanical Code of the City of Oak Forest.
   (B)   Amendments to the 2018 International Mechanical Code.
      (1)   Section 101.1 Title: Insert: The City of Oak Forest.
      (2)   Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule: Delete in its entirety.
      (3)   Section 106.5.3 Fee Schedule: Delete in its entirety.
      (4)   Section 108.4 Violation Penalties: Change to read:
         Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or
repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law and/or subject to permit fees, including double the cost for
inspections and administrative fees as outlined Fees for Construction, in the
City of Oak Forest Code, and shall be subject to a stop work order until such
time a permit is obtained.
      (5)   Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders: Insert amounts to read: not less
than $100.00 and not more than $750.00.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed 2-22-
2011; Am. Ord. 2019-03-0724, passed 3-12-2019)
§ 151.010 OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   No new, remodeled or moved building or structure shall be occupied
until a permit for the occupancy has been issued by the Building Commissioner
or his or her designee as hereinafter provided.
      (2)   No builder, developer, carpenter, contractor or other tradesman
shall deliver possession of a new, remodeled or moved building or structure to
the proposed occupants of the building or structure until an occupancy permit
has been issued by the Building Commissioner or his or her designee.
   (B)   Facilities required for occupancy permit. Unless authorized by the
City Council and except as may be otherwise provided in an applicable S.1.A.,
annexation agreement or permit agreement, no occupancy permit for any new,
remodeled or relocated building or structure, including, but not limited to, a
residential, commercial and office buildings and structures shall be issued
unless:
      (1)   All plumbing and electric wiring has been completely installed for
permanent service; water supply service presently exists through a permanent
connection with the city’s water supply system in accordance with this code;
and sanitary sewer service presently exists through a permanent connection with
the city’s sanitary sewage disposal system in accordance with this code; and
      (2)   All improvements required by this code have been installed and
accepted by the City Council; provided, however, that required street
improvements may be in the process of installation if the building or structure
to be occupied is directly adjacent to and accessible from a hard surface
roadway of sufficient width, strength and composition to permit reasonably
unimpaired access by authorized emergency, utility service, snow removal and
waste removal vehicles in all weather conditions.
   (C)   Compliance with engineering plans. “As-built” drawings and engineer’s
and land surveyor’s statements required: Not less than five days prior to the
filing of the application required by the applicant shall file with the
Building Commissioner “as-built” drawings for all structures, which drawings
shall include:
      (1)   Drawing, Type 2 lots. For Type 2 lots, as defined in this section,
in addition to the registered professional engineer shall also submit a written
drawing or sketch prepared by or under his or her direction which shall have
denoted thereon:
         (a)   The location of the principal structures located on the site;
         (b)   The grade elevations designed for the site as shown on the final
approved engineering plans; and
         (c)   The measured field elevations which demonstrate that the site,
as finally graded, is in substantial conformance with the final approved
engineering plans.
      (2)   Optional Type 2 lot certificate. The applicant may obtain a final
occupancy certificate pursuant to the terms of this division by filing with the
Building Commissioner not less than five days prior to the filing of the
application:
         (a)   “As built” drawings;
         (b)   Statements from a registered professional engineer; and
         (c)   A Type 2 lot certificate signed and sealed by both a registered
professional engineer and a registered professional land surveyor.
      (3)   Topographical survey, Type 1 lots. For Type 1 lots, as defined in
this section, in addition to the “as built” drawings and the statements
required by the registered professional engineer shall also submit a
topographical survey of the construction site, as finally graded which
demonstrates that the site, as finally graded, is in substantial conformance
with the final approved engineering plans by having denoted thereon:
         (a)   The location of the principal structures located on the site;
and
         (b)   The grade elevations designed for the site as shown on the final
approved engineering plans.
      (4)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   TYPE 1 LOTS. Any lot which is adjacent to a flood route or a drainage swale,
which transports water runoff to or from a detention facility, which drains
from the rear of the lot to the front of the lot, which is adjacent to a storm
water facility, floodplain or floodway, or which is determined by the City
Engineer to present a substantial likelihood of flooding, erosion or damage to
other property in the vicinity if not graded in accordance with generally
accepted engineering principles.
   TYPE 2 LOTS. Any lot other than a Type 1 lot.
      (5)   Proof of compliance. No occupancy permit shall be issued for any
structure unless the survey or statement required shows full compliance with
the intent of the final engineering plans approved for the construction site.
The applicant shall be responsible for procuring and paying for any required
topographical survey and professional registered engineer’s statement.
   (D)   Temporary occupancy; merchandising/ employee training.
      (1)   A temporary occupancy permit may be issued in accordance with the
provisions of this division for the specific purposes of allowing proposed
occupants to stock shelves, train employees and move in furniture needed to
conduct business. The temporary permit shall under no circumstances be
construed to allow occupancy of the structure by the general public.
      (2)   A temporary occupancy permit for merchandising or training may be
issued by the Building Commissioner or his or her designee only after approval
of the appropriate fire/life safety requirements, including, without
limitation, sprinkler systems, alarm systems, and exit requirements, and the
Chief Building Official has determined that any non-fire/life safety
deficiencies remaining with the structure can be corrected within 15 days of
the date of issuance of this permit.
      (3)   A temporary occupancy permit for merchandising or training shall be
valid for a period not to exceed 15 days, at which time the applicant must
either obtain a final occupancy permit or immediately cease any activities
within the building conducted pursuant to the permit. The permit can be renewed
for one additional period of 15 days, if the Building Commissioner or his or
her designee agrees that weather or other uncontrollable circumstances
prohibited the completion of the remaining deficiencies.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed 2-22-
2011)
§ 151.011 PERMITS ON FILE WITH TOWNSHIP ASSESSOR.
   (A)   The Building Department shall file copies of all building permits with
the Township Assessor of the township in which the proposed construction is to
be located within 30 days of the issuance thereof. The Building Department
shall keep on file a receipt from the Township Assessor of the township in
which the proposed construction is to be located showing that the building
permit has been filed and that the property is subject to increased assessment.
   (B)   The Building Department shall file copies of all occupancy permits
with the appropriate Township Assessor within 30 days of the issuance thereof.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed 2-22-
2011)
§ 151.012 FEES AND DEPOSITS.
   The fees for building and plan review pursuant to this subchapter shall be
established by the City Council from time to time by resolution.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)
§ 151.013 DAMAGE TO PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   The owner of any lot or parcel of real estate upon which a building or
structure is to be constructed shall, as a condition to issuance of a building
or occupancy permit in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter shall
perform preconstruction videotaping and be strictly liable for the cost of
repairing, replacing or restoring any public improvement, including, but not
limited to, public sidewalks, sewers, water mains, curbs or gutters,
streetlights and related improvements, which are located on the lot or parcel
of property or within a dedicated right-of-way abutting the property but only
from the edge of the lot or parcel to the edge of pavement of the abutting
roadway and which are damaged or destroyed after the issuance of a building
permit for the property and before the issuance of a final occupancy permit.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)
§ 151.014 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to construct or alter any building or structure without
complying with the regulations set forth in this title and/or in violation of
the terms of the permit for the building or structure.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.015 PLAT OF SURVEY.
   (A)   A plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor shall be filed
after the footings and the foundation wall have been poured. The plat of survey
shall locate and spot the foundation wall.
   (B)   No construction shall be continued on any building until the Building
Department approves the location of the proposed structure as being in
conformance with all setback requirements provided for in the zoning
regulations of this code.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed 2-22-
2011)
§ 151.016 RAZING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Permit required. No building or structure, or major portion of any
building or structure, located in the city shall be razed without a permit
therefore having been obtained from the Building Commissioner or his or her
designee.
   (B)   Application for permit; fee. Application for the permit shall be made
in writing to the Building Commissioner or his or her designee upon a form
provided by the Building Commissioner. The applicant shall state on the
application, in addition to all other information required, the portion or
portions of any street, alley or other public place, if any, that will be
required to be closed to public use while the razing work is being done if any
closing is required. If any closing is required, no permit shall be issued
without the approval of the Building Commissioner or his or her designee and
notice of the proposed street closing is given to the City Administrator.
   (C)   Fee. The applicant shall pay a permit fee determined by the Building
Commissioner or his or her designee as being sufficient to pay the costs of
necessary and appropriate services provided by city departments to ensure the
safe and orderly demolition of buildings, including, but not limited to, the
cost of closing a portion of any public street, alley or place to traffic and
the posting of a satisfactory bond for public liability and damages to city
property.
   (D)   Requirements of applicant.
      (1)   Guarding site. The applicant shall take or cause to be taken all
steps necessary to properly guard the work and the site of the work, to protect
the public from damage of or injury to property or persons.
      (2)   Disconnection of utilities. The Building Commissioner or his or her
designee shall require the applicant to furnish to the Building Commissioner
written statements by the persons having authority to make the statements,
respectively, that the electric, water, sanitary sewer and gas services to the
building or structure have been properly disconnected.
      (3)   Insurance. The applicant shall have in force and effect insurance
coverage in the amount of not less than the sum determined by the Building
Commissioner or his or her designee, taking into consideration the size,
location and type of construction of the building or structure to be razed; the
method that will be used for the razing and moving of materials from the site,
to protect the city and the public generally for payment in full for all
damages sustained by the city or any person, arising out of injury to property
or persons, without any deduction whatever under any provisions contained in
the policy of insurance. Proof of the insurance shall be filed with the
Building Commissioner or his or her designee before issuance of the permit.
      (4)   Notice to adjacent property owners. Except where damage to a
structure results from fire or storm, upon filing an application for demolition
of any principal residential structure on any lot or parcel within the city,
the applicant shall notify the owners of the surrounding properties in
accordance with this division (D)(4).
         (a)   The applicant shall give written notice to the owners of record,
as determined by the records of the local real estate tax collector, for all
lots lying within 250 feet of the subject property, exclusive of public rights-
of-way.
            1.   The written notices shall be properly addressed, delivered
personally or sent by first class, postage prepaid, U.S. mail.
            2.   All required written notices shall include the number assigned
to the application; the place, the nature and the purpose of the demolition,
the date and time of the scheduled demolition; the common address or location
of the subject property; the name and address of the applicant and owner of the
subject property; and the office address of the Building Department where full
information concerning the application, including a legal description, may be
obtained.
            3.   All required written notices shall be personally served or
postmarked not more than 15 days nor less than seven days in advance of a
scheduled demolition.
         (b)   The applicant shall file a sworn affidavit including copies of
the notices with the City Clerk, showing the names and addresses of the persons
to whom the written notices have been sent. The affidavit shall create a
presumption that the notices were properly given.
         (c)   The applicant shall also request the temporary license or
permission from those owners of the properties immediately adjacent to the site
where the demolition will take place. The license shall grant authority to
enter onto those adjacent properties or structures which may potentially be
affected by the proposed demolition, both before the demolition work begins and
at reasonable intervals during the work, to inspect and preserve the adjacent
lots, buildings or structures from damage.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed 2-22-
2011)
§ 151.017 PAVED AREAS.
   (A)   Drainage requirement. Every motor vehicle driveway area, motor vehicle
parking area, patio or other area designed for recreational or similar use,
hereafter constructed upon private property, which is constructed and surfaced
with materials rendering the same practically impervious to surface waters,
shall be properly and sufficiently graded and drained so as to prevent causing
an increased burden upon adjoining property by reason of runoff water.
   (B)   Plans required. No area containing an excess of 1,000 square feet
shall be constructed without filing with the Building Commissioner or his or
her designee complete detailed plans and specifications by a licensed
professional engineer showing the location thereof upon the lot or tract,
dimensions, materials to be used, the finished surface grade and the surface
water drainage facilities that will be provided. Construction of the
improvement shall not be commenced without the prior approval of the plans and
specifications of the Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner or his
or her designee shall not approve the plans and specifications without the
prior approval thereof by the City Engineer as to the data and information
shown on the plans and specifications pertaining to the drainage of surface
water being sufficient when constructed.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed 2-22-
2011)
§ 151.018 SIDEWALK REQUIRED.
   (A)   Unless designated as a “no build” area in the comprehensive sidewalk
policy, construction of a sidewalk, or payment of a fee in lieu of the
construction as provided herein, shall be required for the construction of any
new building or any addition to an existing building that increases the square
footage of the building by greater than 50%. Except as provided in this
section, sidewalks shall be constructed whenever 30% or more of the total
number of lots on the block fronting upon the same street side within that
property’s subdivision or development have sidewalks. For purposes of this
section, BLOCK is defined as a geographic area within the city enclosed by
streets or by a combination of streets, or by other demarcations, including,
but not limited to, public parks, cemeteries, subdivision boundaries and
railroad rights-of-way. Where there are cul-de-sacs, a block shall include all
lots having an address facing the cul-de-sac and bounded by the next cross
street. When required as provided herein, sidewalks shall be constructed upon
the public street or streets adjacent to the land described in the building
permit application, according to the specifications required by the city
applicable thereto. The location of the sidewalk shall be subject to approval
by the City Engineer or his or her designee.
   (B)   Except as provided in this section, whenever construction of a
sidewalk is not required, in whole or part, a fee in lieu of construction of
sidewalks shall be paid. The fee shall be established by the City Engineer
based upon estimated cost of construction of the sidewalk at the time of permit
issuance. This fee shall be paid before permit issuance. Fees paid shall be
utilized as authorized by the City Council for construction and maintenance of
sidewalks, bike paths and other non-motorized vehicle paths within the city.
   (C)   The City Engineer may direct that a sidewalk be constructed for any
property described in division (A) of this section whenever the City Engineer
determines that the sidewalk is needed to connect other existing sidewalk
segments, or is otherwise necessary pursuant to the city’s sidewalk plans for
the affected area. In that case, no fee in lieu of construction shall be
required to the extent sidewalks are constructed. The City Engineer may direct
that a sidewalk not be constructed for any property described in division (A)
of this section whenever the City Engineer determines that the sidewalk is not
needed to connect other existing sidewalk segments, or is otherwise contrary to
the city’s sidewalk plans for the affected area. In such case, a fee in lieu of
construction shall be required to the extent sidewalks are not constructed.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)
§ 151.019 INDIVIDUAL LOT GRADING PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A detailed grading plan shall be submitted to the city for any lot
within a subdivision without a master grading plan prior to the issuance of a
building permit for a new home or addition. The detailed grading plan shall be
signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered to practice in the
State of Illinois. The plan shall show the site plan requirements on file at
the Building Department.
   (B)   The detailed grading plan shall comply with the following.
      (1)   Unless easements are granted for work on adjacent property, the new
grading must meet the existing grades at the side and rear property lines.
      (2)   There shall be a drainage swale along the side yard that has a
slope of at least 1½%. A SWALE is defined as a shallow ditch with slide slopes
formed by the grading away from the building foundation. If a drainage swale is
not present, one must be constructed as part of the engineering improvements
for the lot. Unless permission is granted by an adjacent property owner, the
new swale shall be built entirely on the lot for which there has been an
application for a building permit.
      (3)   All yards shall have a design drainage pattern with a minimum slope
of 1½%.
      (4)   If the minimum slope requirements cannot be met for yards, drainage
inlets shall be constructed. The inlet(s) shall be connected to a public storm
sewer or outlet to a public drainage facility.
   (C)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a new single- or two-
family home or large room addition, as defined in §
151.002(B), the individual lot grading plan shall show the following
requirements unless otherwise waived by the City Engineer:
      (1)   There shall be dedicated public utility and drainage easements of
not less than ten feet in width for poles, wires, conduits, storm or sanitary
sewers, gas, cable TV, water or other utility pipes or lines along the rear of
each lot, and five feet alongside one interior side lot line where necessary.
The easements shall be laid out so that a proper continuity may be developed
for the utilities from lot to lot and block to block.
      (2)   Subject to the provisions of the city’s driveway regulations,
driveways may be permitted to encroach within any easement located within any
front or corner side yard building setback area parallel to the public right-
of-way or public street.
      (3)   No buildings, driveways or structures shall be constructed within
any interior side or rear lot line easements.
      (4)   At the city’s discretion, encroachments into a dedicated public
utility or any other easement granted to the city may be permitted for the
construction of buildings, driveways or structures including brick, stone or
masonry walls or fences; or structures which are wired for electricity, where:
         (a)   A written encroachment agreement approved by the City
Administrator is executed by the owner of the property; and/or
         (b)   A building permit for the proposed construction is issued by the
city’s Building Department. Those permits shall be issued only after approval
of complete plans for the construction by the Department of Public Works.
      (5)   At the city’s discretion, encroachments into a dedicated public
utility or any other easement granted to the city may be permitted for the
construction and installation of a fence that provides clearance in the
direction of flow for drainage of the width of the easement in the amount of
50% opaque to the height of 12 inches or 100% at a height of six inches,
provided a fence permit for the proposed construction is issued and all
required fees are paid to the city. Where any easement is designated for
drainage or storm water purposes, a fence permit shall be issued only after
approval by the Building Department.
      (6)   Any encroachment permitted by this section shall not be construed
as a waiver of any of the other requirements of this code, including, without
limitation, the zoning code, the subdivision regulations or the building codes.
      (7)   Under no circumstances shall the city be liable to any property
owner or third party for any damage to real or personal property or personal
injury that may result from or arise out of the construction of any
encroachment permitted by this section. The permitted encroachments shall be
subject to the conditions that:
         (a)   The encroaching structure shall not abrogate or nullify the
city’s rights and interests in and to the easement of record;
         (b)   The property owners shall retain all of the risks and liability
associated with the encroaching structure on a dedicated public utility and
drainage easement or any other easement granted to the city, including, without
limitation, the risk that in an emergency the city may remove the encroaching
structure without any prior notice to the property owners;
         (c)   The property owners shall be solely responsible for the city’s
cost to remove the encroaching structure to gain access to any of its public
utilities in the easement for any purpose;
         (d)   The city shall not be responsible for any costs incurred by the
property owner to repair or replace the encroaching structure if it is damaged
or destroyed by the city for public utility purposes; and
         (e)   The property owners shall hold harmless, indemnify and defend
the city from and against any and all liability, claims, demands and causes of
action arising out of or related to any loss or injury, death, or loss or
damage to property resulting from the city’s use of any easement for any of its
intended purposes or the property owner’s construction of or use of the
encroaching structure.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed 2-22-
2011)
§ 151.020 SAFETY AND WORK REQUIREMENTS.
   The following safety and work requirements shall apply whenever a razing
permit or a large room addition permit (as defined in §
151.002(B)) is required as set forth in this title, or whenever there is new
construction where 80% of the lots within a 90- foot radius of the limits of
the subject property are improved with dwelling units:
   (A)   Fencing. The applicant shall install a six foot chain link fence
around the perimeter of either the excavation, the structure under
construction, or the entire construction area in a location and manner approved
by the development services team. The fencing shall be installed before
commencement of any work on the subject property pursuant to any permit issued
by the city.
   (B)   Litter control and cleanup. Litter and debris at the subject property
shall be controlled within an enclosed container at all times. The applicant
shall designate a person as having responsibility to assure compliance with
this provision. The permit shall specify the location of the container as
approved by the development services team.
   (C)   Construction traffic and parking management. All construction parking
shall be in compliance with this code in addition to the requirements of this
section. The applicant shall acknowledge receipt of these regulations by
signing and dating a copy to be kept on file. Prior to and as a condition of
the issuance of a building permit, the builder or owner shall provide the city
a written summary of a proposed parking plan that will be reviewed and approved
by the city. The parking plan shall provide adequate flow of traffic, minimize
disruption to existing homeowners to the extent reasonably possible and shall
take into account any other construction projects within a two-block area. Once
approved, the parking plan shall be included in the notice to adjacent property
owners, and a copy shall be posted on the construction site so that the
information can be made available to contractors and individuals associated
with the permit and the construction activity. The builder and/or owner shall
be responsible for compliance with the approved parking plan and shall be
subject to the penalties provided in §
151.999 for violations of the parking plan.
   (D)   Construction sanitation facilities. A minimum of one portable toilet
shall be provided at the subject property. The permit shall specify the
location of any portable toilet as approved by the development services team.
The portable toilet shall be installed before commencement of any work on the
subject property pursuant to any permit issued by the city and shall remain on
site for the duration of the project through final inspection. Toilet
facilities must be serviced regularly.
   (E)   Construction hours. It shall be unlawful to allow or permit any
building or construction operations (including construction-related noises,
such as the delivery of equipment or material or the operation of tools,
machinery, or apparatus) on private property from the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 7:
00a.m. Monday thru Friday, and 9:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday.
   (F)   Construction site signage. The permit applicant shall post a sign in a
visible location on the subject property before commencement of any work on the
subject property pursuant to any permit issued by the city. The sign must be
purchased from the city and shall:
      (1)   Be a minimum size of three feet by four feet.
      (2)   Include a title (for example, “Construction Site Regulations”);
address of the subject property, date of demolition, the applicable permit
numbers; general construction site regulations, including construction hours,
litter control and cleanup regulations, construction parking regulations, a
statement indicating penalties (as listed in division (G) of this section);
petitioner and city contact information.
      (3)   Include lettering to a minimum of four inches high in the title,
and a minimum of two inches high for all other lettering.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.021 EXTERIOR WALL CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   A minimum of 50% of the exterior wall construction for all multiple-
family dwellings, and single-family attached dwellings, two-family dwellings
and any other principal building or structures containing the residential
dwelling units (as those terms are defined in this code) shall be constructed
of solid masonry, face brick, manufactured concrete stone veneer (1½-inch
average thickness) set individually into mortar bed, or other masonry products
as approved by the City Council. In no instance shall EIFS, corrugated or
channeled metal, unfinished/smooth face concrete block, be construed as
sufficient material to comply with this section.
   (B)   The 50% coverage requirement shall be calculated by measuring all
facades of the structure, excluding the openings for windows and doors, and
dividing that figure by two. The builder of the structure shall be authorized
to satisfy the 50% requirement by placing the masonry or brick on one or more
facades of the structure, provided that the facade that faces the public street
or private road that services the structure shall have a minimum of 50% ofthat
facade constructed of solid masonry, face brick, manufactured concrete stone
veneer (1½-inch average thickness), or other masonry products approved by the
City Council. The requirements of this section shall apply to new multiple-
family dwellings, single-family attached dwellings, two-family dwellings, and
any other building or structures containing residential dwelling units, or to
additions that comprise more than 50% of the total gross square footage of the
existing building or structure.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)
§ 151.022 RETAINING WALLS.
   (A)   General. Walls built to retain the lateral pressure of earth or water
or other superimposed loads shall be designed and constructed of approved
masonry, reinforced concrete, steel sheet piling or other approved materials
within the allowable stresses specified in this code.
   (B)   Design. Retaining walls shall be designed to resist the pressure of
retained material, including both dead and live load surcharges to which the
walls are subjected, and to insure stability against overturning, sliding,
excessive foundation pressure and water uplift.
   (C)   Hydrostatic pressure. Unless drainage is provided the hydrostatic head
of the water pressure shall be assumed to be equal to the height of the wall.
   (D)   Coping. All masonry retaining walls, other than reinforced concrete
walls, shall be protected with an approved coping.
(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)
NEW RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES AND OTHER RELATED ACTIVITIES;
CONSTRUCTION
§ 151.035 FEES AND DEPOSITS.
   The fees for residential construction, fees for major repairs or remodeling,
additional fees and miscellaneous fees regarding same pursuant to this
subchapter shall be established by the City Council from time to time by
resolution.
(Ord. 2011-02-033O, passed 2-22-2011)
NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES AND OTHER RELATED ACTIVITIES;
CONSTRUCTION
§ 151.050 FEES AND DEPOSITS.
   The fees for nonresidential construction, fees for major repairs or
remodeling, additional fees and miscellaneous fees regarding same pursuant to
this subchapter shall be established by the City Council from time to time by
resolution.
(Ord. 2011-02-033O, passed 2-22-2011)
UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY; CONSTRUCTION
§ 151.065 PREAMBLES.
   The facts and statements contained in the preambles to this subchapter are
found to be true and correct and are hereby adopted as part of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 151.066 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the city’s
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city
rights-of-way and the city as a whole.
   (B)   Intent. In enacting this subchapter, the city intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of-way in the city and, in particular, the use of the
public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
city’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the city’s residential neighborhoods;
      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities subject to this subchapter. This subchapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-
way within the jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully established prior
to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired
and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may
be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar
agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, licenses or similar agreements. The city, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the city
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into an
agreement may request that the city enter into an agreement. In an agreement,
the city may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this
subchapter.
   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses or similar agreements.
      (1)   Utilities. In the event that a utility provider has entered into a
franchise, license or similar agreement with the city, the franchise, license
or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of the agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this subchapter and the provisions of
any franchise, license or similar agreement between the city and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of the franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of the agreement and
any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts with other chapters. This subchapter supersedes all chapters
or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of the conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
subchapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this subchapter
to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or
regulations.
   (H)   Sound engineering judgment. The city shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this subchapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this subchapter when the city so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city
to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-10-0665O, passed 10-24-
2017)
§ 151.067 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any term
not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill.
Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
   AASHTO. The American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.
   ANSI. The American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this subchapter.
   ASTM. The American Society for Testing and Materials.
   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility having tracks or rails, wires, lines, cable,
fiber optic cable, conduit, ducts or pipes located either above or below ground
that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The City Director of Public Works or his or her
designee.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this subchapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. The work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER. The City Engineer or his or her designee.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, lines, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits,
grates, covers, pipes, cables and appurtenances thereto) located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across or within rights-of-way under this
subchapter. For purposes of this subchapter, the term FACILITY shall not
include any facility owned or operated by the city.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, pole, transformer, pump or meter
station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
   GRANTEE. A person who is granted a permit under the provisions of this
subchapter.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is determined by the
Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life,
health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or
toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.
   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.
   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.
   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or
more utilities.
   J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility
notification program.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility having tracks or rails, wires, lines, cable,
fiber optic cable, conduit, ducts or pipes either above or below ground, that
generally are located parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-
way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to §§
151.069 and
151.070 of this subchapter.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane or coal-slurry.
   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If
no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the city has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the city. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include any
real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the
previous two sentences and shall not include city buildings, fixtures and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
right-of way.
   ROADWAY. That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly-owned subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one corporation to another corporation is not greater than the
gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for
sale.
   SECURITY FUND. That amount of security required pursuant to §
151.075.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel
services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite or similar facilities. PRIVATE LINE means a dedicated non-traffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of channels, from one
or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. TELE- COMMUNICATIONS
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by the
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-
to-end communications. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications
Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or cable
or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to
the city through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. §§ 76.1500 et seq.), as now or hereafter
amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Every person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH.  A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY. Any individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this subchapter, within the right-of-way. The term includes any
public utility defined in the Public Utility Act, Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-105, any
telecommunications retailer or provider, and any public entity other than the
city.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in § 21-201 (v) of the Illinois Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(v).
   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-10-0665O, passed 10-24-
2017)
§ 151.068 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the city shall register on
January 1 of each year with the Director of Public Works, providing the
utility’s name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility’s facilities in the right-of-
way and a 24-hour telephone number for each person, and evidence of insurance
as required in §
151.073 of this subchapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 151.069 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this
subchapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within
any city right-of-way which changes the location of the facility, adds a new
facility, disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this subchapter), or
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first
filing an application with the Director of Public Works and obtaining a permit
from the city therefor, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter. No
permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers’ premises where there will be no disruption of the
right-of-way.
   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
subchapter shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed in
the number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of the materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility’s name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility,
its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address and its interest in the work;
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and email
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of the description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended
response shall include notification to the city and shall promote protection of
the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for
emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the
city finds that additional information or assurances are needed.
      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that the drawings, plans and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations;
      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in §
151.073 of this subchapter;
      (8)   Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in §
151.075 of this subchapter;
      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (§
151.086); and
      (10)   Additional information as may be reasonably required by the city.
   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of division (C) of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any certificate of public
convenience and necessity or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District (other local or state entities with jurisdiction), have been
satisfied; or
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and the design
standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant’s duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the city within 30 days after the change
necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $50. No application fee is required to
be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity
infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 151.070 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   City review of permit applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Director of
Public Works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, the Director of Public Works shall reject the application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Director of Public Works is
satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this
subchapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, the
Director of Public Works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.
In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, that the construction proposed
under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Additional city review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to § 4 of the Telephone Company Act, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 65,
§ 4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city that it intends to
commence work governed by this subchapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. The notice shall consist of plans, specifications,
and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the
facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the
city not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work requiring no
excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of work
requiring excavation. The Director of Public Works shall specify the portion of
the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the Director of Public Works fails to provide the
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either ten
days after service of notice to the city by the telecommunications retailer in
the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or 25 days after
service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work
involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may
commence work without obtaining a permit under this subchapter.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to §
151.069 of this subchapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the
city an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. The
application shall be subject to the requirements of division (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility,
its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address and its interest in the work;
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and email
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of the description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended
response shall include notification to the city and shall promote protection of
the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for
emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the
city finds that additional information or assurances are needed.
      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that the drawings, plans and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations;
      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in §
151.073;
      (8)   Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in §
151.075;
      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (§
151.086); and
      (10)   Additional information as may be reasonably required by the city.
   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of division (C) of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any certificate of public
convenience and necessity or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District (other local or state entities with jurisdiction), have been
satisfied; or
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and the design
standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the city within 30 days after the change
necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $50. No application fee is required to
be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity
infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act, or by any telecommunications retailer that is paving the
municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee or the optional
state telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-10-0665O, passed 10-24-
2017)
§ 151.071 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A
permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this subchapter on city rights-of-way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this subchapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this subchapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the city with
city representatives in attendance as the city deems necessary. The meeting
shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing
special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including,
without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area
and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of
rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by
adjacent property owners.
   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the
city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 151.072 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   (A)   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in
any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within 90 days after the
completion of the permitted work.
   (B)   The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the
locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the
permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of
this subchapter, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance
with §
151.086 of this subchapter.
   (C)   If the city denies the request for a variance, then the permittee
shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility
so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 151.073 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required coverages and limits.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or similar
agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in
the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance
policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the city, and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as additional
insureds on the policies listed in divisions (A)(1)(a) and (b) below:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse and underground hazard (commonly referred to as
“X,” “C” and “U” coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
            1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each
person;
            2.   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any
one accident; and
            3.   Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
         (b)    Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles
with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property
damage for each accident;
         (c)   Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and
         (d)   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
      (2)   If the utility is not providing the insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then the contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis so that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover the loss.
   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the city within ten days following receipt
of a written request therefor from the city.
   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.
      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the city,
by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written
notice addressed to the City Mayor of such intent to cancel or not to renew.”
      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the city of the notice, and in no
event later than ten days prior to the cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under division (A), or the requirements of division (B), (C) and (D)
of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required under division (A) of this
section, such as evidence that the utility is a “private self insurer” under
the Workers Compensation Act.
   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility’s liability. The
legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state. All insurance
carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated “A-” or better and of a class
size “X” or higher by A. M. Best Company.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 151.074 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall
be deemed to agree to defend indemnify and hold the city and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether the acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited
by this subchapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided,
however, that the utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to
any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising
out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
subchapter by the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 151.075 SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee’s sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this subchapter;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the city occasioned by
the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this subchapter;
and
      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this subchapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this subchapter to perform that the city must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee pursuant to
this subchapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the city in the
form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable
to the city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
city. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this division
shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
city and the permittee;
      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the city of any amounts covered by it; and
      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the
state at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Director of Public Works, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the city estimates are likely to be
incurred if the permittee fails to perform the restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the city, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Director of
Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to
post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this division for any single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals. The city, upon 14 days’ advance written notice clearly
stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under
this division, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the
permittee has not reimbursed the city for the amount within the 14-day notice
period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this subchapter that the city
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the
city that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the permittee
shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in division (C) of this
section.
   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the city,
upon written request for the withdrawal to the city, provided that any
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in division (C) of this section.
   (G)   Closing and return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or the portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
subchapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the
permit, the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall
become the property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable
costs, loss or damage incurred by the city as a result of the revocation,
provided that any amounts in excess of the costs, loss or damage shall be
refunded to the permittee.
   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the city with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether
reserved by this subchapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to the Security Fund shall affect
any other right the city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its
rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 151.076 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   City right to revoke permit. The city may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this subchapter for one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Noncompliance with this subchapter;
      (3)   Permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare;
or
      (4)   Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The city shall send written notice
of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this subchapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the city, the permittee shall have the following options:
         (a)   Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of the
correction to the city within five working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of the removal
to the city within ten days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
      (2)   The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the
time periods provided in this division.
   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division (A) of this
section.
   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of division (C) of this section, the city or its
designee may, at the option of the city: correct the deficiencies; upon not
less than 20-days notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or
equipment; or after not less than 30-days notice to the permittee of failure to
cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the city. The
permittee shall be liable in all events to the city for all costs of removal.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 151.077 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the city no less than
30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way
or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the
facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former
owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations, including this subchapter, with respect to the work and facilities
in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city’s right-of-
way.
   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 151.078 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      (3)   Highway Design Manual;
      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;
      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code § 545);
      (7)   Flagger’s Handbook; and
      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
subchapter, the Director of Public Works shall determine, in the exercise of
sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and the decision shall be
final. If requested, the Director of Public Works shall state which standard or
principle will apply to the construction, maintenance or operation of a
facility in the future.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 151.079 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The city’s minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this Code.
   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business
or institution, the utility shall notes the resident, business or institution
of the approximate beginning time and duration of the work; provided, however,
that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to §
151.085 of this subchapter, the utility shall provide the notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility’s attention by the city.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.080 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this division.
      (1)   No interference with public ways. No facilities shall be placed in
any location if the Director of Public Works determines that the proposed
location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the city’s
utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with use of the right-of- way by
the general public or the operation or maintenance of any of the city’s
facilities, or any other existing facilities. The city may require any
facilities causing such interference to be moved, as determined by the city
engineer.
      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin the right-of-
way. Underground telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an
existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within
such duct or conduit.
      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on the right-of way.
      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed
in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of- way.
      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
      (6)   Facilities to be located underground. All new facilities shall be
located underground unless not technically practicable.
      (7)   Whenever new telecommunication facilities will exhaust capacity of
a right-of-way or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future facilities,
a grantee may be required to provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and
other facilities for non-discriminatory access to future grantees.
      (8)   No interference with drainage. No facility shall be placed in any
location that interferes with stormwater drainage, storage or conveyance or
blocks overland flow routes.
   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.
      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Wires, lines, or cable are located as near as practicable to the
right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable
pole alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3
m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other underground locations are impracticable or inconsistent
with sound engineering judgment (such as, a new cable may be installed in
existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or telecommunications wires,
lines or cable, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and
any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.
      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of the crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities.
      (3)   90-degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or
as near to a 90-degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
      (4)   Overhead power or telecommunication facility. An overhead power or
telecommunication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC’s
rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines (83 Ill.
Adm. Code 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground power or telecommunication facility. An underground
power or telecommunication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the grantee’s foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      (6)   Markers. The city may require the grantee to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
telecommunication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the
type of facility, the grantee, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also
be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations, (49 C.F.R. § 1 92.707
(1989)).
   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The city may
require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding facilities.
      (1)   The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (F)   Facilities installed above ground. Above-ground facilities may be
installed only if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and the installations are not
permitted.
      (2)   An applicant shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance standards.
      (1)   The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular
locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-10-0665O, passed 10-24-
2017)
§ 151.081 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
      (1)   Boring or jacking.
         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Director
of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall
be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations
and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are
completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by
barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced and
maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that
may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over six
inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following
pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches
or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger,
or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of § 603 of IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the Director of Public Works.
         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.
      (3)   Backfilling.
         (a)   Any pit, trench or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Director of Public Works.
      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection is
permitted under §
151.086, the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Director of Public Works.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three
years, permits shall not be issued unless the work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      (5)   Encasement.
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
city.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed
prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if
extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if
extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
Type of Facility                        Minimum Cover
Electric lines                          30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service   18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined
lines                                   by city)
Gas or petroleum products               30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                              Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                        protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer or drainage Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                    protection
 
   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
      (1)   Electric power or telecommunication lines.
         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or telecommunications facilities
within city rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General
Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled Construction of
Electric Power and Communications Lines, and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or telecommunication
facilities shall use single pole construction and joint use of poles shall be
used unless not practicable. Applicants shall make every reasonable effort to
design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be
allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with
guy guards for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground facilities.
            1. Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if the crossing is installed by the use of “moles,” “whip augers” or other
approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         (d)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after
placement.
      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or
telecommunication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or
telecommunication lines may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of “moles,” “whip augers” or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway; or
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or tunneling with
vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained and operated in a city-approved
manner and in conformance with the federal code of the Office of Pipeline
Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 – Transportation of
Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 C.F.R.
§192), IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, and all
other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum
Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).
      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.
      (6)   Ground mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Director of Public Works. With the approval of
the Director of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be
used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for ground-mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   (C)   Materials.
      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on
the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Director of Public
Works. When the storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross
arms or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an
obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be
obtained from the city.
      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the city
shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational restrictions.
      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety and welfare. These operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Director of Public Works
when emergency work is required to restore vital utility or telecommunications
services.
      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction
are those set forth in this code.
   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the city shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and
location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the rights-
of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city or by
J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground
facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with
the Illinois Underground Utility Facilities Damage Prevention Act, ILCS Ch.
220, Act 50, §§ 1 et seq.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-10-0665O, passed 10-24-
2017) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.082 VEGETATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Electric utilities; compliance with state laws and regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with the local franchise or other agreement with
the city as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other utilities; tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of a permit, in addition to
any other permit required under this subchapter.
      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city will require
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without
authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The city may require
that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm
extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (D)   Chemical use.
      (1)   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the city for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Director of Public Works that spraying is the only practicable method of
vegetation control.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.083 REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city, a
utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that the removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any city
improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the rights-
of-way.
   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of the facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this subchapter; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior
to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after
cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the city, the utility shall notify the city within 90 days.
Following receipt of the notice the city may direct the utility to remove all
or any portion of the facility if the Director of Public Works determines that
the removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and
welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the utility that abandoned
the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the city, the
abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of
all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.084 CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION.
   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-
way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by
the utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the Director of Public Works. The cleanup and
repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding,
resodding or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition
substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the
project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the
Director of Public Works for good cause shown.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.085 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the city and at the utility’s expense.
   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Director of Public Works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the city police shall be notified immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the city a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after
an emergency repair.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.086 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this subchapter must do so in writing to the Director of
Public Works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this subchapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Director of Public Works shall
decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this subchapter
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Director of Public Works may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Director of Public Works may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or
may not be expressly contained within this subchapter but which carry out the
purposes of this subchapter.
   (E)   Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Director
of Public Works under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to
appeal to the City Council, or other board or commission as it may designate.
The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the City Clerk
within 30 days after the date of the order, requirement, decision or
determination. The City Council shall commence its consideration of the appeal
at the Council’s next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven days
after the filing of the appeal. The City Council shall timely decide the
appeal.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 151.087 ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.088 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
subchapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, that portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and the holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)
BURIAL OF CABLES
§ 151.100 BURIAL OF CABLES AND PIPES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every contractor, installer or other company or individual who places
any cable, pipe or similar tubing on or across streets or municipal or private
property within the city shall with 72 hours of the placement bury the cable,
pipe or tubing.
   (B)   The burial shall be at a level of 12 inches or more below the ground
surface.
(2000 Code, § 15.26.010) (Ord. 2479, § 1, passed - - 2000) Penalty, see §
151.999
ELEVATORS, DUMBWAITERS, ESCALATORS AND MOVING WALKS
§ 151.115 NATIONAL STANDARD SAFETY CODE.
   (A)   There is adopted by and for the city the American National Standard
Safety Code for Elevators, Dumbwaiters, Escalators and Moving Walks (ANSI A-
17.11978), as amended.
   (B)   The code is made an addendum to and part of the International Building
Code adopted in §
151.001.
(2000 Code, § 15.40.010)
§ 151.116 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of any other code, law,
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind conflict with the
provisions of the standard adopted in §
151.115, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher
standards or requirements shall govern.
(2000 Code, § 15.40.020)
FALLOUT SHELTERS
§ 151.130 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   All fallout shelters shall comply with the minimum construction
standards established by the Emergency Services and Disaster Administration in
the following publications:
      (1)   MP-15 The Family Fallout Shelter, June, 1959 (reprinted November,
1960); and
      (2)   NP-10-2 National Plan Appendix Series Fallout Shelter Surveys Guide
for Architects and Engineers, May, 1960 (reprinted July, 1960).
   (B)   In addition, minimum construction standards shall be the same as set
forth in the International Building Code adopted in §
151.001.
(2000 Code, § 15.48.010)
§ 151.131 PERMIT FEES.
   The city waives any building permit fee that it may be entitled to collect
under this chapter when application is made to construct a fallout shelter
under this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.48.020)
MULTIPLE-OWNER COMPLEXES
§ 151.145 PREAMBLES.
   The preambles recited in this ordinance codified in this chapter are
expressly incorporated within and made a part of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.64.010) (Ord. 2380, Art. 1, passed - - 1999)
§ 151.146 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMON ELEMENTS. All portions of the multi-ownership, multiple-unit
development property except the individual living units.
   CONDOMINIUM. Any property submitted or included as part of a development
registered under the Condominium Property Act, ILCS Ch. 765, Act 605, §§ 1 et
seq.
   CONVERSION. Any property which has changed ownership from a multi-family
dwelling structure to individual condominium units.
   CONVERSION/DWELLING UNIT. Any individual condominium unit created by the
conversion of a multi-family dwelling structure to individual condominium
units.
   COOPERATIVE. Any multi-unit real estate development operated by means of a
voluntary association, corporation, land trust or otherwise.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any property consisting of three or more parts intended for any
type of independent use whether contained in one or more multiple structures.
It shall include, but not be limited to, any association, condominium
development, cooperative, planned unit development or other entity which
includes as part of the development the maintenance and joint ownership of
common elements.
   OWNERSHIP INTEREST. Any legal title where an estate or interest individually
or collectively aggregates a fee simple absolute ownership of the unit.
OWNERSHIP INTEREST shall include shareholders, holders of beneficial interest
in land trusts, as well as holders of other common ownership interests.
Ownership shall not include any individual or entity whose interest is as
mortgagee or holder of a security interest.
(2000 Code, § 15.64.030) (Ord. 2380, Art. 3, passed - -1999; Ord. 2603, § 1,
passed - -2002)
§ 151.147 MULTIPLE OWNERSHIP/MULTIPLE UNIT INSPECTION REVIEW BOARD.
   (A)   There is established an Inspection Review Board.
   (B)   The Board shall consist of three members, who shall be the City
Administrator or his or her designee, the Superintendent of Public Works and
the Fire Chief.
   (C)   No official business shall be transacted by the Board unless a quorum
of members is present. The Board is empowered to enact its rules of procedures.
(2000 Code, § 15.64.020) (Ord. 2380, Art. 2, passed - -1999)
§ 151.148 REGISTRATION/CONVERSION OF STRUCTURES CONSTRUCTED PRIOR TO 1996.
   All multi-family rental dwelling structures intended to be converted to
condominium units shall be registered with the Building Department.
(2000 Code, § 15.64.035) (Ord. 2603, § 2, passed - -2002)
§ 151.149 MULTIPLE OWNERSHIP/MULTIPLE UNIT DEVELOPMENT REGISTRATION
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No multiple-ownership/multiple unit development shall be in compliance
with city ordinances unless the development holds and maintains a current,
unrevoked certificate of registration issued by the city in its name for the
specifically named development.
   (B)   Every certificate of registration shall be issued for a period of one
year from its date of issuance unless sooner revoked, and may be renewed for
successive annual periods.
   (C)   (1)   No certificate of registration shall be issued or renewed unless
the completed application form is accompanied by payment of an annual
registration fee. The annual registration fee for an operating license for
multi-family dwellings shall be $5 per dwelling unit.
      (2)   The annual registration shall be due by May 31. If not paid by May
31 of each year, a late charge of $5 per unit shall be imposed.
      (3)   In the event that all registration and any late fees are not fully
paid by the end of June 30, the Building Commissioner shall suspend the
certificate(s) of occupancy until all payments are fully made.
      (4)   This provision shall become effective for the registration year
2000.
   (D)   The Building Commissioner is authorized to investigate and to issue
new certificates of registration upon application therefor or renewal therefor,
in the name of the development. No certificate shall be issued unless the
development for which the certificate is sought is found, after inspection by
the Building Commissioner or his or designee, to meet all requirements of these
codified ordinances and of applicable rules and regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto. Each applicant shall be notified by the Building Commissioner
in advance of the date and time of the inspection.
   (E)   The Building Commissioner is authorized to inspect the common elements
of the development. Nothing is intended to nor grants the power to the Building
Commissioner to inspect any individual living unit.
   (F)   No certificate of registration shall be issued or renewed unless the
completed application is accompanied by payment of an annual registration fee.
The annual registration fee for an operating license for a development shall be
$5 per dwelling unit.
   (G)   No certificate of registration shall be issued or renewed for an
application unless the applicant has first designated an agent for the receipt
of service of complaints for violations of any of the provisions of these
codified ordinances and for service of process pursuant thereto. The
designation shall be made in writing and shall accompany each application form.
   (H)   An application for renewal of a certificate of registration shall be
made 30 days prior to the expiration of the present certificate.
   (I)   Each certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the
common ways of the development. Every person holding a certificate shall give
notice in writing to the Building Commissioner within five days after having
transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of any development. The
notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the
control of the development.
(2000 Code, § 15.64.040) (Ord. 2380, Art. 4, passed - -1999; Ord. 2411, § 2,
passed - -1999; Ord. 2414, § 2, passed - -1999; Ord. 2423, § 2, passed - -1999;
Ord. 2603, § 3, passed - -2002)
§ 151.150 DWELLING UNIT REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No dwelling conversion unit in a converted structure built prior to
1996 shall be in compliance unless the unit holds and maintains a current
unrevoked certificate of registration issued by the city in the name of the
current owner.
   (B)   Every certificate of registration shall be issued for a period of one
year from its date of issuance unless sooner revoked, and may be renewed for
successive annual periods.
   (C)   No certificate of registration shall be issued or renewed unless the
completed application form is accompanied by payment of an annual registration
fee. The annual registration fee shall be $5.
   (D)   The Building Commissioner is authorized to investigate and to issue
new certificates of registration upon application therefor or renewal therefor,
in the name of the owner. No certificate shall be issued unless the dwelling
unit for which the certificate is sought is found, after inspection by the
Building Commissioner or his or her designee, to meet all requirements of these
codified ordinances and of applicable rules and regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto. Each applicant shall be notified by the Building Commissioner
in advance of the date and time of the inspection.
   (E)   An application for renewal of a certificate of registration shall be
made 30 days prior to the expiration of the present certificate.
(2000 Code, § 15.64.045) (Ord. 2603, § 4, passed - -2002)
§ 151.151 ADDITIONAL INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Building Commissioner is authorized to inspect the common elements
of any development to determine whether the development remains in full
compliance with city ordinances.
   (B)   If upon inspection the Building Commissioner determines the
development is not in full compliance with city ordinances, the Building
Commissioner may proceed with the suspension or revocation of the certificate
of registration as outlined in §
151.152.
(2000 Code, § 15.64.050) (Ord. 2380, Art. 5, passed - -1999)
§ 151.152 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Whenever, upon inspection of a development or conversion/dwelling unit
for initial registration or renewal of a certificate of registration, the
Building Commissioner finds that conditions or practices exist which are in
violation of this subchapter, or of any applicable provision of these codified
ordinances or an applicable rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto,
the Building Commissioner shall serve the designated agent or owner of the
dwelling unit with notice of the violation. The notice shall state that unless
the violation cited is corrected within not less than five days, except for
emergency situations, the certificate of registration may be suspended.
   (B)   At the end of the time, the Building Commissioner has allowed for
correction of any violation cited, the Building Commissioner or his or her duly
authorized designee shall reinspect the development or conversion/dwelling unit
and, if he or she determines that the violation has not been corrected, he or
she may issue an order suspending the certificate. The order shall take effect
five days following service upon the designated agent or owner of the dwelling
unit unless, in the interim, the development or unit owner requests, in
writing, a hearing.
   (C)   Any person whose certificate of registration is subject to suspension
pursuant to a suspension order shall be entitled to a hearing on the suspension
action by filing with the City Clerk a written receipt for a hearing before the
Building Inspection Review Board within two business days following the receipt
of the suspension order. Upon receipt of the request, a hearing shall be
scheduled to be held before the Board not more ten business days thereafter.
Upon completion of the hearing, the Board may either:
      (1)   Confirm the suspension;
      (2)   Suspend the suspension and allow additional compliance time; or
      (3)   Rescind the suspension.
   (D)   If no petition for reconsideration of a suspension order is filed as
provided herein, the suspension order shall remain in effect until the
violation in question has been corrected, as determined by the Building
Commissioner upon inspection of the development or conversion/dwelling unit.
   (E)   If a certificate of registration is suspended, and the suspension is
affirmed after hearing, if any, during the period of suspension the following
apply:
      (1)   The city may seek enforcement of any applicable law; and
      (2)   The city may seek the imposition of penalties as provided by this
code.
(2000 Code, § 15.64.060) (Ord. 2380, Art. 6, passed - -1999; Ord. 2603, § 5
(part), passed - -2002)
§ 151.153 FAILURE TO REGISTER.
   In the event of a failure by any development or conversion/dwelling unit to
register as required under this chapter, each individual or entity which
possesses an ownership interest in the development or conversion/dwelling unit
shall be responsible for the responsibilities and penalties as outlined in this
subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.64.070) (Ord. 2380, Art. 7, passed - -1999; Ord. 2603, § 5
(part), passed - -2002)
§ 151.154 GUARANTEES.
   The city does not guarantee the condition of any property which is the
subject matter of this subchapter, and the city is not responsible for any
claim arising out of the subject property or the conditions thereof. The city
does not warrant that all deficiencies are listed in a certificate of housing
inspection and does not warrant anything as to the condition of the property or
the habitability thereof.
(2000 Code, § 15.64.080) (Ord. 2380, Art. 8, passed - -1999)
RENTAL MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING STRUCTURES
§ 151.165 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING INSPECTION REVIEW BOARD. The review panel consisting of the
Community Development Director or his or her designee, the Police Chief and the
Fire Chief.
   CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION. The certificate issued to a landlord or owner
by the Community Development Director that demonstrates that the landlord’s or
owner’s multi-family dwelling structure complies with the standards set forth
in this subchapter.
   CITY CODES. All applicable city building construction, maintenance, life
safety and zoning codes, ordinances, rules and regulations including, without
limitation, all applicable codes adopted and established in this Title XV.
   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The currently appointed Community
Development Director and his or her designee.
   DWELLING UNIT. An individual dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling
structure arranged, designed and used as a rental residence or living quarters
by one or more persons.
   LANDLORD. The person who is in charge of the day to day management of a
multi-family dwelling structure and may include the owner.
   LESSEE. The person and any person claiming under that person, such as sub-
lessees, who enters into a rental contract for a dwelling unit within a multi-
family dwelling structure.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING STRUCTURE. A building containing three or more
dwelling units.
   OWNER. The person, people or entity who are the legal title holders of a
multi-family dwelling structure or a dwelling unit.
(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008)
§ 151.166 FEES, PENALTIES AND OTHER CHARGES.
   Unless otherwise provided, all references to fees, penalties and other
charges in this subchapter are those established from time to time by the city
and a schedule of all current fees, penalties and other charges, including
copies, is on file with the Community Development Department at all times.
(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.167 CERTIFICATE OF HOUSING INSPECTION PREREQUISITE TO OPERATION, LEASE OR
SALE; TERM.
   (A)   No multi-family dwelling structure shall be operated as rental housing
unless the owner or landlord of the structure applies for and obtains a current
and enforceable certificate of registration issued by the Community Development
Director. The certificate of registration will be issued in the name of the
owner and landlord for the specifically identified multi-family dwelling
structure.
   (B)   No owner or landlord of a multi-family dwelling structure will
contract for the sale of the structure, or lease a dwelling unit, without
having first provided the buyer or lessee with a current and enforceable
certificate of registration for the property made within one month prior to the
date of the conveyance of the structure or lease of a dwelling unit.
   (C)   Every certificate of registration shall be issued for a period of one
year from its date of issuance unless sooner revoked, and may be renewed for
successive one-year periods.
(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008)
§ 151.168 APPLICATION PROCEDURES FOR CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   All applications for a certificate of housing inspection shall be made
on forms prescribed by the Community Development Director. The Community
Development Director will issue a certificate of registration within 14
business days after an inspection of the multi-family dwelling structure.
   (B)   The owner’s or landlord’s consent to the inspection will be given by
the owner’s or landlord’s filing of an application for a certificate of
registration together with the applicable inspection fee. The Community
Development Department will inspect the multi-family dwelling structure for
compliance with all applicable city codes.
   (C)   In the event that the Community Development Director finds any
violations of any city codes, he or she will provide the landlord or owner with
an itemized list of the violations. No certificate will be issued unless and
until all violations have been corrected to the satisfaction of the Community
Development Director. In the event a reinspection is necessary to inspect any
cited violations, the landlord or owner will be responsible for and pay a
reinspection fee. Payment of the reinspection fee will be due prior to the
reinspection. No person who is the owner or landlord of a multi-family dwelling
structure will permit the occupancy of any dwelling unit in the structure until
all violations have been remedied and the structure has been brought into
compliance with all city codes.
   (D)   All multi-family dwelling structure owners and landlords must apply
for an initial application for registration within 30 days after the effective
date of this subchapter.
   (E)   (1)   An application for renewal of a certificate of registration
shall be made not less than 45 days prior to the expiration of the present
certificate of registration. No application for a certificate of registration
will be processed unless the application is accompanied by payment of an annual
registration fee. Failure to file a completed application by December 15 of the
year preceding the renewal year may result in a delay of processing the
application and issuance of a certificate of registration beyond January 1 of
the renewal year. In the event that an application is filed beyond December 15
of the year preceding the renewal year, the applicant may request in writing
that the Community Development Director issue a provisional certificate of
registration pending inspection. Any request for a provisional certificate of
registration will be granted by the Community Development Director in his or
her discretion based upon the following factors:
         (a)   History of code, ordinance, rule or regulation enforcement
actions taken against the owner or landlord or the subject multi-family
dwelling structure;
         (b)   History of applicant in filing timely renewal applications; and
         (c)   Any currently known city code, ordinance, rule or regulation
violations, including any outside the scope of this subchapter.
      (2)   Any application completed on or after January 1 of the renewal year
shall be assessed a late fee.
(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008)
§ 151.169 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   No certificate of registration will be issued or renewed for an
applicant unless and until the applicant has first designated an agent for the
receipt of service of complaints for violations of any city code and for
service of process when the applicant is absent from the city for 30 or more
days. The designation must be made in writing and accompany each application
form.
   (B)   A current and enforceable certificate of registration must be
displayed in a conspicuous place within the common areas of the multi-family
dwelling structure at all times. Every owner or landlord holding a certificate
of registration must give notice in writing to the Community Development
Director within ten days of closing on a transaction that conveys legal title,
in whole or in part, to another party. The notice must include the name and
address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of the multi-
family dwelling structure.
   (C)   Certificates of registration in no way warrant or guarantee the
condition of the multi-family dwelling structure or any individual dwelling
unit and the city will have no responsibility for any claim arising out of the
multi-family dwelling structure or the condition thereof. Each certificate of
registration will have the following statement printed on its face:
      The holder of this certificate of registration acknowledges and agrees
that the city is not and will not be, in any way, liable for any damages or
injuries that may be sustained as a result of the city’s inspection of these
premises and that the city’s inspection and approval of these premises does
not, and will not, in any way, be deemed to insure the holder of this
certificate of registration against any damage or injury of any kind and at any
time.
(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008)
§ 151.170 CONSENT TO INSPECTION; SCOPE OF INSPECTION; LIMITATIONS; WARRANTS.
   (A)   Any application made under this subchapter shall constitute an
acknowledgment and consent on the part of the applicant to authorize the city
to make inspection of the multi-family dwelling structure in accordance with
the requirements of this subchapter. The landlord or owner will provide access
to the multi-family dwelling structure and dwelling units, as appropriate, to
the Community Development Director during reasonable business hours.
Inspections for renewal certificates of registration must be permitted by the
multi-family dwelling structure owner or landlord prior to December 31 of each
preceding year.
   (B)   All inspections made under this subchapter are limited to inspecting
the condition of the multi- family dwelling structure and dwelling units, as
appropriate, to ensure compliance with all city codes.
   (C)   No inspection made under this chapter will be used to prosecute any
other type of city code, ordinance, rule or regulation except as established in
this subchapter, nor will any visual or physical evidence collected during an
inspection made under this subchapter be admissible in or used for any other
city code, ordinance, rule or regulation enforcement action, including any
actions normally undertaken by the Police Department.
   (D)   (1)   Where no consent has been given to enter or inspect a multi-
family dwelling structure or dwelling unit, as appropriate no entry or
inspection will be made without the city first obtaining a warrant from the
circuit court. The court may consider any of the following factors, along with
other matters as it deems pertinent, in its decision as to whether or not to
issue a warrant:
         (a)   An eyewitness account of a violation;
         (b)   Citizens’ complaints;
         (c)   Tenant complaints;
         (d)   Plain view violations;
         (e)   Violations apparent from city records;
         (f)   Property deterioration;
         (g)   The age of the property;
         (h)   The nature of the alleged violation;
         (i)   Similar properties in the area;
         (j)   Documented violations of similar properties in the area;
         (k)   The passage of time since the last inspection; and
         (l)   A previous violation on the property.
      (2)   Cause for issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist when,
based on reasonable legislative and administrative standards, there is reason
to believe that a violation of a city code exists with respect to a particular
multi-family dwelling structure.
(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008)
§ 151.171 BUILDING INSPECTION REVIEW BOARD.
   There is established a Building Inspection Review Board. The Building
Inspection Review Board will hear all appeals from any actions taken by the
Community Development Director under this subchapter. The Board will consist of
the Community Development Director, the Police Chief and the Fire Chief. No
official business will be transacted by the Board unless a quorum of members is
present. The Board is empowered to enact its own rules of procedure.
(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008)
§ 151.172 BUILDING INSPECTION REVIEW BOARD PROCEDURES; APPEALS.
   (A)   Whenever the Community Development Director finds that conditions or
practices exist which are in violation of this subchapter, the Community
Development Director shall serve the owner or landlord with written notice of
any violation. The notice will state that unless each violation is corrected
within five days, or a longer time as may be determined by the Community
Development Director, except for emergency situations, the certificate of
registration may be suspended.
   (B)   At the end of the time, the Community Development Director has allowed
for correction of any violation cited, the Community Development Director, will
reinspect the multi-family dwelling structure and, if he or she determines that
any violation has not been corrected, he or she may issue an order suspending
the certificate. The order will take effect five days following service upon
the landlord or owner unless, in the interim, the landlord or owner requests,
in writing, a hearing.
   (C)   (1)   Any person whose certificate of registration for a multi-family
dwelling is subject to a suspension order is entitled to a hearing on the
suspension action by filing with the City Clerk a written petition for a
hearing before the Building Inspection Review Board within two business days
following the receipt of the suspension order. Upon receipt of a request, a
hearing will be scheduled not more than ten business days thereafter. Upon
completion of the hearing, the Board may either:
         (a)   Confirm the suspension;
         (b)   Delay the suspension and allow additional compliance time; or
         (c)   Rescind the suspension.
      (2)   All final decisions of the Building Review Board will be made in
writing and specify the reasons for its decision. A copy of the final decision
will be delivered to the owner or landlord and placed on file with the
Community Development Director.
   (D)   If no petition for reconsideration of a suspension order is filed as
provided herein, the suspension order will remain in effect until the violation
in question has been corrected, as determined by the Community Development
Director upon inspection of the multi-family dwelling structure or individual
dwelling unit.
   (E)   If a certificate of registration is suspended, and the suspension is
affirmed after hearing:
      (1)   No existing rental agreement can be renewed and no new rental
agreement can be entered into with respect to any rental unit located within
the structure; and
      (2)   The city may seek enforcement of its order in the circuit court in
law or in equity.
   (F)   Any appeal from a final decision of the Building Review Board will be
heard at a regular meeting of the City Council. All appeals from a decision of
the Building Review Board must be made in writing to the Community Development
Director within 15 business days after a final decision of the Building Review
Board. The Community Development Director will schedule the date of an appeal
hearing in front of the City Council not more than 30 days after the filing of
an appeal. At the appeal hearing, the City Council may:
      (1)   Confirm the suspension;
      (2)   Delay the suspension and allow additional compliance time; or
      (3)   Rescind the suspension.
(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008)
SEWER SYSTEM CONNECTION CHARGE
§ 151.185 PREAMBLES.
   The preambles are expressly incorporated into and made part of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.70.010) (Ord. 2597, § 1, passed - -2002)
§ 151.186 CONNECTION CHARGE.
   (A)   The city enacts a connection charge upon the enactment and publication
of this chapter.
   (B)   Every dwelling unit constructed after the date of this chapter within
any area of Oak Forest’s municipal boundaries west of a location in some places
called “Boca Rio Drive” and located 6000 west shall be assessed the amount of
$3,000.
   (C)   DWELLING UNIT for purposes of this subchapter is defined as each
condominium unit, townhouse or residence. In the event any single owner,
multiple unit (apartment building) is constructed within the area this
structure shall be assessed $3,000 per rental unit.
   (D)   These amounts shall be paid at the time any building permit is issued.
This connection charge is in addition to any now existing charges and fees.
(2000 Code, § 15.70.020) (Ord. 2597, § 2, passed - -2002)
SIGNS
§ 151.200 MOBILE SIGNS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. MOBILE SIGN means any electrical sign designed for use and display
out-of-doors, which is mounted on a trailer with a locking device, or which is
otherwise capable of being easily transported or moved from place to place, or
which is a display board similar or comparable to a portable attraction sign
mounted on a light-carrying carriage capable of being towed.
   (B)   Regulations. Specific regulations for the use of mobile signs are as
follows.
      (1)   No mobile sign shall be permitted to stand upon any public right-
of-way. All mobile signs shall be placed on private property only.
      (2)   All mobile signs shall meet all city requirements concerning
traffic hazards and line-of-sight hazards.
      (3)   No mobile sign shall be permitted with lights that flash, blink or
vary in intensity.
      (4)   All electrical mobile signs shall comply with all applicable code
provisions.
      (5)   Each mobile sign shall have clearly and permanently stamped,
painted or affixed thereon, in a prominent and visible location, the name and
address of the owner of the sign.
      (6)   When a mobile sign is electrical, the following regulations, in
addition to all other applicable regulations, shall apply thereto.
         (a)   The total length of the cord between the source of power and the
mobile sign unit shall be not more than 12 feet.
         (b)   The source of power shall be a weatherproof receptacle of the
grounded type. There shall not be any other connector of any kind between the
mobile sign and the source of power.
         (c)   In no case shall the cord be in a position that it will be
walked over or under by pedestrian traffic or be driven over or under by any
form of wheeled vehicle.
         (d)   No mobile sign shall be operated with any power source unless
the mobile sign unit has a U.L. label affixed thereto.
         (e)   Temporary electrical permits shall be required for all
electrical mobile signs.
      (7)   All mobile signs shall be maintained in good working order and in a
structurally safe condition, and the immediate area surrounding the mobile
signs shall be kept free from litter and debris.
      (8)   No person shall place a mobile sign within the city without first
having obtained a permit therefor from the City Clerk. The application for the
permit shall be on a form provided by the City Clerk and shall contain such
information as is required by the City Clerk.
      (9)   All mobile sign permits shall be valid for a period of 30 days and
shall have set forth thereon the date of issuance and expiration.
      (10)   No mobile sign shall be allowed which is larger in size than four
feet by eight feet.
      (11)   All mobile signs shall be firmly and solidly constructed and must
be firmly and securely set in place.
      (12)   The fee for a mobile sign permit shall be $30. If a temporary
electrical permit is required, there shall be an additional fee of $30.
      (13)   No mobile sign shall be permitted to stand at any address within
the city for a period of more than 30 consecutive days in any year, nor more
than a total of 60 days in any year. No mobile sign permit shall be issued for
consecutive 30-day periods without a period of at least 30 days intervening.
   (C)   Violations.
      (1)   Any person who places a mobile sign upon property within the city
without first having obtained and kept in full effect a permit therefor as
required above, shall be required to procure a permit for the sign and shall
pay a fee therefor equal to twice the fee which would otherwise be charged
hereunder.
      (2)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, in addition to the penalty provided in §
10.99, have his or her permit revoked, and no new permit shall be allowed to
that person or on that location for one year.
      (3)   When the person responsible for violating the provisions of this
section cannot reasonably be determined, then the person holding the permit to
place the mobile sign at such location shall be deemed to be the person who is
in violation of this section. If, at the time of the violation, there exists no
valid permit for the particular mobile sign in violation, then the owner of the
sign or the owner of the property or business where these sign is located shall
be deemed to be the person who is in violation of this section.
   (D)   Effective date. As to new signs, this section shall be in full force
and effect from and after its adoption, approval and publication in pamphlet
form of the ordinance codified in this section as provided by law. As to
existing signs which are currently in compliance with existing codes, this
section shall be in full force and effect as of January 1, 1987.
(2000 Code, § 15.76.010) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.201 SIGNS AT THE REAR OF SHOPPING CENTERS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      LETTERED SIGN. A sign whose individual lettering is five inches high and
black on a white or otherwise contrasting background, which sign is six feet
above ground level.
      SHOPPING CENTER. A multiple commercial structure of two or more
commercial or industrial units.
   (B)   Posting signs. The owner of a shopping center shall post, permanently
affix and maintain on each rear door of each unit of the shopping center a
lettered sign identifying the present occupant and the unit address. The sign
shall also include the designation of the storage or meter room if the rooms
are accessible from the rear door.
   (C)   Declaration of nuisance; injunction. Any violation of this section is
declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided by this
chapter, the City Attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for
an injunction to prohibit the continuation of such violation. The application
for relief may include a request for a temporary restraining order, a temporary
injunction or a permanent injunction.
(2000 Code, § 15.76.020)
STORAGE OF CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
§ 151.215 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND DEPOSIT.
   (A)   The owner of a new building under construction, or of an existing
building that is being repaired or remodeled, may apply to the Director of
Public Works for a permit to allow stone, sand, dirt, building material, debris
or material of any kind to accumulate on city property adjacent to construction
premises for the period required for such work and a reasonable period after
the termination thereof to allow for the removal thereof.
   (B)   The permit application shall be on a form supplied by the Director. It
shall contain the name of the owner; the name of the contractor; the street
address or other identification of the location of the work; a brief
description of the work to be performed; a brief description of the debris to
be accumulated; the length of time the work will take to be completed; and a
statement that if at the end of the period described in §
151.216(B), the owner has not cleared the debris from the property, the city
may apply the deposit required in division (C) of this section to the cost of
removing the debris. The application may contain such other information as the
Director may reasonably require.
   (C)   The application shall be accompanied by a cash deposit to secure the
promise of the owner that the debris will be removed from the property as
required in this section.
   (D)   The amount of the cash deposit required in division (C) of this
section hereof shall be as follows:
      (1)   Nonresidential main buildings and accessory buildings: $250;
      (2)   Residential main buildings: $100; and
      (3)   Residential accessory buildings, including garages: $50.
(2000 Code, § 15.80.010)
§ 151.216 TIME LIMITS FOR REMOVAL OF DEBRIS.
   (A)   The owner shall make every effort to remove debris from time to time
during the term of the project. Upon completion or abandonment of the project,
the owner shall remove all debris from the city property adjacent to the
construction premises within five days thereof. For purposes of this chapter,
PROJECT means each main building, and its accessory building, if any, if the
owner or contractor is engaged in constructing more than one main building or
accessory building.
   (B)   Subject to §
151.218, no person shall permit, allow or suffer debris to be accumulated on
any city property adjacent to construction premises upon which new construction
is or has been erected for one year from the date the permit was issued, or on
any city property adjacent to construction premises upon which existing
buildings or accessory buildings are or have been remodeled or repaired for one
and one-half years from the date the permit was issued.
(2000 Code, § 15.80.020) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.217 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   If, at the end of the periods set forth in §
151.216(B), there remains debris on city property adjacent to construction
premises, the Director of Public Works shall serve written notice upon the
owner of the premises that he or she will conduct a hearing in which the owner
is to show cause why the city should not apply the cash deposit to the cost of
removing the debris from the property. The notice shall be served not less than
ten days prior to the hearing and shall state the date, time and place of the
hearing.
(2000 Code, § 15.80.030)
§ 151.218 EXTENSION OF TIME LIMITS.
   At the hearing provided for in §
151.217, the Director of Public Works shall take evidence concerning the nature
and extent of the debris remaining and the reasons why the owner cannot remove
the same forthwith. If the Director finds that there is good cause to extend
the time for removal of the debris, he or she may enter a written order in the
record of the proceedings extending the time. In no event may the time be
extended for longer than 30 days.
(2000 Code, § 15.80.040)
§ 151.219 USE OF DEPOSIT FOR REMOVAL BY CITY.
   If the Director of Public Works finds that there is no good cause to extend
the time for removal of the debris, he or she shall enter an order finding the
fact and further finding that the cash deposit may be used by the city to
defray the cost of the removal.
(2000 Code, § 15.80.050)
§ 151.220 APPEALS.
   (A)   The owner may appeal the decision of the Director of Public Works to
Council.
   (B)   The appeal shall be made by serving upon the City Clerk written notice
stating the portions of the decision of the Director appealed from.
   (C)   The notice shall be served upon the City Clerk within two working days
from the date of the decision of the Director.
   (D)   Council shall not consider an appeal unless the notice thereof is
served as required in this section. The decision of Council on the appeal is
final.
(2000 Code, § 15.80.060)
§ 151.221 EXCESS OR DEFICIENCY IN DEPOSIT; LIENS.
   (A)   If, upon completion of the removal of the debris by the city, the
reasonable cost thereof is less than the amount of the cash deposit the city
shall refund to the owner the excess. If, upon completion of the removal of the
debris by the city, the reasonable cost thereof exceeds the amount of the cash
deposit, the owner shall, upon demand, pay to the city the deficiency.
   (B)   If the owner fails to pay the deficiency, the city may place a lien
upon the premises for the amount of the deficiency and may take other action as
is permitted by law to recover the deficiency from the owner.
(2000 Code, § 15.80.070) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.222 INSPECTION; REFUND OF DEPOSIT.
   Upon completion of the project and removal of debris by the owner, the owner
shall apply to the city for an inspection of the premises. If upon the
inspection, the city finds that all debris has been removed by the owner and
that the city property is free from damage, the city shall refund to the owner
the amount of the cash deposit.
(2000 Code, § 15.80.080)
§ 151.223 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
   Deposits made under this subchapter shall in no way limit the liability of
any person for damage to city property.
(2000 Code, § 15.80.090)
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
§ 151.300 PURPOSE.
   Consistent with the requirements of the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act (Public Act 100-585) (the "Act"), and in anticipation of a continued
increased demand for placement of small wireless facilities of the type
regulated by the Act both within the public rights-of-way and in other
locations within the jurisdiction of the city, the City Council has found it to
be in the best interests of the public health, safety and general welfare of
the city to adopt the code amendments set forth in this subchapter in order to
establish generally applicable standards for the design, permitting, location,
construction, deployment, regulation, operation, maintenance, repair and
removal of such small wireless facilities both within the public rights-of-way
and in other locations within the jurisdiction of the city so as to, among
other things:
   (A)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the city's
facilities in the right-of-way and other city utilities and of other utilities
lawfully located both within public rights-of-way and in other locations within
the jurisdiction of the city;
   (B)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which such small
wireless facilities are installed;
   (C)   Minimize any adverse visual impact of small wireless facilities and
prevent visual blight in the neighborhoods in which such facilities are
installed;
   (D)   Ensure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to small wireless facilities;
   (E)   Provide appropriate aesthetic protections to any designated historic
landmarks or districts within the city; and
   (F)   Ensure that the placement of small wireless facilities does not
negatively impact public safety and the City's public safety technology.
(Ord. 2019-08-07470, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.301 INTERACTION WITH OTHER CODE PROVISIONS AND LAWS.
   (A)   Other Code provisions. The provisions of this subchapter are intended
to supplement general requirements and standards relative to the siting of
telecommunication facilities and generally applicable requirements for
construction within public rights-of-way set forth elsewhere within this Code,
including but not limited to the regulations set forth in "Utility Facilities
in the Public Rights-of-Way; Construction", §§
151.065 through
151.088 of this Code. In the event of a conflict, however, the provisions of
this subchapter shall control in all matters involving small wireless
facilities, as defined below.
   (B)   State and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or state
laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this subchapter, a
wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating such federal or state laws or
regulations,
(Ord. 2019-08-07470, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.302 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 100-585).
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the city for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   AUTHORITY. The city or other unit of local government that has jurisdiction
and control for use of public rights-of-way as provided by the Illinois Highway
Code for placements within public rights-of-way or has zoning or land use
control for placements not within public rights-of-way.
   CITY. The City of Oak Forest.
   CITY UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the city in public
rights-of-way.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole, whether existing or new.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S. C. 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(33), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
522(5). as amended; a provider of information service, as  defined in 47 U.S.C.
153(24), as amended: a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either:
      (1)   Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the
individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list
properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in
accordance with Section VI.D.l.a.i through Section VI.D.l.a.v of the Nationwide
Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR Pari I. Appendix C; or
      (2)   Designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or
historic district by an ordinance adopted by the city pursuant to a
preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local
Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where
such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic
Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than (24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in
height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the city or other permitting
authority to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization, including an authority.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
fire fighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. The same meaning as set forth in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-
105.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on. below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include authority-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary
enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and
      (2)   All other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole
associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in
volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included
in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
   STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. A person licensed under the laws of the State of
Illinois to practice structural engineering.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and a communications network, including:
         (a)   Equipment associated with wireless communications; and
         (b)   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration.
      (2)   WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities.
      (3)   WIRELESS FACILITY does not include:
         (a)   The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or
          (b)   Wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that
is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber
optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the city.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider and/or a wireless
services provider. This does not include, and expressly excludes, any person
who is providing service to or for a private niche market.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole:
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 2019-08-07470, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.303 ZONING.
   (A)   Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and
shall not be subject to zoning review or approval, if collocated in rights-of-
way in any zoning district, or outside rights-of-way, except in areas zoned
residential.
   (B)   In all residential districts, for collocation of small wireless
facilities outside rights-of-way, the city's normal special use zoning
approvals, processes and restrictions shall apply, if such zoning approval,
processes or restrictions are required by the city's zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 2019-08-07470, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.304 PERMITS; APPLICATION PROCESS.
   Unless otherwise specifically exempted in this subchapter, a permit to
collocate a small wireless facility within the city is required in all cases.
Permits are subject to the following.
   (A)   Permit applications. Permit applications for the collocation of small
wireless facilities shall be made on a form provided by the city for such
purpose. In addition to any generally applicable information required of other
communications service providers or for other installations in the public
right-of-way, applicants must, when requesting to collocate small wireless
facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure, provide the
following information:
      (1)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a city utility pole,
make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined
in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989:
      (2)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and digital photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. The photographs shall include a digital
photo simulation of the proposed location providing "before and after" views
demonstrating the true visual impact of the proposed small wireless facilities
on the surrounding environment;
      (3)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
      (4)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
      (5)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
      (6)   Certification that, to (he best of the applicant's knowledge, the
collocation complies with the written design standards established by the city,
and with the various other requirements set forth in this subchapter and Code;
      (7)   Copies of all licenses, permits and approvals required by or from
the city (i.e. zoning approval, where required), other agencies and units of
government with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and
operation of said small wireless facility. The applicant shall maintain such
licenses, permits and approvals in full force and effect and provide evidence
of renewal or extension thereof when granted; and
      (8)   In the event the small wireless facility is proposed to be attached
to an existing utility pole or wireless support structure owned by an entity
other than the city, legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of
such pole or wireless support structure to the proposed collocation.
   (B)   Means of submission. Permit applications, along with all supporting
information, for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall be
submitted by personal delivery or by other means approved by the city.
   (C)   Multiple applications for same location. Multiple applications for
collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
processed based on a first fully complete application, first-served basis.
   (D)   Permit application fees. All applications for collocation of small
wireless facilities shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in
the following amounts:
 
Request to collocate a small wireless facility  
that includes the installation of a new        $1,000
utility pole
Request to collocate a single small wireless    
facility on an existing utility pole or        $650
wireless support structure
Request to collocate multiple small wireless
facilities on existing utility poles or         
wireless support structures addressed in a     $350 per small wireless facility
single application
 
   (E)   Permit review time lines.
      (1)   Completeness of application.
         (a)   Requests for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall
be reviewed for conformance with the requirements of the Act, this subchapter,
and other applicable provisions of this Code. Within 30 days after receiving an
application, the city must determine whether the application is complete and
notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the city must
specifically identify the missing information. Processing deadlines are tolled
from the time the city sends a notice of incompleteness to the time the
applicant provides the missing information.
         (b)   An application shall be deemed complete if the city fails to
provide notification to the applicant within 30 days of the date when all
documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the city's permit
application form are submitted by the applicant to the city.
      (2)   Existing pole or wireless support structure. Requests for the
collocation of small wireless facilities on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and
either approved or denied within 90 days of submission of a completed
application. A permit application shall be deemed approved if the city fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days, subject to the following: if an
applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved
basis, the applicant shall notify the city in writing of its intention to
invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after the submission
of a completed application. The permit shall be deemed approved on the later of
the ninetieth day after submission of the completed application, or the tenth
day after receipt of the deemed approved notice by the city. Receipt of a
deemed approved notice by the city shall not preclude the city from denying the
permit within the allowed time limit.
      (3)   New utility pole. Requests for the collocation of small wireless
facilities that include the installation of a new utility pole shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and either approved or denied within 120
days of submission of a completed application. A permit application shall be
deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the application within 120
days, subject to the following: if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
city in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner
than 105 days after the submission of a completed application. The permit shall
be deemed approved on the later of the one hundred twentieth day after
submission of the completed application, or the tenth day after receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the city. Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the
city shall not preclude the city from denying the permit within the allowed
time limit.
   (F)   Tolling. The time limitations for approval or denial of applications
shall be tolled by notice to an applicant that its application is incomplete as
set forth above, upon mutual agreement of the parties, or by a local, state or
federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes a delay.
   (G)   Pole replacement. Permit approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure at the applicant's
sole cost where such replacement is deemed necessary for compliance with the
requirements of this subchapter or Code relative to the siting of small
wireless facilities, or other applicable codes and regulations that concern
public safety.
   (H)   Denial. The city shall deny an application that does not meet the
requirements of this subchapter. The reasons for any denial of a permit shall
be provided in a written notice of denial sent to the applicant, and shall
include the specific Code provisions or application conditions on which the
denial is based.
   (I)   Resubmittal after denial. In the case of a permit denial, an applicant
may cure the deficiencies identified in the notice of denial and resubmit a
revised application once within 30 days after the notice of denial is sent
without payment of an additional application fee. The city shall have 30 days
to approve or deny the resubmitted application or it is deemed approved, if the
applicant has notified the city of its intention to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, which notification may be submitted with
the resubmitted application. Review of a resubmitted application is limited to
the deficiencies cited in the original notice of denial. This division does not
apply if a revised application is not resubmitted within 30 days, or curing any
deficiencies in the original application requires review of a new location, new
or different structure for collocation, new antennas, or other wireless
equipment associated with the small wireless facility. In such cases, a new
application and application fee are required.
   (J)   Consolidated applications. Consolidated applications for small
wireless facilities for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities
shall be allowed if the collocations each involve substantially the same type
of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. Each
consolidated application shall provide all the information required by this
subchapter for each small wireless facility at each location. If such an
application includes incomplete information for one or more small wireless
facility collocations, or includes requests for small wireless facilities that
do not qualify for consolidated treatment, or that are otherwise denied, the
city may remove such collocation requests from the application and treat them
as separate requests. Separate permits may be issued for each collocation
approved in a consolidated application.
   (K)   Alternate locations. If an applicant is seeking to install a new
utility pole as part of its application, the city may propose that the small
wireless facility be located on an existing utility pole or existing wireless
support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation. The applicant
shall accept the proposed alternate location so long as it has the right to use
the location on reasonable terms and conditions, unless the alternate location
imposes technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the
applicant. If the applicant refuses an alternate location based on the
foregoing, the applicant shall provide legally competent evidence in the form
of a written certification, under oath, describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons that prevent the alternate location
from being utilized.
   (L)   Exemptions. No application, permit approval or fee shall be required
from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the right-of-way
when the work in question is for:
      (1)   Routine maintenance not requiring replacement of wireless
facilities if the wireless provider notifies the city in writing at least 48
hours prior to the planned maintenance;
      (2)   (a)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless
facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the
wireless provider notifies the city in writing at least ten days prior to the
planned replacement and includes equipment specifications, including:
            1.   Equipment type and model numbers, for the replacement of
equipment consistent with the equipment specifications information required on
a permit application for original installation; and
            2.   Information sufficient to establish that the replacement is
substantially similar.
         (b)   The wireless provider shall provide all information necessary
and requested by the city to establish that the replacement is substantially
similar.The city has the sole right and responsibility to determine if a
proposed small wireless facility is substantially similar to the existing small
wireless facility; or
      (3)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement
of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
   (M)   The city may require a permit to work within rights-of-way for
activities which affect traffic patterns or require lane closure.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.305 CONSTRUCTION.
   Collocations for which permits are approved shall be completed within 180
days of issuance of the permit, unless the city agrees to extend the period or
a delay is caused by make-ready work for a city utility pole or by the lack of
commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the applicant
has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the permit for
commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete
installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit. Permits
that are not completed within applicable time lines shall be void absent an
extension granted in writing by the city.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.306 PERMIT DURATION.
   Permits issued for small wireless facilities pursuant to this subchapter
shall be for a period of five years. Permits shall be renewed at the end of the
five-year permit period for a successive five- year term so long as the
installation complies with the applicable code provisions in force at the time
of renewal. A finding by the city at the time of a request for renewal that an
installation does not comply with the applicable Code provisions in force at
the time of the renewal request shall be in writing. If the Act is repealed as
provided in Section 90 of the SEFDA, renewals of permits shall be subject to
the applicable City Code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of the
renewal.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.307 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Antenna installations. The maximum permitted height of a small
wireless facility is ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
   (B)   New poles. The maximum permitted height of new or replacement utility
pole or wireless support structure on which a small wireless facility is
collocated is the higher of:
      (1)   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other
than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on
the date the application is submitted, and that is located within 300 feet of
the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is
in the same right-of-way within the city. The city may designate which
intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or
wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such
facility; or
      (2)   Forty-five feet above ground level.
   (C)   Waiver process. A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the City
Engineer from the maximum permitted height of a new pole set forth in this
section, if the wireless provider can establish that:
      (1)   Because of a particular unusual condition, a particular hardship or
practical difficulty to the wireless provider would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, and such hardship or difficulty has not been created
by the wireless provider; and
      (2)   Existing utility poles or wireless support structures, or a new
utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new pole allowed by this
section cannot accommodate the wireless facility at a height necessary to
function effectively, under reasonable terms and conditions; and
      (3)   The use of existing utility poles or other wireless support
structures, or a new utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new
pole allowed by this section, is not technically feasible.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.308 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Public safety technology. A wireless provider's operation of a small
wireless facility may not interfere with the frequencies used by a public
safety agency for public safety communications. A wireless provider must
install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause
unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications
equipment. Unacceptable interference is determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licenses by a public safety agency. If a small wireless facility causes such
interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the
interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own
expense, shall take all reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate the
interference, including, but not limited to, powering down the small wireless
facility and later powering up the small wireless facility for intermittent
testing, if necessary. The city may terminate a permit for a small wireless
facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not making a
good faith effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the
abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safely
spectrum established by the FCC, including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973
and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. The burden to establish the good faith
effort shall be on the wireless provider, which shall timely deliver to the
city all information necessary to demonstrate its efforts to resolve the
interference consistent with the Code of Federal Regulations sections cited
above. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a
public nuisance and the small wireless facility may be abated through the
procedures for abatement of such nuisances set forth in this Code.
   (B)   A wireless provider shall not construct or maintain any small wireless
facility that:
      (1)   Obstructs, impedes or hinders the usual travel or public safety on
a right-of-way;
      (2)   Obstructs the legal use of right-of-way by utility users;
      (3)   Violates nondiscriminatory applicable codes;
      (4)   Violates or conflicts with other applicable regulations set forth
in this Code or otherwise adopted by the city, except to the extent such
chapters, sections or regulations may be modified by the provisions of this
subchapter; or
      (5)   Violates the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42
U.S.C. Section 12101 et seq.)
   (C)   Contractual requirements. Wireless providers shall comply with all
requirements imposed by a contract between the city and any private property
owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles
and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   (D)   Ground-mounted equipment. Wireless providers shall also comply with
any ground-mounted equipment spacing requirements within rights-of-way as set
forth in "Utility Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way; Construction", §§
151.065 through
151.088 of this Code.
   (E)   Undergrounding.
      (1)   The wireless provider shall comply with City Code provisions or
regulations concerning undergrounding requirements at "Utility Facilities in
the Public Rights-of-Wav; Construction", §§
151.065 through
151.088 and applicable Code provisions, that prohibit the installation of new
or the modification of existing utility poles or equipment in the right-of-way.
      (2)   A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the City Engineer to
allow small wireless facilities to be located above ground in an area where
city ordinances or regulations prohibit or restrict above ground facilities if
the wireless provider can establish that:
         (a)   Underground equipment is not technically feasible and there is
no reasonable alternative or location that is more aesthetically favorable to
adjacent property owners and to effective use and management of the right-of-
way; and
         (b)   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
is necessary at the proposed location to provide coverage in a specified area:
and
         (c)   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
will not disrupt traffic or pedestrian circulation or constitute a safety
hazard; and
         (d)   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
will not interfere with public safety uses or frequencies; and
         (e)   Space exists within the public right-of-way to accommodate the
above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location; and
         (f)   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
will not create a safely hazard; and
         (g)   The above ground small wireless facility is located and designed
in such a way so as to minimize its visual impact on adjacent properties; and
         (h)   In any historical area, that the above ground small wireless
facility will not detrimentally affect the historical nature of the area.
      (3)   Screening for ground- mounted facilities. Where a ground-mounted
facility is allowed, such equipment shall be screened around the perimeter in
accordance with a landscape plan sealed by a professional landscape engineer.
Plant materials shall include a mixture of deciduous arid coniferous planting
materials. The owner or wireless provider shall be responsible for maintenance
of all landscaping as provided in the approved landscape plan.
      (4)   Future undergrounding. The city may, from time to time, make a
decision to eliminate above ground utility poles of a particular type
generally, such as electric utility poles, in all or a significant portion of
the city. In the event that such a utility pole has a collocated small wireless
facility in place at the time of such a decision, the city shall either:
         (a)   Continue to maintain the utility pole, or install and maintain a
reasonable utility pole or wireless support structure for the collocation of
the small wireless facility; or
         (b)   Offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider at a
reasonable cost, or allow the wireless provider to install its own utility pole
so it can maintain service from that location.
   (F)   Collocation limits.
      (1)   Wireless providers shall not collocate small wireless facilities on
city utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission
system within the communication worker safely zone of the pole or the electric
supply zone of the pole.
      (2)   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the city utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
      (3)   For purposes of this division (F), the terms COMMUNICATIONS SPACE,
COMMUNICATION WORKER SAFETY ZONE, and ELECTRIC SUPPLY ZONE have the meanings
given to those terms in the National Electric Safely Code as published by the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   (G)   Code compliance. Wireless providers shall comply with applicable codes
and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.309 STEALTH, CONCEALMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Every small wireless facility installation shall comply with the following
standards:
   (A)   General stealth, concealment and design standards. Installations shall
comply with any stealth, concealment, design and aesthetic standards applicable
to utility installations in the public right-of-way, as set forth"Utility
Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way; Construction", §§
151.078 through
151.082 of this Code, as well as any written design standards that are
generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth,
concealment, design and aesthetic requirements that are otherwise identified by
the city in an ordinance, written policy adopted by the City Council, in the
city's comprehensive plan, or in a written design plan that applies to other
occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a
historic district.
   (B)   Historic districts and landmarks. For any areas which may be
designated as historic districts, or on buildings or structures designated as
historic landmarks pursuant to of this Code, in addition to the stealth,
concealment and design requirements referenced above, the following additional
restrictions/ conditions apply to the installation of small wireless
facilities:
      (1)   Small wireless facilities shall be comprised of materials that are
consistent with the surrounding elements so as to blend architecturally with
any buildings or structures designated as historic landmarks or located within
a designated historic district, and shall be designed to blend with the
surrounding historical landmarks and/or district in design and color.
   (C)   Historic district or landmark limitations.
      (1)   Any stealth, concealment and design standards in a historic
district or on a historic landmark including restrictions on a specific
category of utility poles, may not have the effect of prohibiting any
provider's technology. Such stealth, concealment and design measures shall not
be considered a part of the small wireless facility for purposes of the size
restrictions of a small wireless facility.
      (2)   This division shall not be construed to limit the city s
enforcement of any historic preservation in conformance with the requirements
adopted pursuant to the Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation
Act or the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 54 U.S.C. Section 300101
et seq., and the regulations adopted to implement those laws.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.310 RESERVATION OF CITY UTILITY POLE SPACE.
   The city may reserve space on city-owned utility poles for future public
safety uses or for city electric utility uses. Such reservation may preclude
collocation of small wireless facilities if the city reasonably determines that
the city's utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.311 APPLICABILITY OF EXISTING AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Existing installations. Subject to any applicable termination
provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the city and a
wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on
city utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall remain in effect for
all small wireless facilities collocated on the city's utility poles pursuant
to applications submitted prior to June 1, 2018.
   (B)   Applications received between June 1, 2018 and June 1, 2020. Subject
to any applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in
place between the city and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of
small wireless facilities on city utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement
shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the
city's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1, 2018, but
prior to June 1, 2020, until June 1, 2020 or receipt by the city from the
wireless provider of a notice that it is opting to accept the rates, fees and
terms of this subchapter and the Act received after June 1, 2020, whichever is
later.
   (C)   Applications received after June 1, 2020. Subject to any applicable
termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the
city and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless
facilities on city utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall remain
in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the city's utility
poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1, 2020, until receipt by
the city of a notice from the wireless provider that it is accepting the rates,
fees, terms and conditions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.312 COLLOCATION ON CITY- OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE.
   (A)   Fee. The annual fee to collocate a small wireless facility on a city-
owned utility pole located
in a right-of-way shall be the higher of:
      (1)   $200/year per small wireless facility: or
      (2)   The actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless
providers use of space on the pole.
   (B)   Exception. Small wireless facilities collocated on city-owned utility
poles located outside of public right-of-way are not subject to the rate
limitations in this section.
   (C)   Attachment agreement. An attachment agreement in a form approved by
the city is required for any collocation upon any city- owned utility pole or
wireless support structure.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.313 NOTICE OF SALE OR TRANSFER.
   A wireless provider shall, prior to any sale or transfer of ownership or
control of a small wireless facility located within the jurisdiction of the
city, provide written notice to the city of such sale or transfer of control.
Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless
provider.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.314 ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period
of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility shall
remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written
notice from the city notifying it of the abandonment. The notice shall be sent
by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the city to the
owner at its last known address. If the small wireless facility is not removed
within 90 days after receipt of such notice, such wireless facility shall be
deemed to be a nuisance and the city may remove or cause the removal of such
facility, and recover or place a lien for its costs, pursuant to the terms of
its pole attachment or other agreement for city utility poles or through the
procedures for abatement of nuisances set forth in this Code.
   (B)   In the event the city suspects that the wireless provider is no longer
using the small wireless facilities to provide wireless service, as provided in
division (A) above, it may send the wireless provider written notice that
requires the wireless provider to remove the small wireless facility or provide
proof that the small wireless faciliiy is operational and still being used
within 90 days, and informs the wireless provider that failure to provide proof
or to remove the small wireless facility will result in the city removing the
small wireless facility at the wireless provider's cost.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.315 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The Circuit Court of Cook County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Act. Pending resolution of a dispute
concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on city utility
poles within the right-of-way, the city shall allow the collocating person to
collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year per pole,
with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.316 INDEMNIFICATION.
   Other than for liabilities and losses due to or caused by the sole
negligence of the city or its employees or agents, a wireless provider shall
indemnify and hold the city harmless against any and all liability or loss from
personal injury or properly damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole
or in part, the use or occupancy of the city infrastructure or improvements, or
right-of-way associated with such infrastructure or improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider proceeding under this chapter waives any claims it may have against
the city with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however
caused, based on the theory of liability.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.317 INSURANCE.
   At all times during the period in which a wireless provider's facilities are
located on city infrastructure, improvements or in right-of-way, the wireless
provider shall, at its own sole cost and expense, carry the following insurance
coverages:
   (A)   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   (B)   Workers' compensation insurance within statutory limits as required by
law; and
   (C)   (1)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the city infrastructure, improvements or rights-of-way, including
coverage for bodily injury and property damage, with limits not less than:
         (a)   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;
         (b)   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
         (c)   Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
      (2)   The wireless provider shall include the city as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and shall provide
certificates of insurance and proof of inclusion of the city in a commercial
general liability policy to the city prior to the collocation of any small
wireless facility, and shall keep updated certificates and proof of inclusion
on file with the city at all times that the provider maintains small wireless
facilities within the city.
   (D)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limits required by the city. A wireless provider that self-insures
is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the
requirement that the city be named an additional insured. A wireless provider
that self-insures shall provide to the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate
its financial ability to self-insure (he insurance limits required by the city.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.318 MAINTENANCE OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   A wireless provider shall maintain all small wireless facilities
installed within the city in a condition that maintains the safety, integrity
and aesthetics of such facilities. Small wireless facilities shall not appear
to be unkempt. In the event of a failure to properly maintain such facilities,
the city shall notify the wireless provider, in writing, who shall have 30 days
to correct the identified maintenance violation. If not corrected within such
period, the city reserves the right to take such action as it deems necessary,
including revocation of the permit. Maintenance and replacement of small
wireless facilities shall be performed by the wireless provider at the wireless
provider's sole cost and expense.
   (B)   In the event of an emergency involving an imminent threat to life or
property, the city may take corrective action to eliminate such emergency at
the wireless provider's expense.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.319 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit to collocate a small wireless facility may be revoked for one
or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   The wireless provider obtained approval by means of fraud or made a
misrepresentation of a material fact with respect to the permit application, or
any required documentation or submittal;
      (2)   The wireless provider failed to construct the small wireless
facility in accordance with the approved plans;
      (3)   The wireless provider failed to comply within any material
condition of a permit issued;
      (4)   The wireless provider substantially expanded or altered the use or
the structure of the small wireless facility beyond what was requested in the
permit application or approved, without the approval of the city;
      (5)   The wireless provider failed to notify the city of the replacement
of small wireless facilities as required by this subchapter;
      (6)   A substantial change of law has occurred affecting (he wireless
provider's authority to occupy or use the property upon which the small
wireless facility is located;
      (7)   The small wireless facility interferes with vehicular or pedestrian
use of the public right-of-way.
      (8)   The wireless provider has failed to make a safe and timely
restoration of the right-of-way or the property upon which the small wireless
facility is located;
      (9)   The wireless provider has failed to properly maintain the small
wireless facility as required by this subchapter;
      (10)   The wireless provider has failed to abate interference with public
safety communications in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675;
      (11)   The small wireless facility has been abandoned and the wireless
provider has failed to remove the small wireless facilities as provided in this
subchapter.
   (B)   Written notification of the permit revocation shall be sent by
certified mail or shall be personally delivered to the wireless provider
setting forth the basis for the revocation. The wireless provider shall, within
14 days of the notice of revocation, file a written response with the City
Engineer setting forth the reasons why the permit should not be revoked along
with such evidence in opposition to the revocation as the wireless provider
determines necessary. Failure to file a response with the City Engineer shall
be deemed an admission of the facts set forth in the notification of written
notification and shall result in automatic revocation of the permit. The City
Engineer shall render findings and a decision within 21 days of the date of
receipt of the wireless provider s response, if any.
   (C)   If the City Engineer revokes the permit, the wireless provider may
file a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 21 days of
notification of the permit revocation. Such notice shall contain a response to
the decision of the City Engineer. The City Council shall hear the revocation
appeal and render a decision on such appeal.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.320 EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter authorizes the collocation of small
wireless facilities on:
      (1)   Property owned by a private party without the written consent of
the property owner;
      (2)   Property owned or controlled by a unit of local government that is
not located within rights-of-way without the written consent of the unit of
local government (local governments are, however, required to authorize the
collocation of small wireless facilities on utility poles owned or controlled
by the local government or located within rights-of-way to the same extent the
local government permits access to utility poles for other commercial projects
or uses);
      (3)   A privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure,
without the consent of the property owner;
      (4)   Property owned, leased or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes, without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code (ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, §§1-
101 et seq.); or
      (5)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under ILCS Ch.625, Act
5. § 18c-7201, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail service,
or an electric utility as defined in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-102, without the
consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to:
      (1)   Facilities of an electric or gas public utility or such utility's
wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained
consistent with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-108.5(i); or
      (2)   Small wireless facilities owned by the city.
(Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 151.321 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this subchapter regarding
the siting and installation of personal wireless telecommunication facilities
are more restrictive than comparable conditions imposed elsewhere in any other
local law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the regulations of this
subchapter will govern.
(Ord. 2017-10-06650, passed 10-24-2017; Am. Ord. 2019-08-0747O, passed 8-13-
2019)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of § 151.020 shall be fined not
less than $250 for the first offense, $500 for the second offense, and $1,000
for the third and each subsequent offense on the same property by the same
person or entity. Every day during which a violation occurs or continues shall
be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the minimum fines provided, the
city may issue a stop work order or revoke the building permit if a violation
continues after warning, citation and request for compliance.
   (C)   Any contractor, installer, company or individual who violates §
151.100 shall be responsible to pay a fine of at least $75 for each offense.
Each day and each property shall be considered as a separate and distinct
offense.
(2000 Code, § 15.26.020) (Ord. 2479, § 2, passed - -2000)
   (D)   In addition to the penalty provided for in §
10.99 for violations of §§
151.145 through
151.154, the city may file suit seeking the demolition, repair or enclosure of
a structure, or such other relief as is provided for in state law.
(2000 Code, § 15.64.090) (Ord. 2380, Art. 9, passed - -1999)
   (E)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of §§
151.066 through
151.088 shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of
this code. There may be times when the city will incur delay or other costs,
including third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform
its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that
another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is
appropriate, the utility shall bear the city’s costs of damages and its costs
of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating or removing the facility that
is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may
review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions
may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)
CHAPTER 152: EROSION, DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Intent and purpose
   
152.02   Conflict of laws
   
152.03   Definitions
   
152.04   General criteria and standards
   
152.05   Site development permit required; exceptions
   
152.06   Application; site development plan
   
152.07   Bond
   
152.08   Conditions for issuance of permit
   
152.09   Responsibility of permittee; nonliability of city
   
152.10   Retention of plans by Director of Public Works
   
152.11   Inspections
   
152.12   Operation standards and requirements
   
152.13   Exceptions; appeals
   
152.14   Revocation of permits
   
152.15   Fees and deposits
   
152.16   Nuisances
   
152.17   Disclaimer of liability
   
152.18   Violations
Drainage Regulations
   
152.30   Prohibited acts
   
152.31   Permit required; review by Building Commissioner and City Engineer
   
152.32   Notice of violation; time limit for abatement
   
152.33   Emergency measures
   
152.34   Abatement by city; costs
   
152.35   Liens for unpaid abatement charges
   
152.36   Foreclosure
   
152.37   Nonliability of city
Stormwater Maintenance
   
152.50   Definitions
   
152.51   Developments; storage and controlled release required
   
152.52   Controlled release rate
   
152.53   Stormwater detention
   
152.54   Dry bottom stormwater storage areas
   
152.55   Wet bottom stormwater storage areas
   
152.56   Paved surface stormwater storage areas
   
152.57   Rooftop storage
   
152.58   Developments forming only a portion of a watershed
   
152.59   Control plans required before plat approval or issuance of building
permits
   
152.60   Flood or flash runoff hazards
   
152.61   Cost of construction
   
152.62   Recharge methods
   
152.63   Erosion control
   
152.64   Final engineering plans
   
152.65   Developments of less than five acres
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The intent of this chapter is to avoid the following:
      (1)   Excessive quantities of soil eroding from areas that are undergoing
development for certain nonagricultural uses, including, but not limited to,
the construction of dwelling units, commercial buildings and industrial plants,
the building of roads and highways, the filling of land and the creation of
recreational facilities;
      (2)   The washing, blowing and falling of eroded soil across and upon
roadways endangering the health and safety of users thereof by decreasing
vision and reducing traction of road vehicles;
      (3)   Soil erosion necessitating the costly repair of gulleys, washed-out
fills and embankments;
      (4)   Sediment from soil erosion tending to clog sewers and ditches and
to pollute and silt rivers, streams, lakes and reservoirs;
      (5)   Sedimentation limiting the use of water and waterways for the most
beneficial purposes and destroying fish and other aquatic life, and the costly
and difficult removal of sediment; and
      (6)   Sedimentation reducing the channel capacity of waterways, resulting
in greatly increased chances of flooding and grave danger to public health and
safety.
   (B)   The purposes of this chapter are to provide minimum standards to
safeguard persons, to protect property, to prevent the despoilation of the
environment and to promote the public welfare by regulating and controlling the
design, construction, quality of materials and use and maintenance of any
development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise
results in the movement of earth on land situated in the city.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.010)
§ 152.02 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be additional requirements
to minimum standards required by other ordinances of the city. In the case of
conflicting requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.020)
§ 152.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or require a different meaning.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the city for the construction, erection
or alteration of a structure or building.
   CERTIFY or CERTIFICATION. That specific inspections and tests, where
required, have been performed and that such tests comply with applicable
requirements of this chapter.
   CUBIC YARDS. The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by
the method of average end areas.
   EXCAVATION. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed, and includes conditions resulting therefrom.
   EXISTING GRADE. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior
to excavation or filling.
   FILL. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location, and includes conditions resulting therefrom.
   GRADING. Excavation or fill or any combination thereof, and includes
conditions resulting therefrom.
   LAND SURVEYOR. A registered surveyor of the state.
   PARCEL. All contiguous land in one ownership.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
   REMOVAL. Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction or
killing by spraying.
   SITE. A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT. Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing
driveways.
   VACANT. Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.030)
§ 152.04 GENERAL CRITERIA AND STANDARDS.
   The following general principles shall apply to any movement of earth, any
sedimentation and erosion control plan and the granting of a permit for the
execution of the plan as provided in this chapter:
   (A)   The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any given time
during development;
   (B)   The minimum area exposure shall be kept to as short a duration of time
as is practical;
   (C)   Temporary vegetation or, where appropriate, mulching or other
nonviable cover, shall be used to protect areas exposed during development;
   (D)   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps shall
be installed and maintained to remove sediment from run-off waters from land
undergoing development;
   (E)   Provision shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development;
   (F)   Permanent, final plant coverings or structures shall be installed as
soon as possible;
   (G)   The plan of development shall relate to the topography and soil of the
site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created; and
   (H)   Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected so far as is
consistent with developing the site.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.040)
§ 152.05 SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Before land is cleared, graded, filled, transported or otherwise
disturbed by the movement of earth for purposes including, but not limited to,
the construction of buildings, the mining of minerals, including sand and
gravel, the development of golf courses, the filling of land and the
construction of roads and streets by any person within the city, a site
development permit embodying the proposed earth movement shall be obtained from
the city where development comes under any one or more of the following
provisions, unless the development is exempted therefrom by division (B) below:
      (1)   The excavation or fill, or any combination thereof, will exceed 25
cubic yards;
      (2)   The fill will exceed one foot in vertical depth at its deepest
point measured from the natural ground surface;
      (3)   The excavation will exceed one foot in vertical depth at its
deepest point;
      (4)   The excavation or fill, or any combination thereof, will exceed an
area of 500 square feet; and
      (5)   Plant cover is to be removed from an area exceeding 500 square feet
on any vacant parcel of land or any parcel of land in excess of one acre.
   (B)   A site development permit is not required in the following cases:
      (1)   Excavations below finished grade for septic tanks, drain fields,
tanks, vaults, tunnels, equipment basements, swimming pools, cellars or
footings of buildings or structures for which a building permit has been issued
by the city, unless part of a development which would otherwise require such a
permit;
      (2)   The excavation or removal of vegetation in public utility easements
by public utility companies for the purpose of installing underground
utilities;
      (3)   Tilling of the soil for fire protection purposes; or
      (4)   Engaging in the following if, but only if, in connection with a
farming or other agricultural or conservation enterprise and upon property
zoned solely for farming or agricultural purposes and uses:
         (a)   The construction of sod waterways;
         (b)   The construction of terraces;
         (c)   The construction of surface water diversions;
         (d)   The construction of grade stabilization structures; or
         (e)   Tilling of the soil.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.050)
§ 152.06 APPLICATION; SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   No site development permit or building permit shall be issued until
the developer submits a site development plan, together with other submissions
required by this chapter, and certifies that any land clearing construction or
development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with such
plan and submissions.
   (B)   Each application for a site development permit shall be made by the
owner of the property or his or her authorized agent to the City Engineer and
the Director of Public Works for their approval. When grading or plant cover
removal is proposed as a part of a building permit application, the site
development permit application and the building permit application may be
combined, and one plot plan, in the number of copies required by the City
Engineer and the Director, may be submitted showing building plans and site
development plans. In such instances, a registered land surveyor shall certify
as to the accuracy of the existing and proposed contour lines. Each application
shall be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   With respect to site development, a vicinity sketch showing acreage
of the site, a boundary line survey, zoning, the type of proposed sewer and
water facilities and the location of existing utilities, buildings and drains
on and within 100 feet of the site, together with a legend and scale. There
shall be included on or with the vicinity sketch:
         (a)   A soil map of the subject property showing the predominant soil
types on the site;
         (b)   Enough information on those areas abutting or adjacent to the
site to show existing drainage patterns and the drainage course that may affect
or be affected by the development of the site;
         (c)   The name and address of the developer or owner;
         (d)   The name and address of any consulting firm retained by the
applicant, together with the name of the applicant’s principal contact at the
firm;
         (e)   Limits of natural floodplains, if any;
         (f)   Areas to be sodded, seeded, mulched or paved;
         (g)   Acreage of area to be vegetatively stabilized, if any; and
         (h)   Areas to be left undisturbed.
      (2)   With respect to site grading, existing topography of the site and a
100-foot adjacent peripheral strip, proposed contours and final grades and
street profiles, together with an indication as to what measures will be
employed to protect cut and fill slopes from surface runoff;
      (3)   Storm drainage by means of a plan based upon a competent storm
drainage study, including a drainage area map and computations, and indicating
what conditions now prevail at proposed and natural outlets such as:
         (a)   Whether the drainage course is bare earth or vegetated;
         (b)   Whether the constructed outlet will be in open sun, open shade
or dense shade;
         (c)   Whether the natural or proposed outlet is subject to long-term
or continuous flow;
         (d)   Whether the existing outlet is actively eroding;
         (e)   Whether there is evidence of a high-water table (permanent or
seasonal);
         (f)   Whether the area is subject to seepage or spring flow;
         (g)   The elevation of normal water level in all proposed and natural
outlets;
         (h)   A profile below outlet for a sufficient distance to indicate the
natural gradient of the accepting natural outlet and/or stream channel;
         (i)   A cross-section and profile of existing stream channels, where
applicable; and
         (j)   A ditch design and computations for all seeded, sodded or bare
earth outlets, ditches and similar water conduction facilities.
      (4)   An estimated schedule and phasing of development of the site, as
follows:
         (a)   The phasing of the development of the site shall be as follows:
            1.   Phase I — Stripping and/or clearing;
            2.   Phase II — Rough grading and construction;
            3.   Phase III — Final grading and vegetative establishment; and
            4.   Phase IV — Maintenance.
         (b)   All erosion and sediment control plans submitted to the City
Engineer and the Director of Public Works for approval shall show all erosion
and sediment control measures needed to provide protection throughout all
phases of construction listed in division (B)(4)(a) of this section. These
plans shall also include any off-site borrow and spoil areas, sewer lines,
utility lines and haul and access roads, and shall further indicate:
            1.   The start of clearing date;
            2.   The duration of exposure of disturbed areas;
            3.   The installation of temporary sediment control measures
(vegetative and structural) by phase and date;
            4.   The installation of storm drainage by phase and date;
            5.   The establishment of permanent vegetative cover (plans will
show what will be done to shorten the duration of exposure of disturbed areas
as soon after grading as possible), including seeding mixes and rates, type of
sod, seedbed preparation, seeding dates, lime and fertilizer application,
temporary seedlings, if needed, mulching or similar stabilization procedures;
            6.   Details of all structural sediment control measures; and
            7.   Computations for sediment basins, if any.
   (C)   The standards and requirements of the Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook, Will-So. Cook County, Illinois, First Edition, as compiled by the
Will-So. Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District and approved by the
Seven County Regional Planning Commission, are incorporated into this section
and made a part of this section by reference for the purpose of exemplifying
the considerations and factors which should enter into the preparation or a
site development plan.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.060)
§ 152.07 BOND.
   (A)   The applicant for a permit required by this chapter shall file with
the City Clerk a faithful performance bond or other improvement security in an
amount equal to 125% of the City Engineer’s estimate of costs for improvements,
landscaping and maintenance of landscaping for that period as specified by the
city and to secure all engineering, inspection fees and incidental expenses.
   (B)   If the applicant has entered into a contract for any of the foregoing,
then the bond shall be in an amount equal to 100% of the cost of the contract.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.070)
§ 152.08 CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   No site development permit shall be issued for an intended building site
unless:
   (A)   The permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building permit
issued by the city; or
   (B)   The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall plan
previously approved by the city for the area in which the site is situated.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.080)
§ 152.09 RESPONSIBILITY OF PERMITTEE; NONLIABILITY OF CITY.
   Failure of a city official to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend denial of the site development permit shall not
relieve a permittee from responsibility for the condition or damage resulting
therefrom and shall not fix the responsibility on the city, its officers or
agents.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.090)
§ 152.10 RETENTION OF PLANS BY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   Plans, specifications and reports for all site developments shall be
retained in original form by the Director of Public Works.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.100)
§ 152.11 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The City Engineer and the Director of Public Works shall make
inspections as required in this section and shall either approve the portion of
the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the same fails to
comply with the site development plan.
      (2)   Where it is found by inspection that conditions are not
substantially as stated or shown in the plan, they may stop further work until
approval is obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to the existing
conditions.
      (3)   Plans for grading work, bearing the stamp of approval of the City
Engineer and the Director, shall be maintained at the site during progress of
the grading.
      (4)   Until the final inspection is made, a sign issued by the city
indicating that permission to grade has been granted by the city shall be
prominently displayed on the front property line of the property involved so as
to be visible from the street on which the property fronts.
   (B)   In order to obtain inspections in accordance with the following
schedule, the permittee shall notify the City Engineer and the Director at
least two full working days before the inspection is to be made:
      (1)   Rough grading. When all rough grading has been completed; and
      (2)   Final inspection. When all work, including the installation of all
drainage and other structures and required planting, has been completed.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.110)
§ 152.12 OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Compliance required. All earth moving grading and grading operations
not specifically exempted by this chapter shall comply with the applicable
standards and requirements set forth in this section, in addition to the other
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Handbook adopted by reference. The standards and specifications of the
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, Will-So. Cook County, Illinois, First
Edition, as compiled by the Will-So. Cook County Soil and Water Conservation
District and approved by the Seven County Regional Planning Commission, are
incorporated into this section and made a part of this section by this
reference for the purpose of delineating procedures and methods of operation
under development plans approved in §
152.06 above. In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the
handbook and any of the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
   (C)   Special precautions.
      (1)   If, at any stage of the grading, the City Engineer or the Director
of Public Works determines, by inspection, that the nature of the formation is
such that further work as authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil
any property, public way, watercourse or drainage structure, he or she may
require, as a condition to allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable
safety precautions be taken as he or she considers advisable to avoid the
likelihood of the peril. Special precautions may include, but are not limited
to, specifying a more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage
facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, leveling or cribbing, installation of
plant materials for erosion control and reports of a registered engineering
geologist whose recommendations may be made requirements for further work.
      (2)   Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading
is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required to install
temporary planting to control erosion, to install temporary structures or to
take such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or
the public safety. On large operations, or where unusual site conditions
prevail, the City Engineer or the Director may specify the time of starting
grading and the time of completion or may require that the operation be
conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures
or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains.
   (D)   Expiration of permit. Every site development permit shall expire by
limitation and shall become null and void if the work authorized by the permit
has not been commenced within 180 days or is not completed within one year from
the date of issuance. However, the Mayor and Council may, if the permit holder
presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work
being started or completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable
extension of time if written application is made before the expiration date of
the permit.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.120)
§ 152.13 EXCEPTIONS; APPEALS.
   (A)   Exceptions. The Mayor and Council may authorize exceptions to any of
the requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Application for exception. An application for an exception shall be
made by a verified petition of the applicant, stating fully the grounds of the
application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner. The petition shall be
filed with the site development permit application. In order for the land
referred to in the petition to come within the provisions of this section, it
shall be necessary that the Mayor and Council find all of the following facts
with respect thereto:
      (1)   The land is of such a shape or size, is affected by the physical
conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record that it is
impossible or impractical for the subdivider or property owner to comply with
all of the regulations of this chapter;
      (2)   The exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner; and
      (3)   The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject property.
   (C)   Referral of proposed exception. Each proposed exception shall be
referred to the City Engineer and the Director of Public Works and they shall
transmit to the Mayor and Council their recommendations, which recommendations
shall be reviewed prior to the granting of any exception.
   (D)   Appeals. After review thereon, the Mayor and Council, by resolution,
may approve the site development permit application with the exceptions and
conditions he, she or it deems necessary, may disapprove the site development
permit application and exception application or may take such other action as
is appropriate.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.130)
§ 152.14 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Authority. If any person holding a site development permit pursuant to
this chapter violates the terms of the permit, conducts or carries on the site
development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health,
welfare or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the
property of the permittee, or conducts or carries on such site development so
that it is materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to
property or improvements in the neighborhood, the Mayor and Council shall
revoke or suspend the site development permit.
   (B)   Procedure. No site development permit shall be permanently revoked or
suspended until a review is held by the Mayor and Council. Written notice of
the review shall be served upon the permittee, either personally or by
registered mail, and shall state:
      (1)   The grounds for complaint or reasons for the revocation or
suspension, in clear and concise language; and
      (2)   The time and place of the review.
   (C)   (1)   The notice shall be served by registered mail or personal
service on the permittee at least five days prior to the date set for the
review.
      (2)   At the review, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be
heard and he or she may call witnesses and present evidence on his or her
behalf. Upon conclusion of the review, the Mayor and Council shall determine
whether or not the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   (D)   The Mayor and Council shall hold the hearing to consider a
recommendation for revocation or suspension of a permit which has been
temporarily suspended at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Mayor and
Council, at which all conditions of this division can be fulfilled.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.140)
§ 152.15 FEES AND DEPOSITS.
   Filing fees and deposits for services shall be as set forth by Council or as
deemed necessary for specific projects.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.150)
§ 152.16 NUISANCES.
   This chapter shall not be construed as authorizing any person to maintain a
private or public nuisance upon his or her property, and compliance with this
chapter shall not be a defense in any action to abate a nuisance.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.160)
§ 152.17 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of erosion and sedimentation protection required by this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
engineering and scientific methods of study.
   (B)   This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer or employee thereof for any damage that results from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made under this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.170)
§ 152.18 VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any grading,
excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.44.180) Penalty, see §
152.99
DRAINAGE REGULATIONS
§ 152.30 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Construct or erect or cause to be constructed or erected any garage,
fence, wall or other structure which interferes with any drainage easement or
natural drainage in such a manner that the easement or natural drain fills or
becomes obstructed with any matter which impedes or interferes with the flow of
water;
   (B)   Alter or cause to be altered the grade of any soil, drainage easement
or natural drain; or
   (C)   Plant or cause to be planted any grass, shrubbery or other vegetation
which affects the drainage or grading of any soil.
(2000 Code, § 15.36.010) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.31 PERMIT REQUIRED; REVIEW BY BUILDING COMMISSIONER AND CITY ENGINEER.
   (A)   No person shall construct or erect or cause to be constructed or
erected any garage, fence, wall or other structure; alter or cause to be
altered the grade of any soil; or plant or cause to be planted any grass,
shrubbery or other vegetation which affects the drainage or grading of any
soil, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Building Commissioner,
who shall inspect the proposed construction site, change of grade or planting
prior to the issuance of such a permit. The Building Commissioner and/or the
City Engineer shall render his or her opinion regarding any potential drainage
problem.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued if, in the opinion of the Building
Commissioner and/or the City Engineer, the proposed construction, change of
grade or planting will cause, create or increase any drainage problem of the
surrounding or adjacent land or area. Upon completion, the person securing the
permit shall notify the Building Commissioner who shall then reinspect the
construction, change of grade or planting to determine whether or not it has
interfered with any drainage easement or natural drainage.
   (C)   If the drainage easement or natural drainage has been interfered with,
the person who secured the permit shall correct the situation.
(2000 Code, § 15.36.020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.32 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; TIME LIMIT FOR ABATEMENT.
   The City Clerk’s office or its duly authorized agent shall serve or cause to
be served an official notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on
which a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter exists and shall
demand the abatement of the violation within ten working days.
(2000 Code, § 15.36.030)
§ 152.33 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
   If the City Engineer or his or her duly authorized agent deems the
obstruction of a dedicated drainage easement or natural drainage an immediate
danger to property or to the health and welfare of the community, he or she may
immediately remove or cause to be removed the obstruction. The City Clerk or
his or her duly authorized agent shall serve or cause to be served notice to
the owner or occupant of the premises upon which a violation exists of the
action taken by the City Engineer and bill the owner or occupant in accordance
with §
152.34 below.
(2000 Code, § 15.36.040)
§ 152.34 ABATEMENT BY CITY; COSTS.
   If the person served a notice provided for in §
152.32 above does not abate the violation within ten working days, the city may
proceed to abate such violation, keeping an account of the expense of the
abatement and all administrative and legal fees incurred by the city. All the
expenses and fees shall be billed to and paid by the owner or occupant of
premises upon which the violation exists.
(2000 Code, § 15.36.050)
§ 152.35 LIENS FOR UNPAID ABATEMENT CHARGES.
   Charges for the abatement of a violation shall be a lien upon the premises.
Whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for 60 days after it has been
rendered, the City Clerk may file with the County Recorder of Deeds a statement
of lien claim. This statement shall contain a legal description of the
premises, the expenses and costs incurred, the date of abatement and a notice
that the city claims a lien for such amount. Notice of the lien claim shall be
mailed to the owner of the premises if his or her address is known. However,
failure of the City Clerk to record the lien claim or to mail the notice, or
the failure of the owner to receive the notice, shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for the charges as provided in §
152.36 below.
(2000 Code, § 15.36.060)
§ 152.36 FORECLOSURE.
   (A)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid abatement charges shall be sold
for nonpayment of the same and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay
the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. The foreclosure shall be in equity in the name of the city.
   (B)   The City Attorney is authorized and directed to institute the
proceedings, in the name of the city, in any court having jurisdiction over
such matter, against any property for which a bill has remained unpaid 60 days
after it has been rendered.
(2000 Code, § 15.36.070)
§ 152.37 NONLIABILITY OF CITY.
   Neither the city nor its agents shall be liable for any damage to property
that occurs while they are enforcing this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.36.080)
STORMWATER MAINTENANCE
§ 152.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BY-PASS CHANNEL. A channel formed in the topography of the earth’s surface
to carry stormwater runoff through a specific area.
   CONTROL STRUCTURE. A structure designed to control the volume of stormwater
runoff that passes through it during a specific period of time.
   DRY BOTTOM STORMWATER STORAGE AREA. A facility that is designed to be
normally dry and that contains water only when excess stormwater runoff occurs.
   EXCESS STORMWATER. That portion of stormwater runoff which exceeds the
transportation capacity of storm sewers or natural drainage channels serving a
specific watershed.
   GROUNDWATER RECHARGE. The replenishment of existing natural underground
water supplies.
   GROUNDWATER RECHARGE CAPACITY. The amount of water absorbed into the ground
as determined by a percolation test.
   LOW FLOW. Any amount of runoff less than design conditions.
   NATURAL DRAINAGE. Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the
earth by natural causes prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
   POSITIVE GRAVITY OUTLET. The drainage of an area by means of natural gravity
so that it lowers the free water surface to a point below the existing grade or
invert of storm drains within the area.
   RECOGNIZED AGENCY. An agency or governmental unit that has statistically and
consistently examined local, climatic and geologic conditions and has
maintained records as they apply to stormwater runoff, e.g. the Metropolitan
Sanitary District of Greater Chicago, the United States Weather Bureau, the
University of Illinois Engineering Experiment Station, the Illinois State Water
Survey and the like.
   RUNOFF RATE COEFFICIENT. A numerical factor used to determine the percentage
of stormwater that will not be absorbed by the ground.
   SAFE STORM DRAINAGE CAPACITY. The quantity of stormwater runoff that can be
transported by a channel or conduit without having the water surface rise above
the level of the earth’s surface over the conduit or adjacent to the waterway.
   STILLING BASIN. An artificially enclosed area to collect stormwater which
will permit soil and debris to settle out.
   STORMWATER RELEASE RATE. The volume of water in gallons per minute at which
stormwater runoff is released from a control structure.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. Water that results from precipitation which is not
absorbed by the soil or plant material.
   STORMWATER STORAGE AREA. An area designated to store excess stormwater.
   TRIBUTARY WATERSHED. All of the area that contributes stormwater runoff to a
given point.
   WET BOTTOM STORMWATER STORAGE AREA. A facility that is designed to be
maintained as a free water surface or a pond.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.010)
§ 152.51 DEVELOPMENTS; STORAGE AND CONTROLLED RELEASE REQUIRED.
   The storage and controlled release of excess stormwater runoff shall be
required, in combinations for all new commercial and industrial developments,
and for all new residential developments that contain an area in excess of one-
half acre.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.52 CONTROLLED RELEASE RATE.
   The controlled release rate of stormwater runoff from a development shall
not exceed the existing runoff from the area in its undeveloped and unimproved
state. The release rate shall be calculated from a storm of three-year
frequency with a runoff rate coefficient of 0.15 of an inch.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.030)
§ 152.53 STORMWATER DETENTION.
   The required volume for stormwater detention shall be calculated on the
basis of the runoff from a 100-year frequency rainfall of any duration as
published by the United States Weather Bureau for the county. The stormwater
release rate shall be considered when calculating the stormwater storage
capacity. The control structure shall be designed to maintain a relatively
uniform rate of flow regardless of the depth of stormwater in the storage area.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.040)
§ 152.54 DRY BOTTOM STORMWATER STORAGE AREAS.
   (A)   Dry bottom stormwater storage areas shall be designed as recreation or
open areas or other types of uses that will not be adversely affected by
occasional or intermittent flooding. A method of carrying the low flow through
these areas shall be provided, in addition to a system of drains, and both
shall be provided with a positive gravity outlet to a natural channel or storm
sewer with adequate capacity.
   (B)   The combination of storage of the water from a 100-year storm and the
design release rate shall not result in a storage duration in excess of 72
hours. The maximum depth of planned stormwater storage shall not exceed four
feet, unless existing natural ground contours and other conditions lend to a
greater storage depth, which shall be approved by the City Engineer. Minimum
grades for turf areas shall be two percent and maximum slopes shall be ten
percent. Storage area side slopes shall be kept as close to the natural land
contours as practical. If slopes of greater than ten percent are necessary to
meet storage requirements or area restrictions, approval shall be obtained from
the City Engineer and suitable erosion control shall be provided.
   (C)   Outlet control structures shall be designed to operate automatically.
Each stormwater storage area shall be equipped with facilities for emergency
overflow in the event that a storm in excess of the 100-year frequency storm
occurs. The emergency overflow facility shall be designed to function
automatically and shall become part of the natural or surface channel system.
Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all design features.
Stormwater runoff velocities shall be kept at a minimum and turbulent
conditions at an outfall control structure will not be permitted without
complete protection for the public safety. No outlet control device
(restrictor) shall be less than three inches in diameter, unless required by
the City Engineer.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.050)
§ 152.55 WET BOTTOM STORMWATER STORAGE AREAS.
   Wet bottom stormwater storage areas shall be designed to incorporate all
items required for dry bottom stormwater storage areas, with the exception of a
low-flow conduit and a system of drains with a positive gravity outlet.
However, the following additional conditions shall be complied with.
   (A)   Shoreline protection shall be provided to prevent erosion from wave
action.
   (B)   Minimum normal water depth shall be four feet. If fish are to be used
to keep the pond clean, a minimum of one-fourth of the pond area shall be a
minimum of ten feet deep.
   (C)   Facilities shall be available, if possible, to allow the pond level to
be lowered by gravity flow for cleaning purposes and shoreline maintenance.
   (D)   Control structures for stormwater release shall be designed to operate
at full capacity with only a minor increase in the water surface level.
Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to the City Engineer to substantiate
all design features.
   (E)   Aeration facilities to prevent pond stagnation shall be provided.
Design calculations to substantiate the effectiveness of such aeration
facilities shall be submitted with final engineering plans. Agreements for the
perpetual operation and maintenance of aeration facilities shall be executed,
subject to approval by Council, at the recommendation of the City Engineer.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.060)
§ 152.56 PAVED SURFACE STORMWATER STORAGE AREAS.
   (A)   A paved surface that is to serve as a stormwater storage area shall
have a minimum grade of one percent and shall be restricted to a maximum
storage depth of one foot. Release rates and storage volume requirements for
paved storage areas shall be as set forth in §§
152.52 and
152.53 above.
   (B)   If a portion of an area within a stormwater storage area is to be
paved for parking or recreational purposes, the paved surface shall be placed
at the highest elevation within the area as possible.
   (C)   Maximum parking lot grades shall not exceed normal design parameters
of three to five percent.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.070)
§ 152.57 ROOFTOP STORAGE.
   Rooftop storage shall be designed with permanent control inlets and parapet
walls to contain runoff on the rooftop. Emergency overflow shall be provided to
ensure that the weight of water stored will not exceed the structural capacity
of the roof.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.080)
§ 152.58 DEVELOPMENTS FORMING ONLY A PORTION OF A WATERSHED.
   Where a development forms only a portion of a watershed, the storage
requirement shall be based upon the proportion of the area being developed to
the total watershed. Compensating storage will be acceptable whenever it is
justified and feasible.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.090)
§ 152.59 CONTROL PLANS REQUIRED BEFORE PLAT APPROVAL OR ISSUANCE OF BUILDING
PERMITS.
   Plans, specifications and all calculations for stormwater runoff control
required in this chapter shall be submitted to the city for review and approval
by the City Engineer prior to the approval of a final plat in the case of a
subdivision or planned unit development, or, in the case of commercial or
industrial construction, prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.100)
§ 152.60 FLOOD OR FLASH RUNOFF HAZARDS.
   Where the development of property presents the threat of flooding or damage
by flash runoff to lower property, the facilities for stormwater runoff control
shall be constructed prior to any earth moving or construction on the project
site.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.110)
§ 152.61 COST OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The construction of a stormwater control system shall be accomplished as
part of the cost of land development. If the amount of storage capacity can be
increased to provide benefit to the city, the city may agree to participate in
the cost of construction.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.120)
§ 152.62 RECHARGE METHODS.
   The ability to retain and maximize the groundwater recharge capacity of an
area being developed is encouraged. Design of the stormwater runoff control
system shall give consideration to providing groundwater recharge to compensate
for the reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground surface is
paved and roofed over. The flattening of drainage slopes and the retention of
existing topography are examples of possible recharge methods.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.130)
§ 152.63 EROSION CONTROL.
   During the construction phases of land development, facilities shall be
provided to prevent the erosion and washing away of the earth. Silting of
downstream areas and existing sewers shall be prevented through the strategic
use of stilling basins, sodding of runoff channels and by limiting the period
of time during which the area is stripped of vegetation.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.140)
§ 152.64 FINAL ENGINEERING PLANS.
   Final engineering plans shall set forth, in detail, each item covered in
this chapter and shall be submitted for review and approval by Council prior to
the start of construction.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.150)
§ 152.65 DEVELOPMENTS OF LESS THAN FIVE ACRES.
   Under the provisions of this subchapter, stormwater detention facilities are
not required for developments of less than five acres, provided that the City
Engineer determines that the available outlet capacity and/or existing storm
sewer system is adequate. If the outlet capacity or storm sewer system is not
adequate, detention of stormwater, as required by this chapter, will be
required to store that portion of the runoff exceeding the system capacity.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.160)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of §§
152.50 through
152.65 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $2,000 for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
(2000 Code, § 15.84.170)
CHAPTER 153: BURGLARY PREVENTION REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
153.01   Application of chapter
   
153.02   Definitions
   
153.03   Conflict of laws; controlling provisions
   
153.04   Enforcement by Building Department
   
153.05   Board of Appeals
   
153.06   Compliance requirements for existing buildings
   
153.07   Maintenance by owner
   
153.08   Alternate materials and methods of construction
   
153.09   Tests
   
153.10   Doors generally
   
153.11   Swinging doors
   
153.12   Sliding glass doors
   
153.13   Overhead and sliding doors
   
153.14   Metal accordion grate or grille-type doors
   
153.15   Windows and skylights
   
153.16   Openings
   
153.17   Locking devices for openable windows
   
153.18   Construction of other openings
   
153.19   Hatchways, scuttles and similar openings
   
153.20   Ladders
   
153.21   Security measures for commercial establishments and office buildings
   
153.22   Intrusion detection devices
   
153.23   Security for residential structures
   
153.24   Lighting
   
153.25   Violation
§ 153.01 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall apply to new construction, additions to existing
buildings and existing buildings as specifically provided in this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.010)
§ 153.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BURGLAR-RESISTANT MATERIAL. Glass and glass-like materials which comply with
or exceed the Underwriters’ Laboratories Standard #UL972 for burglary resisting
glazing material.
   COMBINATION DEAD LATCH AND DEAD BOLT. A device combining a dead latch
operable by knobs from the inside and the outside and a dead bolt operable from
the inside by a thumb turn and from the outside by a key, both of which can be
retracted from the inside by turning the knob and from the outside by the key.
   CYLINDER GUARD. A hardened steel ring or plate surrounding the otherwise
exposed portion of a cylinder lock to prevent cutting, drilling, prying,
pulling or wrenching with common tools.
   DEAD LATCH. A latch which is positively held in a latched position with a
strike by an added integral bolt-type mechanism and is released by a key from
the outside and a knob or similar actuator from the inside.
   DEAD LOCK. A locking device with a bolt, not spring loaded, which engages
and disengages a strike by the use of a key from the outside and/or the inside.
   DOOR SCOPE. A system of lenses encased for convenient installation in
entrance doors permitting an inside viewer to observe a 180-degree area of the
outside with the door closed.
   DOUBLE DEAD BOLT. A dead lock actuated by a key from the inside and the
outside.
   INSERT. A hardened steel roller inside unhardened bolts to prevent bolt
cutting with common tools.
   LATCH. A spring-loaded device which automatically holds a swinging door shut
upon closing by engaging a strike and which is released by turning a knob,
lever or similar actuator from the inside or the outside.
   LOUVERS. A series of removable fixed-slanted or movable slats. Glass
louvered is descriptive of jalousies. Glass, wood or metal jalousies are
considered to be louvers. Awning windows having sections more than 12 inches in
depth are not considered to be louvers.
   MULTIPLE-POINT LOCK. A system of lever operated bolts that engage a door
opening, at least at the head and sill, operated by a single knob or handle
from the inside and, optionally, a cylinder-locked handle from the outside.
   SINGLE DEAD BOLT. A dead lock actuated from the outside by a key and from
the inside by a knob, thumb turn, lever or similar actuator.
   SLIDING DOOR DEAD BOLT. A single dead bolt which, after penetration of the
strike, expands or is pivoted hook-type to resist sliding of the door by force.
   STRIKE. A stationary metal plate designed to momentarily depress a moving
latch for final secure engagement requiring a separate operation for
disengagement.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.020)
§ 153.03 CONFLICT OF LAWS; CONTROLLING PROVISIONS.
   This chapter shall apply to all occupancy groups. If it is determined that
there is a conflict between any of the provisions of this chapter and the Fire
Prevention Code of the city, the Fire Prevention Code shall control.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.030)
§ 153.04 ENFORCEMENT BY BUILDING DEPARTMENT.
   This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Department of the city.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.040)
§ 153.05 BOARD OF APPEALS.
   In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of
construction, and to provide for reasonable interpretations of this chapter,
there is established a Board of Appeals. The Board shall be the same Board of
Appeals specified in the International Building Code adopted in §
151.001.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.050)
§ 153.06 COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS.
   Existing buildings shall be made to comply with reasonable conditions of
this chapter as determined by the Building Commissioner when any of the
following conditions exists:
   (A)   When additions, alterations or repairs within any 12-month period
exceed 50% of the value of the existing building; or
   (B)   When a change of occupancy or of occupant occurs. OCCUPANCY, as used
in this chapter, refers to the purpose for which a building is used or intended
to be used. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until compliance with
this chapter is obtained.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.060)
§ 153.07 MAINTENANCE BY OWNER.
   (A)   All devices or safeguards which are required by this chapter in a
building when erected, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working
order.
   (B)   The owner or his or her designated agent shall be responsible for the
maintenance of such devices or safeguards.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.070)
§ 153.08 ALTERNATE MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of
any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this
chapter, provided that the alternate has been approved.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner may approve any such alternate, provided he
or she finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and that the material,
method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of
that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, durability
and safety.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.080)
§ 153.09 TESTS.
   (A)   Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with this
chapter, whenever there is evidence that any material or construction does not
conform to this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims for alternate
materials or methods of construction, the Building Commissioner may require
tests as proof of compliance.
   (B)   The tests shall be made at the expense of the owner or agent by an
approved agency.
   (C)   If there are no appropriate test methods specified in this chapter,
the Building Commissioner shall determine the test procedure.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.090)
§ 153.10 DOORS GENERALLY.
   (A)   A door forming part of the enclosure of a dwelling unit or of an area
occupied by one tenant of a building shall be constructed, installed and
secured as set forth in this chapter when such door is directly accessible from
a public way, yard, court, passageway, corridor, balcony, patio, breezeway,
garage or portion of the building which is available for use by the public or
other tenants or any similar area.
   (B)   A door enclosing a garage or storage facility which has an interior
opening leading directly into the building shall also comply with this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.100)
§ 153.11 SWINGING DOORS.
   All swinging doors shall comply with the following provisions.
   (A)   Swinging wooden doors shall be solid core with a minimum thickness of
one and three-eighths inches or shall be covered on the inside face with 16-
gauge sheet metal attached with screws at six-inch spacing around the
perimeter.
   (B)   A single door, the active leaf of a pair of doors and the bottom leaf
of a Dutch door shall be equipped with either a double dead bolt or a single
dead bolt having a one-inch throw and a hardened insert. A combination dead
latch and dead bolt may also be used. The lock shall be key operated from the
exterior side of the door and may be engaged or disengaged from the interior
side of the door by a device not requiring a key, special knowledge or effort.
   (C)   Nonremovable pins shall be used in pin-type hinges which are
accessible from the outside when the door is closed.
   (D)   Door stops on wooden jambs for in-swinging doors shall be of one-piece
construction with the jamb or shall be joined to the jamb by a rabbet.
   (E)   Cylinders shall be designed or protected to prevent their
accessibility to gripping tools.
   (F)   An interviewer or peephole shall be installed in the main entrance
door of all dwelling units.
   (G)   The inactive leaf of a pair of doors and the upper leaf of a Dutch
door shall be equipped with a dead bolt as set forth in division (B) above,
except as follows.
      (1)   The bolt need not be key operated but shall not be otherwise
activated from the exterior side of the door.
      (2)   The bolt may be engaged or disengaged automatically with the dead
bolt or by another device on the active leaf or lower leaf.
      (3)   Manually operated hardened bolts at the top and bottom of the leaf
which embed a minimum of five-eighths of an inch into the device receiving the
projected bolt may be used when not prohibited by the International Building
Code, as adopted in §
151.001, or other laws and regulations.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.110)
§ 153.12 SLIDING GLASS DOORS.
   All sliding glass doors shall comply with the following standards:
   (A)   The movable section of a sliding glass door shall be on the inside of
the fixed portion of the door;
   (B)   A sliding glass door shall be provided with a dead bolt. The bolt need
not be key operated but shall not be otherwise activated from the exterior side
of the door;
   (C)   Cylinders shall be designed or protected to prevent their
accessibility to gripping tools; and
   (D)   Sliding glass doors shall meet or exceed the Architectural Aluminum
Manufacturer’s Association’s standard for forced-entry resistance (AAMA
#1303.3).
(2000 Code, § 15.28.120)
§ 153.13 OVERHEAD AND SLIDING DOORS.
   A metal or wooden overhead or sliding door shall be secured with a cylinder
lock, padlock with a hardened steel shackle, metal slide bar, bolt or
equivalent when not otherwise locked by electric power operation.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.130)
§ 153.14 METAL ACCORDION GRATE OR GRILLE-TYPE DOORS.
   A metal accordion grate or grille-type door shall be equipped with metal
guide tracks at the top and bottom and a cylinder lock or padlock with a
hardened steel shackle.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.140)
§ 153.15 WINDOWS AND SKYLIGHTS.
   (A)   A window, skylight or other opening forming a part of the enclosure of
a dwelling unit or an area occupied by one tenant of a building shall be
constructed, installed and secured as set forth in this chapter when the bottom
of the window skylight or opening is less than 16 feet above the grade of a
street, highway, yard, court, passageway, corridor, balcony, patio breezeway,
private garage, portion or a building which is available for use by the public
or other tenants or similar area.
   (B)   A window enclosing a private garage with an interior opening leading
directly to a dwelling unit shall also comply with this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.150)
§ 153.16 OPENINGS.
   An opening within 40 inches of a required locking device on a door when in
the closed and locked position, and openable from the inside without the use of
a key, shall be of burglary-resistant material, or shall be covered with iron
bars of at least one-half inch round or one inch by one-fourth inch flat steel
material spaced not more than five inches apart, secured on the inside of the
glazing, or iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth inch material or two-
inch mesh secured on the inside of the glazing.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.160)
§ 153.17 LOCKING DEVICES FOR OPENABLE WINDOWS.
   (A)   A sliding glass window shall be constructed and installed so that the
window cannot be lifted from the frame when the window is in the locked
position.
   (B)   A sliding glass window shall meet or exceed the Architectural Aluminum
Manufacture’s Association’s standards for forced-entry resistance (AAMA
#1303.3).
   (C)   Other openable windows shall be provided with substantial locking
devices which render the building as secure as the devices required by this
section.
   (D)   A louvered window shall not be installed within eight feet of ground
level.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.170)
§ 153.18 CONSTRUCTION OF OTHER OPENINGS.
   Openings, other than doors or lights, which form a part of an enclosure, or
portion thereof, housing a single occupant and the bottom of which is not more
than 16 feet above the grade of a street, highway, yard, court, passageway,
corridor, balcony, patio, breezeway or similar area, or from a private garage
or a portion of the building which is occupied, used or available for use by
the public or other tenants, or an opening enclosing a private garage attached
to a dwelling unit which opens therein, shall be constructed, installed and
secured as set forth in this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.180)
§ 153.19 HATCHWAYS, SCUTTLES AND SIMILAR OPENINGS.
   (A)   Wooden hatchways less than one and three-fourths inches thick solid
wood shall be covered on the inside with 16-gauge sheet metal attached with
screws at six-inch maximum centers around the perimeter.
   (B)   The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar, slide
bolt and/or padlock with a hardened steel shackle.
   (C)   Outside pin-type hinges shall be provided with nonremovable pins.
   (D)   Other openings exceeding 96 square inches with a least dimension
exceeding eight inches shall be secured by metal bars, screens or grills in an
approved manner.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.190)
§ 153.20 LADDERS.
   (A)   Any ladder, excluding a fire escape, located on the exterior of any
building which could provide access to the roof shall be protected from such
access by a continuous piece of wood or metal covering the rungs. The wood or
metal shall be locked with a padlock. The padlock shall have a minimum of five
pin tumblers and be of case-hardened steel.
   (B)   Hinges used on the covering shall be of a nonremovable pin-type. The
wood or metal barrier shall be a minimum of eight feet continuous covering of
not less than one-half inch thickness and located four feet from the ground
level or be secured in a manner approved by the Building Commissioner.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.200)
§ 153.21 SECURITY MEASURES FOR COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS AND OFFICE BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Safes. Commercial establishments having $1,000 or more in cash on the
premises after closing hours shall lock such money in at least a Class E or
higher rated safe after closing hours.
   (B)   Office buildings (multiple occupancy). All entrance doors to
individual office suites shall have a dead bolt lock with a minimum one-inch
throw bolt which can be opened from the outside.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.210)
§ 153.22 INTRUSION DETECTION DEVICES.
   If it is determined by the Building Commissioner that the security measures
and locking devices described in this chapter do not adequately secure a
building, he or she may require the installation and maintenance of an
intrusion detection device (burglar alarm system).
(2000 Code, § 15.28.220)
§ 153.23 SECURITY FOR RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to set forth minimum standards
of construction for resistance to unlawful entry to residential structures
located in the city.
   (B)   Alternatives. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to
prohibit the use of alternate materials, devices or measures when such
alternate provisions are deemed by the Building Commissioner as providing
equivalent security.
   (C)   Doors generally. A door forming a part of the enclosure of a dwelling
unit shall be of solid core construction, installed and secured as set forth in
divisions (D) and (E) below when such door is accessible from a street,
highway, yard, court, passageway, corridor, balcony, patio, breezeway, private
garage, portion of the building which is available for use by the public or
other tenants or similar area. A door leading to a dwelling unit shall also
comply with those divisions.
   (D)   Swing doors.
      (1)   A single swing door, the active leaf of a pair of doors and the
bottom leaf of a Dutch door shall be equipped with a dead bolt with a minimum
throw of one inch and a deadlocking latch. Dead bolts shall contain hardened
inserts or equivalent so as to repel cutting tool attack. The lock shall be key
operated from the exterior side of the door and engaged or disengaged from the
interior side of the door by a device not requiring a key, special knowledge or
effort.
      (2)   A flushbolt with a minimum throw of five-eighths of an inch shall
be provided at the head and foot (floor and ceiling) of the inactive leaf of a
double door and at the top and bottom of the upper leaf of a Dutch door.
      (3)   Door stops on wooden jambs for inswing doors shall be of one-piece
construction with the jamb jointed by a rabbet.
      (4)   Nonremovable pins or interlocking stud-type hinges shall be used in
pin-type hinges which are accessible from the outside when the door is closed.
      (5)   A cylinder guard shall be installed on a mortise or rim-type
cylinder lock whenever the cylinder projects beyond the face of the door or is
otherwise accessible to gripping tools.
   (E)   Overhead and sliding doors.
      (1)   A metal or wooden overhead or sliding door shall be secured with a
cylinder lock, padlock with a hardened steel shackle, metal slide bar, bolt or
equivalent on the inside when not otherwise locked by electric power operation.
If this type of door provides the only entrance to a garage, the cylinder lock
or padlock may be on the outside.
      (2)   A cylinder guard shall be installed on a mortise or rim-type
cylinder lock which projects beyond the face of the door or is otherwise
accessible to gripping tools.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.230)
§ 153.24 LIGHTING.
   All commercial buildings and multi-family buildings with common entrances to
more than one unit shall be illuminated with at least a 75-watt light. The
light shall be protected by a vapor cover or a cover of equal breaking-
resistant material.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.240)
§ 153.25 VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, convert, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or other structure
in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.28.250) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 154: CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
Section
   
154.01   Definitions
   
154.02   Certificate of condominium conversion required
   
154.03   Conditions of structures subject to conversion
   
154.04   Application for certificate; inspections and issuance of certificate
   
154.05   Transferability of certificate
   
154.06   New owner acknowledgment
   
154.07   Availability of certificate to tenants
   
154.08   Inspection fees
   
154.09   Suspension or revocation of certificate
   
154.10   Use of evidence
   
154.11   Lack of consent to enter or inspect; administrative search warrants
   
154.12   Guarantee by city
   
154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a multi-family rental dwelling structure
or portion thereof arranged, designed and used as a residence or living
quarters by one or more persons and containing therein bathroom and kitchen
facilities.
   MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL DWELLING STRUCTURE. A dwelling structure containing
three or more dwelling units which are held for rental to a non-owner. A multi-
family rental dwelling structure consists of both dwelling units and common
areas.
   OWNER. The owner, lessor, sublessor or landlord of a dwelling unit or the
building of which it is a part. An owner can be one or more persons, a
corporation, a partnership or any other legal entity, jointly or severally, in
whom or which is vested all or part of the legal title to a multi-family rental
dwelling structure, or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to
present use and enjoyment of a multi-family rental dwelling structure,
including a mortgage holder in possession.
(2000 Code, § 15.32.010)
§ 154.02 CERTIFICATE OF CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful to convert any real estate within the city to contain
condominium units, or to submit the conversion condominiums to the provisions
of the Condominium Property Act (ILCS Ch. 765, Act 605, §§ 1 et seq.), without
first obtaining a certificate of condominium conversion from the city at least
30 days prior to issuing any notice of intent to convert to the tenants of the
building involved.
(2000 Code, § 15.32.020)
§ 154.03 CONDITIONS OF STRUCTURES SUBJECT TO CONVERSION.
   (A)   All multi-family rental dwelling structures to be converted to
condominium units shall be free from violations of all applicable provisions of
the Building Code and all other applicable city ordinances, codes and
regulations.
   (B)   All multi-family rental dwelling structures to be converted to
condominium units shall be:
      (1)   Safe for human habitation;
      (2)   Capable of providing, or in the process of providing under proper
permits, adequate plumbing and heating facilities for the entire building;
      (3)   In a safe and sanitary condition;
      (4)   In compliance with all current building codes and fire safety
requirements applicable to condominiums; and
      (5)   In compliance with change in use and occupancy requirements set
forth in the comprehensive building codes.
   (C)   All owners of multi-family rental dwelling structures intended to be
converted to condominium units shall submit a statement detailing the time of
construction of the structure. The owners of any structure constructed prior to
1996 shall register each dwelling unit with the Building Department. This
registration is in addition to any existing registrations as required under §§
151.145 through
151.154 entitled Multiple-Owner Complexes.
(2000 Code, § 15.32.030) (Ord. 2602, § 1, passed - -2002)
§ 154.04 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE; INSPECTIONS AND ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   An owner of a multi-family rental dwelling structure shall apply for a
certificate of condominium conversion by submitting a completed application
form to the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   No certificate of condominium conversion shall be issued unless the
completed application form is accompanied by the payment of the inspection fee
set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   No certificate of condominium conversion shall be issued until the
Building Commissioner is presented with a statement of the building’s year of
construction and proof of registration if required under §§
151.145 through
151.154 entitled Multiple-Owner Complexes.
   (D)   The Building Commissioner of the city shall inspect, or cause to be
inspected, the multi-family rental dwelling structure where condominium
conversion is intended to occur to determine whether the multi-family rental
dwelling structure is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   No certificate of condominium conversion shall be issued until the
Building Commissioner and/or his or her designee inspects the property and
finds the property to be in compliance with all applicable codes and
ordinances. Each applicant shall be notified by the Building Commissioner in
advance of the date and time of the inspection. Within ten days after receipt
of notification of the inspection date and time, the owner shall notify each
tenant of the date and time of the inspection and submit proof of the notice,
along with any objections by tenants, to the Building Commissioner.
   (F)   If any tenant refuses to consent to an inspection of a dwelling unit,
the Building Commissioner may either begin proceedings to obtain an
administrative search warrant for the particular dwelling unit or waive the
inspection requirement for the dwelling unit occupied by the tenant who refuses
consent.
   (G)   The Building Commissioner shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, the
subject property for compliance with the building, property maintenance and
Zoning Codes and other ordinances of the city.
   (H)   If compliance is found, a certificate of condominium conversion shall
be issued by the Building Commissioner within 14 days after inspection of the
subject property. The certificate shall constitute approval to initiate, within
one year from its date, conversion of the building to condominiums.
   (I)   If, after inspection, the Building Commissioner determines that the
multi-family rental dwelling structure does not comply with all applicable
codes and ordinances, a list of deficiencies shall be prepared and furnished to
the applicant. A second inspection shall be scheduled at a time after the
deficiencies have been corrected. Upon reinspection and verification of
correction of the deficiencies, the Building Commissioner shall issue a
certificate of condominium conversion.
   (J)   The certificate of condominium conversion is not renewable for
additional periods.
(2000 Code, § 15.32.040) (Ord. 2602, § 2, passed - -2002)
§ 154.05 TRANSFERABILITY OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   A certificate of condominium conversion issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be transferable within the year of its validity to succeeding
owners, provided that, within seven days prior to conveyance of the property,
the owner shall provide notice of the conveyance to the city.
   (B)   The notice shall include the name and address of the person or persons
succeeding to the ownership or control of the multi-family rental dwelling
structure. Failure to provide such a notice may result in the suspension or
revocation of the certificate of condominium conversion.
(2000 Code, § 15.32.050)
§ 154.06 NEW OWNER ACKNOWLEDGMENT.
   Prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit for any dwelling unit created
by the condominium conversion the owner shall submit an acknowledgment that the
purchaser has been made aware of the inspection requirement as required by city
ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 15.32.055) (Ord. 2602, § 3, passed - -2002)
§ 154.07 AVAILABILITY OF CERTIFICATE TO TENANTS.
   Upon the request of an existing or prospective tenant, the owner shall
produce the certificate of condominium conversion or a copy thereof.
(2000 Code, § 15.32.060)
§ 154.08 INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   There is established a fee of $20 per dwelling unit for the first
inspection or the first reinspection necessitated by the existence of
violations ascertained during the first inspection.
   (B)   After one reinspection, there is established a fee of $25 per dwelling
unit for each subsequent reinspection necessitated by the existence of
violations ascertained during any previous inspection.
   (C)   This fee is nonrefundable once the Building Commissioner and/or his or
her designee arrives at the site for the inspection.
(2000 Code, § 15.32.070)
§ 154.09 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   Whenever, upon inspection of a multi-family rental dwelling structure
based on consent, or upon inspection pursuant to an administrative search
warrant as set forth in this chapter, the Building Commissioner and/or his or
her designee finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of
the provisions of this chapter, any applicable provisions of the codes and
ordinances of the city, or any applicable rules or regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, the Building Commissioner and/or his or her designee shall serve the
owner with notice of the violation or violations. The notice shall state that,
unless the violations cited are corrected within a reasonable period of time,
but not less than five days (except that in emergency situations the time
period may be reduced), any and all certificates issued pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended.
   (B)   At the end of the time period allowed for correction of any violation
cited, the Building Commissioner and/or his or her designee shall reinspect or
cause the reinspection of the multi-family rental dwelling structure, and, if
it is determined that such volatile conditions have not been corrected, an
order may be issued suspending any and all certificates issued under this
chapter. The order shall take effect seven business days following service upon
the owner unless, in the interim, the owner requests, in writing, a hearing.
   (C)   Any owner whose certificate issued pursuant to this chapter is subject
to suspension, pursuant to a suspension order, shall be entitled to a hearing
on the suspension action by filing a written request, with the City Clerk, for
a hearing before the City Building Commission within seven business days
following the receipt of the suspension order. Upon receipt of the request, the
hearing shall be scheduled to be held before the City Building Commission at a
date not more than seven business days after receipt of the written request. At
the hearing, the city administrator, or a person as the City Administrator
designates, shall present evidence in support of the suspension, and the owner
shall be permitted to rebut the evidence that is, in the discretion of the city
building commission, relevant and material. Based upon the evidence presented
at the hearing, the City Building Commission may either:
      (1)   Confirm the suspension;
      (2)   Allow additional compliance time for correcting the violation
cited; or
      (3)   Rescind the suspension.
   (D)   The City Building Commission’s decision shall be final and binding.
The suspension of any certificate issued pursuant to this chapter shall not
release or discharge the owner from paying any fees due, nor shall the owner be
released from prosecution for violations of this chapter.
   (E)   If no petition for a hearing before the City Building Commission on a
suspension order is filed as provided above, then such order shall remain in
effect until the violations in question have been corrected, as determined by
the Building Commissioner and/or his or her designee upon inspection of the
multi-family rental dwelling structure.
   (F)   If, after two months from the effective date of the suspension, the
violations in question are not corrected sufficiently to bring the property
into compliance with this chapter, the Building Commissioner and/or his or her
designees will issue an order revoking any and all certificates issued pursuant
to this chapter, and the owner shall be required to submit a new application to
the city in order to obtain any new certificates, as required by this chapter.
The effective date and appeals process for a revocation order shall be the same
as for a suspension order, as set forth in this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.32.080)
§ 154.10 USE OF EVIDENCE.
   No evidence obtained in a consented inspection of a multi-family rental
dwelling structure made pursuant to this chapter shall be used in the
prosecution of any criminal or ordinance violation, other than for violations
of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.32.090)
§ 154.11 LACK OF CONSENT TO ENTER OR INSPECT; ADMINISTRATIVE SEARCH WARRANTS.
   (A)   Where no consent has been given to enter or inspect any multi-family
rental dwelling structure or dwelling unit, no entry or inspection shall be
made without the procurement of an administrative search warrant from the
Circuit Court of Cook County. The court may consider any of the following
factors, along with such other matters as it deems pertinent, in its decision
as to whether a warrant shall be issued:
      (1)   Eyewitness accounts of violations;
      (2)   Citizen complaints;
      (3)   Tenant complaints;
      (4)   Plain-view violations;
      (5)   Violations apparent from city records;
      (6)   Property deterioration;
      (7)   Age of the property;
      (8)   Nature of alleged violations;
      (9)   Similar properties in the area;
      (10)   Documented violations for similar properties in the area;
      (11)   Passage of time since the last inspection; and
      (12)   Previous violations on the property.
   (B)   Cause for issuance of an administrative search warrant shall be deemed
to exist in light of reasonable legislative and administrative standards which
show that there is reason to believe that a condition of nonconformity exists
with respect to a particular property in violation of the codes and ordinances
of the city.
(2000 Code, § 15.32.100)
§ 154.12 GUARANTEE BY CITY.
   The city does not guarantee the condition of any property which is the
subject matter of this chapter, and the city shall not be responsible for any
claims arising out of the subject property or the condition thereof. The city
does not warrant that all deficiencies have been corrected upon issuance of any
certificate under this chapter and does not warrant anything as to the
condition of the property or the habitability thereof.
(2000 Code, § 15.32.110)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   No person shall violate, neglect or refuse to comply with, or resist or
oppose the enforcement of, any of the provisions of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.32.120)
CHAPTER 155: FIRE LIMITS
         Editor's Note: For provisions on fire limits, see the following
chapters:
            
Chapter 94: Fire Code;
            
Chapter 151: Building Code
            
Chapter 160: Zoning Code
CHAPTER 156: BROADCASTING EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES
Section
Satellite Antenna Dishes
   
156.01   Dish antenna defined
   
156.02   Permit required; fee
   
156.03   Permit application; plans and specifications; application of Building
and Zoning Codes
   
156.04   Size and number of antennas
   
156.05   Location of stations
   
156.06   Support structures
   
156.07   Compliance with federal law
   
156.08   Screening, lettering and color of stations
   
156.09   Maintenance
   
156.10   Appeals from decisions of Building Commissioner
   
156.11   Dismantling and removal of antennas
Telecommunications Facilities, Towers and Antennas
   
156.25   Purposes
   
156.26   Definitions
   
156.27   Permitted uses
   
156.28   General requirements
   
156.29   Shared use
   
156.30   Conditional use permits and variances; application procedures and
standards for telecommunications facilities, towers, antennas and dishes
   
156.31   Satellite dish regulations
   
156.32   Decisions
   
156.33   Appeals
   
156.34   Maintenance and removal of telecommunications facilities, towers and
antennas
   
156.35   Abandoned telecommunications facilities, towers or antennas
   
156.36   Telecommunications facilities, antenna towers and antennas as existing
buildings or structures
   
156.37   Public property
SATELLITE ANTENNA DISHES
§ 156.01 DISH ANTENNA DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, DISHED ANTENNA, sometimes referred to as DISH-TYPE
SATELLITE SIGNAL-RECEIVING EARTH STATIONS, DISHED SATELLITES or EARTH STATIONS,
means an antenna of dish shape installed for the purpose of receiving airborne
signals related to communications from satellite transmissions.
(2000 Code, § 15.72.010)
§ 156.02 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)   No person shall erect or maintain a dished antenna in the city
obtaining a building permit therefor and without conforming to except as
otherwise permitted by Council.
   (B)   The fee for such a permit is $50, which shall include the cost of
inspections.
(2000 Code, § 15.72.020)
§ 156.03 PERMIT APPLICATION; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS; APPLICATION OF BUILDING
AND ZONING CODES.
   (A)   Any owner of real estate who desires to construct, erect or maintain a
dished antenna on the real estate shall apply to the Building Commissioner for
the permit required by §
156.02. A part-owner, occupant or renter must have written permission from all
owners of the lot, premises or parcel of land within the city on which the
construction, erection or maintenance is proposed.
   (B)   (1)   The applicant shall submit the permit application upon forms
provided by the Building Commissioner, together with a plot plan of the lot,
premises or parcel of land; antenna specifications; materials; complete
dimensions; support structure details; proposed location in relation to
surrounding buildings, lot lines and utility wires and easements; and landscape
screening.
      (2)   The application shall indicate the name of the owner of the subject
property, the occupant of the subject premises, if different, and the
contractor or other person who will be permitted to construct or erect the
proposed dished antenna. A nonowner contractor is required to be a licensed
contractor.
   (C)   All other provisions of the Building Code and the Zoning Code shall
apply to this chapter, except insofar as they are in direct conflict.
(2000 Code, § 15.72.030)
§ 156.04 SIZE AND NUMBER OF ANTENNAS.
   (A)   The smallest practical size dished antenna shall be used on
residential property in general. On single-family and single-story multiple
residential property, a dished antenna shall have a diameter of not greater
than 12 feet. The maximum height of a dished antenna installation shall be
governed by safety and aesthetic considerations as determined by the Building
Commissioner. Not more than one dished antenna may be installed on a single-
family or single-story multiple residential building.
   (B)   The maximum diameter of a dished antenna located on a multiple
residential building with two or more stories, a commercial building, a church
building or a school building shall be 12 feet.
(2000 Code, § 15.72.040)
§ 156.05 LOCATION OF STATIONS.
   (A)   No dished antenna shall be erected on any front or side yard, or
within ten feet of any lot line, unless approved by Council.
   (B)   No dished antenna shall be erected on the roof top of any single-
family residential structure, unless approved by Council.
   (C)   A dished antenna may be located on the roof of a multiple residential
building with two or more stories, a commercial building a church building, a
school building, a manufacturing building or any other building, if approval is
obtained from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(2000 Code, § 15.72.050)
§ 156.06 SUPPORT STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Only metal support, four-inch black pipe construction, or its
equivalent, shall be allowed for any dished antenna.
   (B)   Only a concrete base or caissons, depending on soil conditions, shall
be employed in line with the grade. The Building Commissioner shall have the
sole discretion to decide whether a concrete base or caissons are appropriate.
   (C)   The structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force of a minimum
of 85 mph in a manner conforming with good engineering practices, as approved
by the Commissioner.
   (D)   All outside electric wires must have a ground fault interrupter,
unless they are low voltage.
   (E)   Direct burial of cable is not permitted. A minimum of 12 inches of
earth ground cover over encased material is required.
   (F)   The dished antenna must be bonded to an eight-foot grounding rod, with
a minimum of seven and one-half feet of the rod imbedded in the ground, and
must comply with the City of Chicago Electrical Code.
   (G)   The structure must be in conformity with the City of Chicago
Electrical Code.
(2000 Code, § 15.72.060)
§ 156.07 COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL LAW.
   The intended use of the dished antenna shall be authorized under applicable
federal law.
(2000 Code, § 15.72.070)
§ 156.08 SCREENING, LETTERING AND COLOR OF STATIONS.
   (A)   No lettering, numerals, symbols, pictorial signs or designs shall be
permitted on any surface of a dished antenna.
   (B)   No dished antenna shall be painted in a color other than black or a
neutral tone.
(2000 Code, § 15.72.080)
§ 156.09 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Dished antennas and support structures shall be maintained in good
repair and kept structurally sound to ensure that they will not be damaged due
to winds or structural failure.
   (B)   All surfaces shall be maintained in good condition and free of rust or
corrosion.
(2000 Code, § 15.72.090)
§ 156.10 APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF BUILDING COMMISSIONER.
   An appeal from a decision of the Building Commissioner denying a permit to
construct or maintain a dished antenna may be made to Council.
(2000 Code, § 15.72.100)
§ 156.11 DISMANTLING AND REMOVAL OF ANTENNAS.
   If the residence, commercial structure, office building or other facility
upon which a dished antenna is located is sold or otherwise transferred, or if
the dished antenna is in any way abandoned or neglected or becomes dilapidated,
the seller or transferor of the premises shall cause the earth station to be
dismantled completely, including all support structures and appurtenances, and
removed from the property. However, if the purchase contract or other means of
conveyance provides specifically for the dished antenna to remain in place for
use by the successive possessor of the property, and the dished antenna is in
acceptable condition, then this section shall not apply.
(2000 Code, § 15.72.110)
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
§ 156.25 PURPOSES.
   The purposes of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Provide for the appropriate location and development of communication
towers and antennas to serve the residents and businesses of the city;
   (B)   Minimize adverse visual effects of towers and antennas through careful
design, sitting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques;
   (C)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful sitting of tower structures;
   (D)   Lessen traffic effects on surrounding residential areas;
   (E)   Maximize use of any new existing telecommunications facilities and
towers and minimize the total number of facilities and towers throughout the
city;
   (F)   Maximize and encourage use of alternative tower structures as a
primary option and discourage the construction of additional single-use towers;
and
   (G)   Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunications
facilities and towers in areas which are not zoned for residential use.
(2000 Code, § 15.74.010) (Ord. 2556, § 1, passed - -2001)
§ 156.26 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE. Manmade structures such as clock towers, bell
towers, church steeples, water towers, light poles and similar alternative-
design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of towers
and antennas.
   ANTENNA. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, video programming,
radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals or other communication signals. For purposes of this chapter, ANTENNA
shall include “personal wireless facilities,” as referenced in § 704 of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. 332). The term antenna shall not
include any antenna under 12 feet in total height, and satellite earth station
antennas one meter in diameter or less located in a residential zoning district
other than R5 or R6 Districts, receive-only home television antennas, and
satellite earth station antenna two meters or less in diameter located in an
R5, R6 or nonresidential zoning district.
   CELL. A single specified geographic area within a cellular provider’s broad
cellular geographic service area (CGSA) served by a single antenna facility and
to which a single radio frequency is assigned.
   DIRECTOR. The Building Commissioner or his or her designee.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   GUY TOWER. A communication tower that is supported in whole or in part by
guy wires and ground anchors.
   HEIGHT or TOTAL HEIGHT. When referring to a telecommunications facility,
tower or antenna, means the distance measured vertically from the highest point
when positioned for operation to the lowest point, which is defined as the
bottom of the base of the structure being measured at either roof or ground
level, whichever is applicable. The HEIGHT of a tower shall include the height
of any antennas positioned for operation attached or which may be attached to
the highest point on the tower. The HEIGHT of an antenna shall include the
height of any tower attached or which may be attached to the antenna.
   INTERFERENCE. The disruption of communications broadcast signals from any
other broadcast transmitting or receiving equipment whether located on the site
or not. For the purposes of this chapter, INTERFERENCE is defined in the rules
and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.
   LATTICE OR SELF-SUPPORTING TOWER. A communications tower that has open-
framed supports on three or four sides and is constructed without guy wires and
ground anchors.
   MONOPOLE. A communications tower consisting of a single-pole constructed
without guy wires or ground anchors.
   SATELLITE DISH. A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid,
open mesh or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow disk, cone or
horn. The device transmits and/or receives radio or electromagnetic waves
between earth based and/or orbitally based satellites. This definition includes
but is not limited to satellite dishes included as “personal wireless
facilities,” as referenced in § 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as
well as what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, television
reception only antennas and satellite microwave antennas.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. Any commercial facility established for the
purpose of providing wireless voice, data and image transmission within a
designated service area. A TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY consists of one or more
antennas attached to a support structure, together with related equipment or
buildings.
   TOWER. A structure and any support thereto, such as a self-supporting mast,
pole, lattice tower, guy tower or monopole tower, constructed as a freestanding
structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or
equipment, on which one or more antennas is located.
      (1)   The term includes radio and television transmission towers,
microwave towers, common carrier towers and cellular telephone towers.
      (2)   The term excludes any towers under 12 feet in total height.
   UNAFFILIATED USER. A person or entity under a shared use agreement specified
in §
156.29(B) of not less than a five-year term, which person or entity does not
directly or indirectly own or control, and is not directly owned or controlled
by, or is not under common ownership or control with another user of the same
tower.
(2000 Code, § 15.74.020) (Ord. 2556, § 2, passed - -2001)
§ 156.27 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Permits required. Upon receipt of an antenna installation permit,
telecommunications facilities, towers or antennas may be located in the
following zoning districts within the city:
      (1)   In M Limited Manufacturing Zoning Districts as a matter of right,
provided such towers comply with all of the requirements of §§
156.28 and
156.29 of this chapter;
      (2)   In B1, B2, B3 and R5 and R6 Districts, as a matter of right,
provided the towers comply with all of the conditions §§
156.28 and
156.29 of this chapter and do not exceed the following height limitations:
         (a)   For a single unaffiliated user, no more than 60 feet in height;
and
         (b)   No guy tower shall be located in the B 1, B2, B3 Central
Business District or an R5 or R6 District.
      (3)   In residential districts other than R5 and R6 Districts, as a
matter of right up to 60 feet in height provided:
         (a)   The tower comply with all of the requirements in §
156.28 of this chapter;
         (b)   The tower are exclusively operated by the residential occupant
of the premises on which the tower is located; and
         (c)   The towers are an accessory use to the principal permitted use
(s) of the zoning district.
      (4)   In new PUD’s as approved in accordance with the PUD process
provided, however, that the standards for the underlying zoning classification
shall serve as a basic guideline for approval of all towers exceeding 12 feet
in height shall require a change to the PUD as determined by the Director; and
      (5)   The location, construction or installation of any
telecommunications facility, tower or antenna exceeding the height limitations
permitted by this section may be allowed as a conditional use pursuant to §
156.30 of this chapter.
   (B)   Rooftop installations. Rooftop mounted towers and antennas may be
located as a matter of right on any multiple-family dwellings and
nonresidential buildings in the city subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   The building is at least 30 feet in height, and the tower and
antenna will add no more than a total of 20 feet to the height of the building;
      (2)   The tower or antenna is set back from any existing or planned off-
site residential property line a distance of at least two times the full height
of the building and the tower and antenna, but in no event less than 100 feet;
and
      (3)   The number and location of towers, antennas or other receiving or
transmitting devices located on a single structure does not exceed one per 200
square feet of building rooftop and does not adversely affect adjacent
properties and views.
(2000 Code, § 15.74.030) (Ord. 2556, § 3, passed - -2001)
§ 156.28 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location,
construction and installation of all telecommunications facilities, towers and
antennas, governed by this chapter.
   (A)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   (a)   No new cell may be established if there is a technically
suitable space available at commercially reasonable terms on an existing tower
or structure within the search area that the new cell is to serve.
         (b)   For the purpose of this chapter, the search area is defined as
the grid for the placement of the antenna.
      (2)   (a)   No illumination shall be permitted on a telecommunications
facility, tower or antenna unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or
federal agency of competent jurisdiction.
         (b)   Where lighting is required, the Building Commissioner may review
the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the
least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views.
      (3)   No advertising is permitted on a telecommunications facility, tower
or antenna.
   (B)   Building codes; safety standards.
      (1)   To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications
facilities, towers and antennas, the owner of a facility shall ensure that it
is maintained in compliance with applicable building and safety codes adopted
by the city and the applicable standards for tower and antennas promulgated by
the FCC and FAA from time to time.
      (2)   The owners of telecommunications facilities, towers, and antennas
shall conduct inspections of the facilities at lease once every three years to
ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a structural
engineer licensed to practice in Illinois.
      (3)   A report of the inspection shall be filed with the Building
Commissioner.
   (C)   Regulatory compliance. All telecommunications facilities, towers and
antennas shall comply with all applicable current standards and regulations of
the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with
the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities, towers and antennas.
      (1)   If regulations are amended from time to time, the owners of any
communications facility, tower or antennas subject to the provisions of this
chapter shall bring the facilities into compliance with the amended rules and
regulations within six months of the effective date of the amendment, unless a
more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or
federal agency.
      (2)   The owners of telecommunications facilities, towers and antennas
shall provide documentation establishing that each such facility is in
compliance with all local, state and federal requirements.
      (3)   Evidence of compliance shall be submitted to the Building
Commissioner.
   (D)   Operation of equipment. All telecommunications facilities, towers and
antennas shall be installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all
applicable laws, regulations and ordinances so as not to interfere with or
cause interference with the city’s use of its other radio or television
transmitting and/or receiving equipment whether located on the site or not.
      (1)   In the event there is interference with radio or other
telecommunications transmissions, the owners of the facilities, towers and
antennas shall promptly take all reasonable steps necessary to correct and
eliminate the interference within a reasonable period of time; provided
however, if the transmissions materially interfere with the city’s emergency
transmitting and/or receiving equipment, such corrective steps shall be taken
immediately upon notice by the city. If the owner of the facilities, towers or
antennas fails to take immediate corrective action, the city may do so at the
owner’s expense.
      (2)   If the owner is unable to eliminate the interference in accordance
with division (D)(1), the owner shall terminate its facilities, towers or
antennas from operation.
   (E)   Security.
      (1)   All telecommunications facilities, towers and antennas, except
towers of less than 12 feet in height, and except for towers and antennas
located on rooftops or alternative tower structures, shall be enclosed by
decay-resistant security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be
equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device.
      (2)   The Building Commissioner may waive the requirements for
alternative tower structures.
   (F)   Visual effect.
      (1)   Subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other state or
federal agency of competent jurisdiction, telecommunications facilities, towers
or antennas shall be constructed of materials that will blend with the
environment to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
      (2)   At a site of such a facility, construction of equipment buildings
and related structures shall, to the extent possible, incorporate materials,
colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will camouflage the tower
facilities to blend with the natural setting and surrounding environment.
      (3)   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment shall be of a
neutral color identical to, or blends with, the color of the supporting
structure so that the antenna and related equipment are as visually unobtrusive
as possible.
   (G)   Landscaping.
      (1)   Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the
tower compound from adjacent public ways, public property and residential
property and shall include the following:
         (a)   For towers less than 150 feet in height, a buffer area no less
than six feet wide shall be provided at any property line which faces a public
street or way, or any residentially zoned property;
         (b)   For towers in excess of 150 feet in height, a buffer area not
less than ten feet wide shall be provided at any property line which faces a
public street or way, or any residentially zoned property; and
         (c)   The buffer zone shall consist of plant materials which can be
expected to grow to form a continuous hedge at least five feet in height within
two years after planting.
      (2)   Landscape screening forming a continuous hedge around the base of
the tower and related equipment, and which can be expected to grow to form a
continuous hedge at least six feet in height within two years after planting,
shall be used to effectively screen the view of the tower compound from all
other property.
      (3)   Trees and shrubs in the vicinity of guy wires shall not exceed 20
feet in height; shall not affect the stability of the guys should they be
uprooted; and shall not obscure visibility of the anchor from the transmission
building or security facilities.
      (4)   Native vegetation, or such other vegetation approved by the
Building Commissioner, on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical
extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant
vegetation to be removed and vegetation to be replaced.
      (5)   For good cause shown, the city’s Building Commissioner may permit
use of an alternate detailed plan and specifications for landscaping and
screening, including plantings, fences, walls and other features designed to
screen and buffer towers and accessory uses.
         (a)   Such a plan shall accomplish the same degree of screening
achieved by the requirements may be desirable for adequate visibility, for
security purposes, or for continued operation of existing bona fide
agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms.
         (b)   In locations where the visual effect of the tower would be
minimal, including, without limitation, remote agricultural and rural locations
or heavily developed industrial areas, the Building Commissioner may waive or
reduce the landscaping requirements.
   (H)   Maintenance of telecommunications facilities, towers and antennas.
      (1)   Equipment located on or at a tele- communications facility, tower
or antenna shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic
and congestion.
      (2)   Where such a facility abuts or has access to a collector or local
street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the
collector street.
   (I)   Principal, accessory and joint uses of telecommunications facilities,
towers and antennas.
      (1)   Where a telecommunications facility, tower or antenna is the
principal use, accessory structures used in direct support of such a facility
shall be allowed but shall not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other
outdoor storage. Equipment buildings housing telecommunications facilities used
in the operation of any tower, antennas or satellite dish on the property or
adjacent property shall be accessory to the towers and antennas.
      (2)   Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower
facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the tower, unless
repairs, inspections or maintenance to the tower are being made.
      (3)   In nonresidential zoning districts and in R5 and R6 zoning
districts, subject to the requirements of this chapter, telecommunications
facilities, towers or antennas may be located on sites containing another
principal use in the same buildable area.
         (a)   The facilities may occupy a parcel meeting the minimum lot size
requirements for the zoning district in which it is located.
         (b)   For a monopole or lattice tower, the minimum distance between a
tower and another tower or principal use located on the same lot shall be the
greater of 20% of the tower height or 25 feet.
         (c)   For a guyed tower, the minimum distance between a tower and
another tower or principal use located on the same lot shall be the greater of
100% of the breakpoint or 25 feet.
         (d)   The separation is required to assure compatibility of land uses
and to provide for the health, safety and welfare of individuals and structures
occupying the same site.
      (4)   No tower may be located on a site where a proposed or existing
principal use includes the storage, distribution or sale of volatile,
flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as propane, gasoline, natural
gas and dangerous chemicals, unless the tower is set back from any such
materials or liquids by not less than the total height of the tower.
   (J)   Lot size, setbacks and separation for telecommunications facilities,
towers and antennas.
      (1)   All telecommunications facilities, towers and antennas shall be
situated on a site of sufficient size and shape to provide an adequate setback
from the based of the tower to any property line abutting a residential
district. The size of the site shall be sufficient where the required setbacks
are satisfied. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower
or antenna complies with district development regulations, including but not
limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such
requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even through the
antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within the lot.
      (2)   All freestanding antennas and towers shall be set sufficiently back
from property lines to:
         (a)   Provide for an adequate vegetative, topographic or other buffer
required by division (G) of this section;
         (b)   Preserve the privacy of surrounding residential property; and
         (c)   Protect adjoining property from the potential adverse effect of
tower failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site,
based on the engineer’s analysis.
      (3)   A freestanding antenna or tower is presumed to be sufficiently set
back where it:
         (a)   Meets the requirements of divisions (J)(1) and (2);
         (b)   For non-guyed structures, provides a setback from a property
line within, abutting or across a public right-of-way from a residential
district of at least two feet for every foot of tower height; and
         (c)   For non-guyed structures, provides a setback equal to or
exceeding the rear yard setback required for the adjoining property where the
adjoining property is not in a residential district.
         (d)   Guyed structures within or abutting a residential district shall
comply with the requirements of division (J)(2) and shall be situated on a site
of sufficient size and shape to provide a setback equal to the height of the
tower from a guy anchor to any property line abutting a residential district.
         (e)   Guyed structures not within or abutting a residential district
shall comply with the requirements of division (J)(2) and shall be situated on
a site of sufficient size and shape to provide a setback equal to the greater
of the required setback for a principal use in the applicable zoning district,
100% of the breakpoint of the tower, or 25 feet.
      (4)   All equipment buildings or cabinets associated with a tower or
antenna shall meet the setbacks required in the zoning district where the tower
and the required buildings are located.
      (5)   No freestanding conditional use tower within a residential district
or freestanding tower exceeding 60 feet in height within an R5, R6 or any
nonresidential district, shall be allowed within the greater of a 1,000-foot
radius or the separation distances set forth in division (J)(6) below, of a
freestanding conditional use tower within a residential district.
      (6)   All freestanding towers within R5, R6 or nonresidential districts
for which applications are submitted after approval of the ordinance codified
in this chapter shall conform to the following minimum tower separation
requirements:
 
Tower  Height <50 Feet   50 - 100 Feet 101 - 150 Feet >150 Feet
< 50 feet      300 feet   500 feet      750 feet       1,000 feet
50 to 100 feet 500 feet   750 feet      1,000 feet     1,500 feet
101 to150 feet 750 feet   1,000 feet    1,500 feet     2,000 feet
> 150 feet     1,000 feet 1,500 feet    2,000 feet     2,500 feet
 
      (7)   Towers and antennas mounted on rooftops shall be exempt from these
minimum separation distances. For purposes of implementing this chapter, an AM
array, consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which
functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower.
Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the
outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array.
   (K)   Location.
      (1)   General. In no case shall a freestanding tower be located in any
required front yard.
      (2)   Residential zoning districts other than R5 and R6.
         (a)   Rear yards. In any residential zoning district other than R5 and
R6, subject to the provisions of this chapter, and to the extent that it is
practicable, towers and antennas shall be located only in the rear yard of any
lot.
         (b)   Interior side yards. If signals cannot be clearly received from
the rear yard, the towers and antennas may be located in the interior side
yard.
         (c)   Roof or wall mounted. In the event signals cannot be clearly
received by locating the towers and antennas in the rear or interior side yards
of the property, it may be mounted on the roof or wall of the principal
structure, subject to the following requirements:
            1.   Roof mounted or wall anchored towers and antennas installed on
a principal building or structure shall be located on that portion of a roof or
wall which faces a rear yard; and
            2.   In the event signals cannot be clearly received by locating
the towers and antennas on that portion of a roof or wall which faces a rear
yard, the towers and antennas may be installed on the side roof.
      (3)   R5, R6 and Nonresidential Zoning Districts.
         (a)   Rear yards, interior side yards and roof mounted. In any R5, R6
and nonresidential zoning district, to the extent that it is practicable,
towers and antennas shall be located in rear yards, interior side yards, or on
the roof, subject to the provisions of division (K)(3)(b) below.
         (b)   Roof mounted. In R5, R6 and nonresidential districts roof
mounted towers and antennas may be installed on any portion of the roof of a
principal structure where the antenna is effectively screened and is installed
so that it is not visible between ground level and ten feet above ground level
from any adjoining street or abutting residential property including other
residential property in R5 or R6 districts.
         (c)   Wall mounted. In R5, R6 and nonresidential districts, wall
mounted towers and antennas installed on a principal building or structure
shall be located on that portion of a wall which faces a rear yard.
         (d)   Accessory structures. Roof mounted or wall anchored towers and
antennas installed on an accessory building or structure may be located on any
side of the roof or wall.
(2000 Code, § 15.74.040) (Ord. 2556, § 4, passed - -2001)
§ 156.29 SHARED USE.
   (A)   Facility design. All new telecommunications towers shall be designed
to structurally accommodate shared use.
      (1)   To encourage the maximum use of existing towers, no building permit
or variance shall be required for the addition of one or more antennas to and
existing tower provided:
         (a)   The height of the tower or structure on which the antenna is
placed is not increased;
         (b)   The applicant complies with the requirements of §§
156.27(B) and
156.28 of this chapter; and
         (c)   The owner provides prior written notice to the city of the
additional antennas.
   (B)   New towers. As conditions of approval of a new freestanding
conditional use tower in a residential district other than R5 or R6, or a new
tower in an R5, R6 or nonresidential district, the owner shall:
      (1)   Record the letter of intent required by this code, in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds for the county in which the tower site is located;
      (2)   Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for
information from a potential shared use applicant;
      (3)   Negotiate in good faith for shared use by third parties;
      (4)   Allow shared use where the third party seeking the use enters into
a written agreement to pay a reasonable, pro rata share of the costs of the
tower and all equipment buildings, including all charges necessary to modify,
but not totally reconstruct, the tower and transmitters to accommodate shared
use, and to avoid interference with the signals transmitted or received by the
tower’s users; and
      (5)   These conditions of approval shall be a covenant running with the
land and be binding on the current owner and all successors in interest of the
tower site.
   (C)   Where an owner whose tower was approved after the effective date of
this chapter wilfully and knowingly fails to comply with the requirements of
division (B), the city may withhold approval of any application by the owner
for a building permit, conditional use permit or variance for any tower or
antenna.
   (D)   Shared use shall not be precluded because a reasonable fee for shared
use is charged, or because reasonable costs may be incurred to adapt the
existing and proposed uses to a shared tower.
      (1)   The Director, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City
Council may consider expert testimony to determine whether the anticipated fees
and costs are reasonable.
      (2)   Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed unreasonable.
(2000 Code, § 15.74.050) (Ord. 2556, § 5, passed - -2001)
§ 156.30 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS AND VARIANCES; APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND
STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, TOWERS, ANTENNAS AND DISHES.
   (A)   Conditional uses and variances.
      (1)   The location, construction or installation of any
telecommunications facility, tower or antenna exceeding the height limitations
permitted by this chapter, or any satellite dish exceeding the size limitations
of this chapter, may be allowed as a conditional use pursuant to this section.
The location, construction or installation of any telecommunications facility,
tower or antenna, or satellite dish which does not otherwise meet the
requirements of §§
156.27,
156.28,
156.29 or
156.31 may be permitted upon the grant of a variance pursuant to this section.
      (2)   A petition for a conditional use permit, variance or any amendment
thereto for a telecommunications facility, tower, antenna or satellite dish not
permitted pursuant to §§
156.27 or
156.31 of this subchapter shall be initiated by application to the Director in
accordance with the provision of this section, and may be issued in accordance
with this section.
      (3)   After receiving the report of the Director, the City Council may
issue or deny a conditional use permit or variance, as the case may be, have
been satisfied.
      (4)   Standards for granting a conditional use.
         (a)   The Council shall determine that the application has met all of
the general requirements of this subchapter, except as to which a variance has
been specifically granted;
         (b)   For facilities, antennas and towers, the extent of the deviation
of the proposed facility from the requirements of this chapter, the effect of
the proposed facility in terms of the goals of this chapter, and the benefits
of and need for the proposed antenna, or tower must be greater than any
possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties;
         (c)   For satellite dishes, strict compliance with the regulations
contained in this chapter must result in an obstructed reception window and
must be beyond the control of the property owner and applicant; and
         (d)   The use of alternative tower structures rather than the
construction and erection of new or additional towers is one of the goals of
this subchapter. The depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring
properties of antennas and towers shall be presumed to be less when alternative
tower structures are used.
      (5)   Standards for granting a variance for antennas, towers or dishes.
         (a)   The Council shall determine that the application has met all of
the requirements of this subchapter and this code, except for those for which a
conditional use or variance has been specifically granted;
         (b)   The variance must be in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this title;
         (c)   Strict enforcement of this subchapter must result in practical
difficulties or impose exceptional hardships due to special conditions which
are not generally found on other properties in the same zoning district;
         (d)   The exceptional hardships or special and unusual conditions or
circumstances aforementioned in division (A)(5)(c), are not self-imposed;
provided however, that in the case of variances as to nonresidential property
and R5 or R6 zoned property, or variances from the requirements of §§
156.27(A)(3)(b) or (c) as to residentially zoned property other than R5 and R6
zoned property, that the property cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted
to be used only under the conditions allowed by this chapter;
         (e)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the neighborhood and will not be a substantial detriment to adjacent
property;
         (f)   The use of alternative tower structures rather than the
construction and erection of new or additional towers is one of the goals of
this subchapter. The depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring
properties of antennas and towers shall be presumed to be less when alternative
tower structure are used;
         (g)   Variances from separation requirements for towers and antennas
may be permitted to allow more than one tower on a lot only if:
            1.   The standards contained in divisions (A)(5)(a), (b), (c) and
(e) of this section are satisfied;
            2.   Setback requirements, design and landscaping requirements are
met for each tower;
            3.   The variance is technically feasible and failure of one will
not lead to multiple failures; and
            4.   Clustered towers shall be of similar height, not to exceed 10%
deviation from the average height of all clustered towers. The term “clustered”
shall mean two or more grouped together within the separation distances
required under this subchapter, on the same parcel or lot, or on adjacent
parcels or lots and within the adjoining setback areas of both parcels or lots.
      (6)   Conditions and restrictions. The City Council may impose conditions
and restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a variance as may be necessary
to comply with the standards set forth in this section and as may be necessary
to create a buffer from, or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed
tower or antenna on surrounding properties. If a time limit is set forth by
which conditions and restrictions must be completed, they shall be so completed
in the time specified. If no such time limit is specified, then the conditions
and restrictions shall be completed within a reasonable amount of time. The
applicant shall be obliged to fulfill and maintain all conditions and
restrictions for as long as the variance is utilized or in effect.
      (7)   Contents of application for a conditional use. All applications for
a conditional use under this subchapter shall include such documentation and
information specified in this code, as may be required by the Director.
      (8)   Contents of application for a variance. All applications for
variances shall include such documentation and information specified in this
code, as may be required by the Director.
      (9)   The Director shall maintain records of all the responses to
requests for information, and shall provide information to any person upon
receipt of a proper request.
      (10)   After the owner of an existing facility demonstrates antenna(s) of
the type proposed by any applicant cannot be reasonably accommodated on the
owner’s tower, no other applicant shall be required to request information from
that owner concerning antennas of the same type which cannot be reasonably
accommodated.
   (B)   Planned unit developments.
      (1)   Existing planned unit developments.
         (a)   The erection or installation of any antennas, towers or
satellite dishes subject to regulation under this chapter that are permitted
uses in the underlying PUD zoning classification shall require approval of a
minor change to the PUD unless and to the extent specifically permitted in the
approved PUD.
         (b)   The erection or installation of any antennas, towers or
satellite dishes subject to regulation under this chapter that are conditional
uses in the underlying PUD zoning classification shall require approval of a
major change to the PUD unless and to the extent specifically permitted in the
approved PUD.
      (2)   New planned unit developments. The erection or installation of any
antennas, towers or satellite dishes subject to regulation under this chapter
shall meet the standards of this chapter and those of the underlying PUD zoning
classification, unless specifically permitted otherwise in the approved PUD.
(2000 Code, § 15.74.050) (Ord. 2556, § 6, passed - -2001)
§ 156.31 SATELLITE DISH REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permits required. No person shall construct or install any satellite
dish exceeding one meter in size in residential districts other than R5 and R6
zoning districts, or two meters in size in R5, R6 or nonresidential districts
without obtaining an antenna installation permit pursuant to
Chapter 110 of this code.
   (B)   General requirements. The following requirements shall apply to all
dish antennas located, installed or constructed:
      (1)   Aesthetic requirements. All dish antennas, and the bases on which
they are mounted, shall be black, gray, white, silver, tan, beige or other
light brown shades of color, or another color which matches or blends with the
predominant color of the roof surface if roof mounted, or the color of the
surroundings if ground mounted.
      (2)   Wind loads. All dish antennas and any bases on which they are
mounted shall be constructed to withstand a minimum wind velocity of 80 mph
(impact pressure of 32 pounds per square foot).
      (3)   No obstruction of public ways or property. No satellite dish shall
extend above, across, over or under any public street, public sidewalk, or
other public rights of way or property, and shall have no wires, or metal rods
extending therefrom above, across, over or under any public street, public
sidewalk or other public rights of way or property.
      (4)   Buried wires, rods and connectors. All wires, rods and other
connectors between a satellite dish and the structure receiving services from
the dish shall be located underground if ground mounted or securely attached to
or located within the structure receiving service if the satellite dish is roof
or wall mounted.
      (5)   Screening for satellite dishes.
         (a)   As an exception to § 160.324, all ground mounted satellite dish
installations exceeding one meter in size in residential districts including R5
and R6 districts, or two meters in size in any nonresidential districts, shall
include screening treatments, not less than the height of the dish
installation, along the dish’s non-reception window axis and low-level
screening treatments along the reception window axis of the dish’s base.
         (b)   Screening treatments should completely enclosed the satellite
and consist of non-deciduous landscape materials or fencing having an opacity
of at least 75%.
      (6)   Lighting and advertising. All satellite dish installations shall
comply with all applicable FCC and FAA requirements. No lights or signs, or
other advertising shall be permitted on any satellite dish or support structure
unless required by the FCC or the FAA.
   (C)   Miscellaneous zoning requirements. Except as otherwise provided in
this chapter, all satellite dish installations shall comply with all accessory
use, yard, height, bulk and setback requirements specified within the zoning
district where the dish will be located.
      (1)   Residential zoning districts other than R5 and R6 Districts.
         (a)   Rear yards. In any residential zoning district other than R5 and
R6 Districts, subject to the provisions of this subchapter, and to the extent
that it is practicable, satellite dishes shall be located only in the rear yard
of any lot. All satellite dishes in a historic preservation district which are
located other than in the rear yard of any lot.
         (b)   Interior side yards. If satellite signals cannot be clearly
received from the rear yard, the satellite dish may be located in the interior
side yard.
         (c)   Roof or wall mounted. In the event satellite signals cannot be
clearly received by locating the satellite dish in the rear or interior side
yards of the property it may be mounted on the roof or wall of the principal
structure, subject to the following requirements.
            1.   Roof mounted or wall anchored satellite dishes installed on a
principal building or structure shall be located on that portion of a roof or
wall which faces a rear yard.
            2.   In the event satellite signals cannot be clearly received by
locating the satellite dish on that portion of a roof or wall which faces a
rear yard, the satellite dish may be installed on the side roof.
            3.   A satellite dish mounted on the side roof shall be installed
so it is not visible between ground level from any street adjoining the front
yard of the property on which it is located.
            4.   A satellite dish exceeding one meter (three and one-half feet)
in size may be permitted as a conditional use pursuant to §
156.30(A)(3) of this subchapter.
            5.   A satellite dish not meeting any other standards or
requirements in this subchapter may be permitted upon the grant of a variance
pursuant to §
156.30(A)(4) of this subchapter.
      (2)   Nonresidential zoning districts and R5 and R6 Districts.
         (a)   Rear yards, interior side yards and roof mounted. In any R5 and
R6, or nonresidential zoning district, to the extent that it is practicable,
satellite dishes shall be located in rear yards, interior side yards, or on the
roof, subject to the provisions of division (C)(2)(b) of this section.
         (b)   Roof mounted. In any R5, R6 or nonresidential districts, roof
mounted satellite dishes may be installed on any portion of the roof of a
principal structure where the antenna is effectively screened and is installed
so that it is not visible between ground level and ten feet above ground level
from any adjoining street or abutting residential property, including other
multiple-family property in an R5 or R6 District.
         (c)   Wall mounted. In any R5, R6 or nonresidential districts, wall
mounted satellite dishes installed on a principal building or structure shall
be located on that portion of a wall which faces a rear yard.
         (d)   Accessory structures. Roof mounted or wall anchored satellite
dishes installed on an accessory building or structure may be located on any
side of the roof or wall.
         (e)   Conditional uses. A satellite dish in excess of two meters
(seven feet) in size may be permitted as a conditional use pursuant to §
156.30(A)(3) of this subchapter.
         (f)   Variances. A satellite dish not meeting any other standards or
requirements in this subchapter may be permitted upon the grant of a variance
pursuant to §
156.30(A)(4) of this subchapter.
   (D)   Setbacks for satellite dishes.
      (1)   Permitted ground mounted satellite dishes. Permitted ground mounted
satellite dishes shall be setback at least five feet from the property line.
      (2)   Conditional use satellite dishes. No satellite dish exceeding one
meter in size in residential districts or two meters in size in any R5, R6 or
nonresidential districts shall be located less than 15 feet from any lot line
or less than 35 feet from any existing principal structure on a lot other than
the lot on which the satellite dish is to be constructed or installed.
   (E)   Satellite dish sizes. The size of all satellite dish installations
shall conform to the following requirements:
      (1)   Residential. No satellite dish shall be more than ten feet in
diameter whether roof mounted, wall anchored or ground mounted; and
      (2)   Nonresidential and R5 and R6. In the nonresidential and R5 and R6
zoning districts, satellite dishes in excess of ten feet in diameter shall be
permitted upon approval of a conditional use in accordance with §
156.30 of this subchapter.
   (F)   Satellite dish heights. The height of all satellite dish installations
shall conform to the following requirements.
      (1)   Ground mounted.
         (a)   Residential other than R5 and R6. In residential districts other
than R5 and R6, no ground-mounted satellite dish shall be more than 12 feet in
height, as measured from the lowest point of the finished grade at the bottom
of the base or tower on which it is constructed or installed to the highest
point on the satellite dish.
         (b)   Nonresidential and R5 and R6. In nonresidential and R5 and R6
Districts, ground mounted satellite dish installations in excess of 70 feet in
height may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use in accordance with
the requirements of §
156.30 of this subchapter.
      (2)   Roof or wall mounted.
         (a)   Residential other than R5 and R6. In residential other than R5
and R6 Districts, roof mounted or wall anchored satellite dishes shall not
exceed the maximum height restriction for principal structures for the zoning
district in which they are located.
         (b)   Nonresidential and R5 and R5. In all nonresidential and R5 and
R6 Districts, roof or wall mounted satellite dishes in excess of 60 feet in
height may be permitted upon approval of a variance in accordance with the
requirements of §
156.30 of this subchapter.
         (c)   Roof mounted satellite dishes. Any roof mounted satellite dishes
shall be installed so it is not visible between ground level and ten feet above
ground level from any street adjoining the property or any abutting residential
properties including other multiple-family property in an R5 or R6 District.
(2000 Code, § 15.74.070) (Ord. 2556, § 7, passed - -2001)
§ 156.32 DECISIONS.
   Any decision rendered upon an application to locate, construct or install a
telecommunications facility, tower, antenna or for a conditional use or
variance permit for any such facility shall be written and shall include
findings of fact supported by substantial evidence in a written record.
(2000 Code, § 15.74.080) (Ord. 2556, § 8, passed - -2001)
§ 156.33 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals from any decision of the Director rendered upon an application
to locate, construct, or install a telecommunications facility, tower, or
antenna shall be filed pursuant to the plan and zone ordinance.
   (B)   Appeals from any decision of the City Council rendered upon an
application to locate, construct, or install a telecommunications facility,
tower, antenna or for a conditional use permit for any such facility, tower,
antenna or for a conditional use permit for any such facility shall be filed
with the plan and zone ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 15.74.050) (Ord. 2556, § 9, passed - -2001)
§ 156.34 MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, TOWERS AND
ANTENNAS.
   (A)   All telecommunications facilities, towers and antennas, including
satellite dishes, shall be maintained in compliance with all standards in
applicable building and technical codes to ensure the structural and technical
integrity of the facilities.
   (B)   The Director or his or her designee shall be authorized to enter upon
the property of the owner or tenant of the antenna facility for purposes of
inspecting same, upon prior written or verbal notice to the owner or tenant.
   (C)   If upon inspection by the Director, it is determined that a
telecommunications facility, tower or antenna fails to comply with any of the
applicable standards of the Oak Forest Building Codes, the Director shall send
a written notice of the violation to the owner of the telecommunications
facility, tower or antenna and the owner is different from the owner of such
facility. The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested.
   (D)   The owner of the telecommunications facility, tower or antenna and the
owner of the property if the owner is different from the owner of the facility,
shall have 30 days after receipt of the violation notice to bring the facility
into compliance.
   (E)   In the event the telecommunications facility, tower or antenna is not
brought into compliance within the required 30-day period, the city may provide
notice to the owners requiring such a facility to be removed.
   (F)   In the event the telecommunications facility, tower or antenna is not
removed within 30 days after receipt of the notice of removal, the city may
remove or cause the removal of the facility and file a lien against the
property for the costs of removal.
   (G)   In the event that the failure of the telecommunications facility,
tower or antenna to comply with any such standards constitutes a present danger
to persons or property, the city may abate the danger, provide notice to the
owner as soon as reasonably practicable and recover the costs of abatement from
the owner and file a lien against the property for the costs of abatement.
   (H)   The city may pursue any and all available legal remedies to insure
that a telecommunications facility, tower or antenna which fails to comply with
the Oak Forest Building Code or which constitutes a danger to persons or
property is brought into compliance or removed.
   (I)   Any delay by the city in taking enforcement action against the owner
or a telecommunications facility, tower or antenna and the owner of the
property if the owner is different from the owner of the facility, shall not
waive the city’s right to take any action at a later time.
   (J)   The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility, tower or
antenna removed regardless of the owner’s or operator’s intent to the facility,
and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been
issued or granted.
(2000 Code, § 15.74.100) (Ord. 2556, § 10, passed - -2001)
§ 156.35 ABANDONED TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, TOWERS OR ANTENNAS.
   (A)   Any telecommunications facility, tower or antenna that is not operated
for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or
not the owner or operator intends to make use of the facility.
   (B)   If upon inspection by the Building Commissioner, it is determined that
a telecommunications facility, tower or antenna is abandoned, the Building
Commissioner shall send a written notice of the abandonment to the owner of the
telecommunications facility, tower or antenna and the owner of the property if
the owner is different from the owner of the facility. The notice shall be
mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested.
   (C)   The owner of the telecommunications facility, tower or antenna and the
owner of the property if the owner is different from the owners of the
facility, shall have 60 days after receipt of the notice to remove all of the
facility, including any and all footings and foundation.
   (D)   If the telecommunications facility, tower or antenna is not removed
within 60 days after receipt of notice from the city notifying the owners of
the abandonment, the city may remove the facility and file a lien against the
property for the costs of removal.
   (E)   The city may pursue any and all available legal remedies to insure
that an abandoned telecommunications facility, tower or antenna is removed.
   (F)   Any delay by the city in taking action to enforce the removal of an
abandoned telecommunications facility, tower or antenna against the owner of
the telecommunications facility, tower or antenna and the owner of the property
if the owner is different from the owner of the facility, shall not waive the
city’s right to take any action at a later time.
   (G)   The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility, tower or
antenna removed regardless of the owners’ or operator’s intent to operate the
facility, and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may
have been issued or granted.
   (H)   If the owner of an abandoned telecommunications facility, tower or
antenna wishes to use such as abandoned facility, the owner shall first apply
for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this
chapter as if the telecommunications facility, tower or antenna were a new
facility.
(2000 Code, § 15.74.110) (Ord. 2556, § 11, passed - -2001)
§ 156.36 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, ANTENNA TOWERS AND ANTENNAS AS EXISTING
BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Except as to the requirements of §
156.28(B) or as otherwise provided in this chapter, a telecommunications
facility, tower or antenna operative on September 25, 2001 shall be permitted
to continue in its present use as an existing building or structure pursuant to
the requirements of the Oak Forest Municipal Code.
   (B)   Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower or antenna
of like construction and height, shall be permitted for such existing
facilities.
   (C)   Any new construction, other than routine maintenance, on an existing
telecommunications facility, tower or antenna, or on the property on which such
an existing facility is located, shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
   (D)   Where the city has granted approval for the construction of a new
telecommunications facility, tower, or antenna which has not yet been
constructed or placed in operation on September 25, 2001, such structure shall
be considered an existing telecommunications facility, tower or antenna as long
as the approval is valid and not expired.
(2000 Code, § 15.74.120) (Ord. 2556, § 12, passed - -2001)
§ 156.37 PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Telecommunications facilities, towers or antennas located on property owned,
leased or otherwise controlled by the city shall be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter; provided a license or lease authorizing the
operation of such a facility has been approved by the City Council.
(2000 Code, § 15.74.130) (Ord. 2556, § 13, passed - -2001)
CHAPTER 157: SWIMMING POOLS
Section
   
157.01   Definitions
   
157.02   Location of pools and equipment
   
157.03   Permit required; fee
   
157.04   Plans and drawings
   
157.05   Recirculation-type pools required
   
157.06   Construction; materials
   
157.07   Structural design
   
157.08   Walk areas
   
157.09   Fences; inspections by Building Department
   
157.10   Steps or ladders
   
157.11   Recirculation and filter systems
   
157.12   Disposal of wastewater
   
157.13   Skimmers
   
157.14   Water treatment
   
157.15   Vacuum cleaners
   
157.16   Electrical requirements; floodlights
   
157.17   Safety precautions; rescue equipment; diving boards
   
157.18   Operation and maintenance; nuisances prohibited
   
157.19   Periodic inspections
§ 157.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL. A receptacle for water or an artificial
pool of water having a depth at any point of more than two feet, intended for
the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and
includes all pertinent equipment constructed, installed and maintained in or
above the ground outside of a building used for a single-family dwelling unit.
However, such a PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL shall be maintained by an
individual primarily for the sole use of his or her household and guests and
not for the purpose of profit or in connection with any business operated for
profit. No out-of-doors swimming pool intended for the use of members and their
guests of a nonprofit club or organization, or limited to house residents of a
multiple dwelling unit, block, subdivision, neighborhood, community or other
specified area of residence, shall be permitted in a single-family residence,
duplex residence or apartment district.
   TEMPORARY SWIMMING POOL. A private residential swimming pool constructed in
such a manner that it is intended to be placed on and maintained on the
property for the summer season only.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.010) (Ord. 2422, Art. 2, passed - -1999)
§ 157.02 LOCATION OF POOLS AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   A private residential swimming pool is permitted in a single-family
residence district only.
   (B)   No portion of a private residential swimming pool shall be located at
a distance of less than ten percent of the width of the owner’s lot from any
side property line or building line, nor, in any instance, shall such a pool be
located within a distance of less than six feet from any side or rear property
line or building line. Pumps, filters and pool water disinfection equipment
installations shall be located at a distance of not less than six feet from any
side property line, but are not permitted in any side yard between dwellings.
The term PORTION shall be construed as any part of the periphery of the pool
water or coping and shall not be construed so as to include walk areas.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.020)
§ 157.03 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)   No person shall proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and any
appurtenance thereto within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor
from the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   The fee for a permit for the erection or construction of a private
residential swimming pool shall be $20.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.030)
§ 157.04 PLANS AND DRAWINGS.
   (A)   All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement
or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and appurtenance for
which a permit is required shall first be presented to the Building
Commissioner for examination and approval as to proper location, construction
and use.
   (B)   All plans and drawings shall be in detail, drawn to a scale of not
less than one-eighth of an inch to a foot, on paper or cloth, in ink, or by
some process that will not fade or obliterate. All distances and dimensions
shall be accurately figured and drawings shall be made explicit and complete,
showing the lot lines and including information pertaining to the pool, walk
and fence construction, the water supply system, the drainage and water
disposal system and all appurtenances pertaining to the pool.
   (C)   All private residential swimming pools, appurtenances and water supply
and drainage systems shall be constructed in conformity with the approved plan.
If any deviation from the plan is desired, a supplementary plan covering that
portion of the work involved shall be filed for approval and shall conform to
this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.040)
§ 157.05 RECIRCULATION-TYPE POOLS REQUIRED.
   All residential swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type in which
circulation of the water is maintained through the pool by pumps, the water
drawn from the pool being clarified before being returned to the pool.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.050)
§ 157.06 CONSTRUCTION; MATERIALS.
   (A)   Private residential swimming pool walls and floor shall be constructed
of any impervious material which will provide a tight tank with white or light-
colored, finished, easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the
pool shall have a nonslip finish as smooth as possible. The side and end walls
of a pool shall present a smooth finish and shall be vertical to a depth of at
least six feet or shall have a slope or curvature meeting one of the following
conditions:
      (1)   The pool wall may be vertical for 30 inches from the water level
below which the walls may be curved to the bottom with a radius at any point
equal to the difference between the depth, at that point, and 30 inches; or
      (2)   To a depth of six feet, except as provided in division (A)(1) of
this section, the wall slope shall be not less than one foot horizontal in six
feet vertical.
   (B)   Pool walls that are to be lined with a plastic liner shall be
constructed of masonry or reinforced concrete.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.060)
§ 157.07 STRUCTURAL DESIGN.
   (A)   The walls of a residential swimming pool shall be designed to
withstand the water pressure from within and to resist the pressure of the
earth when the pool is empty, to a pressure of 2,500 pounds per square foot. In
pools not entirely lined with a plastic liner, the pool floor shall be designed
to withstand the water pressure from within and to resist the earth and
hydrostatic pressure from below when the pool is empty, to a pressure of 2,500
pounds per square foot.
   (B)   The slope of the bottom of such a pool shall conform to the following:
      (1)   Not more than one foot in each six feet in gradual slope-type
pools, where the slope is uniform for the entire length of the pool; and
      (2)   In hopper or bowled-type pools, not more than one foot in each ten
feet to a depth of four feet six inches.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.070)
§ 157.08 WALK AREAS.
   An unobstructed walk area of impervious material, not less than 36 inches
wide, shall be provided, and the surface shall be smooth, easily cleaned and of
nonslip construction. The slope of the walk shall have a pitch of at least one-
fourth of an inch to the foot, designed so as to prevent back drainage from
entering the pool.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.080)
§ 157.09 FENCES; INSPECTIONS BY BUILDING DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   A private residential swimming pool shall be enclosed by a fence. All
fence openings or points of entry into the pool area enclosure shall be
equipped with gates. The fence and gates shall be four feet in height above the
walk grade level. The fence shall enclose all sides of the swimming pool. All
gates shall be equipped with a latching device not less than six inches from
the top of the gate. The fence and gates shall be constructed of a minimum
number 9 gauge woven wire mesh corrosion resistant material, or, in the case of
wood fences, the construction method may be of any type approved by the
Building Commissioner. All fence posts shall be decay or corrosion resistant
and shall be set in concrete bases.
   (B)   An above-ground pool shall be fenced with a fence of the type
described in division (A) above, or a fence permanently affixed to the railing
of the pool complying with all other provisions of division (A) above. No gap
of more than three inches will be permitted between the lower rail of the fence
and the top of the pool wall.
   (C)   Inspections will be carried out by the Building Department or an
authorized representative of the city, with pool safety and public welfare
being the prime considerations.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.090) (Ord. 2422, Art. 1, passed - -1999)
§ 157.10 STEPS OR LADDERS.
   Provisions shall be made for egress from a private residential swimming pool
in the form of steps or ladders. At least one such means of egress shall be
located on a side of the pool at both the deep and shallow ends of the pool.
Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of nonslip material and shall
be at least three inches wide for their full length. Steps and ladders shall
have a handrail on both sides.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.100)
§ 157.11 RECIRCULATION AND FILTER SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Recirculation systems shall contain rapid pressure filters of either
the sand and gravel type, the diatomaceous earth type or an approved equal.
Sufficient filter area shall be provided to filter the entire contents of the
pool in 18 hours at the rate of not more than five gallons per square foot of
filter area per minute for sand and gravel filters and not more than three
gallons per square foot of filter area per minute for diatomaceous earth
filters. Filter tanks shall be built for a minimum of 50 pounds working
pressure and shall be supported in a manner to prevent tipping or setting.
   (B)   The recirculating pump shall have sufficient capacity to backwash at a
minimum rate of 12 gallons per minute per square foot of surface area.
   (C)   The filter system shall be equipped with the following:
      (1)   A pressure gauge on the influent piping;
      (2)   A pressure gauge on the effluent piping;
      (3)   A method of releasing the air at the top of the filter;
      (4)   A backwash sight glass that can easily be removed for cleaning; and
      (5)   An access head or hole large enough to permit inspection,
maintenance and rapid work.
   (D)   A hair and lint catcher shall be installed on the suction side of the
circulation pump to prevent hair, lint and other extraneous matter from
reaching the pump and filters. Hair and lint catchers shall be so designed that
they can be easily dismantled for cleaning and inspection and shall be so
located as to be easily accessible for cleaning. The design features shall be
as follows: Water passes through the strainer from the outside; the strainer is
made of noncorrosive material; the width or diameter of strainer openings is
not more than one-eighth of an inch; and the area of the strainer opening is at
least five times the cross-sectional area of the inlet pipe to the strainer.
   (E)   Pool piping shall be sized to permit the rate flows for filtering and
backwashing without exceeding the maximum head at which the pump will provide
such flow. In general, the water velocity in the pool piping shall not exceed
10 feet per second. The recirculation piping and fittings shall meet the
following requirements.
      (1)   The inlet fitting shall be located so as to discharge below the
pool overflow level.
      (2)   An outlet shall be placed at the deepest point in every pool for
recirculating and emptying the pool.
      (3)   A vacuum inlet fitting shall be located in an accessible position
below the water line.
      (4)   Pool recirculation piping passing through the pool structure shall
be of copper compound.
      (5)   A minimum of one recirculation system inlet shall be provided for
every 800 square feet or fraction thereof of surface area of rectangular or
oblong shaped pools, and a minimum of one recirculation system inlet shall be
provided for every 615 square feet or fraction thereof of surface area of
kidney-shaped or L-shaped pools.
      (6)   Inlets shall be placed so as to produce, so far as possible,
uniform circulation of water throughout the pool.
      (7)   A minimum of one recirculation system outlet shall be provided for
every 800 square feet or fraction thereof of surface area of all private pools.
      (8)   Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the
pool and the discharge of pool water.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.110)
§ 157.12 DISPOSAL OF WASTEWATER.
   All water discharged from a pool by the process of filter backwash or
draining of the pool shall be disposed of as follows:
   (A)   Where space and conditions are such that no hazard or unsanitary
condition may occur, swimming pool wastewater may be used for irrigation;
   (B)   All wastewater, other than that permitted for irrigation, shall be
discharged to a sewer. However, there shall be no direct connection from the
pool to the sewer. Any direct connection to the sewer shall be made from the
waste pipe of the filter only, and at point of connection a gate valve shall be
installed;
   (C)   The discharge of wastewater or any water drained from a pool shall be
at a rate not exceeding 3,000 gallons per hour; and
   (D)   Water drained from the pool shall not be discharged to the sewerage
system during periods of rain or storm.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.120)
§ 157.13 SKIMMERS.
   At least one skimming device shall be provided for every 800 square feet of
surface area or fraction thereof. Skimmers shall be built directly into the
pool wall and shall be located at least 30 feet apart. They shall adequately
remove floating oils and wastes and shall meet the following general
specifications:
   (A)   The total capacity of the skimmer or total of skimmers shall be at
least 50% of the required filter flow of the circulation system;
   (B)   All skimmers shall be automatically adjustable to a variation in water
level over a range of three inches;
   (C)   Whenever the water level of the pool recedes to a level that reaches
the lowest point of overflow (the lowest level at which skimming action can
take place), make-up water shall be added to an amount that will enable the
skimmer to function properly; and
   (D)   The overflow weir shall be of sufficient length to maintain a rate of
flow of at least 20 gallons per minute per linear foot of weir lip.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.130)
§ 157.14 WATER TREATMENT.
   Private residential pools and pool areas shall be kept in a state of
cleanliness at all times. A proper and adequate supply of chlorine or an equal
thereof shall be kept on hand at all times. A kit for testing both the amount
of residual chlorine and the degree of the pH factor shall be provided. The
following conditions shall apply to the treatment of pool water.
   (A)   If a mechanical device is used for the injection of disinfectant into
the pool water, it shall be one using chlorine compounds only and shall be
located so as to introduce the chlorine into the recirculation system ahead of
the filter. Gaseous chlorination systems shall not be used.
   (B)   Chlorine shall be added to the pool water at frequent intervals and in
such quantities to maintain a minimum free chlorine residual of 0.5 parts per
million.
   (C)   The pH factor shall be frequently checked to determine the degree of
acidity or alkalinity of the pool water. It is recommended that if this factor
reaches a point of less than 7.2 or higher than 7.8 on the scale, appropriate
correction treatment be made.
   (D)   It is recommended that the test kit used be of the color chart type
(colormetric comparator), with or without numerals on a scale.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.140)
§ 157.15 VACUUM CLEANERS.
   Every private pool shall be equipped with a vacuum cleaner to clean out
deposits settling at the bottom of the pool. Vacuum cleaners shall:
   (A)   Operate off the vacuum outlet line of the pool or of a design approved
by the Building Commissioner;
   (B)   Have a flexible hose with a minimum diameter of one and one-fourth
inches and sufficient in length to provide access to every corner of the pool
bottom from the point of vacuum outlet;
   (C)   Have a vacuum brush or tool at least 12 inches in length or the
equivalent in cross-sectional area; and
   (D)   Have a pole attachable to the vacuum brush or tool, of sufficient
length to reach the innermost center of the pool from a standing position at
the pool edge.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.150)
§ 157.16 ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS; FLOODLIGHTS.
   (A)   All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in
conjunction with private residential swimming pools shall be in conformity with
the National Electrical Code adopted in § 151.007.
   (B)   No outside current carrying electrical conductor, other than provided
by public utilities, shall cross private residential swimming pools, either
overhead or aboveground within 15 feet of the pools.
   (C)   All underground electrical wiring shall be in conduit or of
underground cable within specifications of the electrical code.
   (D)   All outside electrical appurtenances, such as switches and plug-in
outlets for the underwater lighting or filtration system of the pool, shall be
installed at a distance of not less than 15 feet from the pool and all such
switches and outlets shall be of weatherproof design.
   (E)   All outside floodlights installed and designed to light the pool area
and at a distance of less than 15 feet from the pool shall be installed at
least seven feet above the ground, and installation shall be such that the
conductor to the floodlights is installed in conformity with the National
Electrical Code. Any outside switches connected with such floodlights shall be
placed at a minimum distance of 15 feet from the pool. All the floodlights
shall be located so as not to disturb adjacent property when being used.
   (F)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter every temporary
swimming pool shall be subject to the following additional restrictions
      (1)   The pool must be G.F.I. (ground fault interceptor) protected.
      (2)   The pool shall be maintained on a 15 AMP circuit.
      (3)   Only one extension cord, to a maximum length of 100 feet, may be
used to provide electricity for the pool:
         (a)   For cords up to 50 feet at least 14-gauge wire with a G.F.I.
shall be used; and
         (b)   For cords of 50 feet to 100 feet at least 12-gauge wire with a
G.F.I. shall be used.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.160) (Ord. 2422, Art. 3, passed - -1999)
§ 157.17 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS; RESCUE EQUIPMENT; DIVING BOARDS.
   (A)   A skilled swimmer shall be present at all times when a private
residential swimming pool is in use.
   (B)   Every private residential swimming pool shall be equipped with one or
more throwing buoys, not less than 15 inches in diameter with 60 feet of three-
sixteenths of an inch manila line attached, and one or more light but strong
poles with blunted ends, not less than 12 feet in length, for making reach
assists or rescues.
   (C)   No diving board or platform more than one meter above water level
shall be installed for use in connection with any private residential swimming
pool.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.170)
§ 157.18 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE; NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No source of water other than that secured from the city waterworks
distribution system shall be used.
   (B)   A suitable substantial protective cover shall be provided and
installed over all private residential swimming pool surfaces during the
nonswimming season.
   (C)   All private pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition and all equipment shall be maintained in a satisfactory operating
condition during periods when the pool is in use.
   (D)   A lifeline shall be provided to separate the deep water from the
shallow water when used by children and nonswimmers.
   (E)   No private residential swimming pool shall be used, kept, maintained
or operated in the city, if the use, keeping, maintenance or operation is the
occasion of any nuisance or is dangerous to life or detrimental to health.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.180)
§ 157.19 PERIODIC INSPECTIONS.
   The Building Commissioner and the Health Commissioner shall periodically
inspect all private pools to determine whether or not the provisions of this
chapter regarding health, sanitation and safety applicable thereto are being
complied with.
(2000 Code, § 15.88.190)
CHAPTER 158: MOBILE HOME PARKS
Section
   
158.01   Definitions
   
158.02   Licenses and temporary permits
   
158.03   License and permit fees
   
158.04   License application
   
158.05   Park location
   
158.06   Park plan
   
158.07   Water
   
158.08   Sanitation facilities
   
158.09   Laundry facilities
   
158.10   Service buildings
   
158.11   Sewers
   
158.12   Garbage and rubbish
   
158.13   Fire extinguishers; open burning
   
158.14   Animals
   
158.15   Register of occupants
   
158.16   Cleanliness and sanitation; responsibilities of licensees and
attendants or caretakers
   
158.17   Revocation of licenses
   
158.18   Posting of licenses and temporary permits
§ 158.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME. A mobile home which does not have a flush toilet and
a bath or shower.
   INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME. Toilet and a bath or shower.
   LICENSEE. Any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park
under this chapter.
   MOBILE HOME or TRAILER COACH. Any vehicle or portable structure used or
constructed so as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public
streets or highways and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling
place for one or more persons, provided that any such structure resting in
whole on a permanent foundation shall also be considered a trailer coach or
mobile home.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE. A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for
the accommodation of one mobile home.
   MOBILE TRAILER COURT. An area of land upon which two or more occupied
trailer coaches or mobile homes are harbored for revenue purposes.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any structure designed and intended to accommodate more
than one family and includes, but is not limited to, duplex buildings, group
houses and apartment buildings.
   NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL BARRIER. Any river, pond, canal, railroad, levee,
embankment, fence or hedge.
   PARK. A mobile home park.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a temporary permit to maintain or operate a
mobile home park is issued under this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.010)
§ 158.02 LICENSES AND TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall maintain or operate a mobile home park in the city
without first obtaining a license therefor. However, the maintenance or
operation of a mobile home park in existence on the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter (Ord. 177, passed 7-22-1960) may be
continued under a temporary permit for a period of time and under conditions as
are hereinafter prescribed.
   (B)   A temporary permit, upon written request therefor, shall be issued by
the Health Department for every mobile home park in existence on the effective
date, permitting the park to be maintained and operated during the period
ending 180 days after the effective date without being subject to the
provisions of this chapter, except for those provisions which are expressly
applicable to the permittee.
   (C)   The term of the temporary permit shall be extended, upon written
request, for not more than one additional period of 180 days if:
      (1)   The permittee files an application for a license in conformity with
§
158.04 below within 90 days after the effective date;
      (2)   The permittee is of good moral character and the park plans and
specifications accompanying the application for a license comply with this
chapter and all other applicable ordinances and statutes;
      (3)   The permittee has diligently endeavored to make the existing park
conform fully to the plans and specifications submitted with the application;
or
      (4)   Failure to make the existing park conform fully to the plans and
specifications is due to causes beyond the control of the permittee.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.020)
§ 158.03 LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   The annual license fee to maintain or operate a mobile home park is
$50, plus $20 per trailer.
   (B)   The temporary permit fee for each 180-day period shall be one-half of
the annual license fee prescribed in division (A) above.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.030)
§ 158.04 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Initial license. An application for an initial mobile home park
license shall be filed with and issued by the Health Department. The
application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and shall include the
following:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The location and legal description of the mobile home park;
      (3)   A complete plan of the park in conformity with §
158.06 below;
      (4)   Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and
facilities constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park; and
      (5)   Further information as may be requested by the Department to enable
it to determine if the proposed park will comply with legal requirements.
      (6)   The application and all accompanying plans and specifications shall
be filed in triplicate. The Department shall investigate the applicant and
inspect the application and proposed plans and specifications. If the applicant
is of good moral character, and the proposed mobile home park, when constructed
or altered in accordance with the plans and specifications, will be in
compliance with this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and statutes,
the Department shall approve the application and, upon completion of the park
according to the plans, issue the license.
   (B)   Renewal license. Upon application, in writing, by a licensee for
renewal of a license, and upon payment of the annual license fee, the
Department shall issue a certificate renewing the license for another year.
   (C)   Transfer of license. Upon application, in writing, for transfer of a
license, and upon payment of the transfer fee, the Department shall issue a
transfer if the transferee is of good moral character.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.040)
§ 158.05 PARK LOCATION.
   A mobile home park may be located in any district in which multiple
dwellings are permitted. Each boundary of the park must be at least 200 feet
from any permanent residential building located outside the park, unless
separated therefrom by a unless a majority of the owners of property within the
200 feet consent, in writing, to the establishment of the park.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.050) (Ord. 2007-01-0082O, passed 1-23-2007)
§ 158.06 PARK PLAN.
   A mobile home park shall conform to the following requirements.
   (A)   The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to
ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
   (B)   A mobile home space shall consist of a minimum of 1,500 square feet,
which shall be at least 30 feet wide and clearly defined. However, a mobile
home park in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter (Ord. 177, passed 6-22-1960), which provides mobile home spaces having
a width or area less than that prescribed in this division, may continue to
operate with spaces of the existing width and area, but in no event shall any
mobile home space be less than 25 feet wide and have an area of less than 1,000
square feet.
   (C)   Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each space that there is at least
a 15 foot clearance between the homes, provided, however, that with respect to
mobile-homes parked end-to-end, the end-to-end clearance may be less than 15
feet but not less than ten feet. No mobile home shall be located closer than
ten feet from any building within the park or from any property line bounding
the park.
   (D)   A mobile home space shall abut upon a driveway of not less than 20
feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street, alley
or highway.
   (E)   A walkway, not less than two feet wide, shall be provided from the
mobile home space to a service building.
   (F)   All driveways and walkways within the park shall be hard surfaced and
lighted at night with electric lamps of not less than 25 watts each, spaced at
intervals of not more than 100 feet.
   (G)   Each park shall provide service buildings to house toilet, bathing and
other sanitation facilities and laundry facilities as prescribed in §§
158.08 and
158.09 below.
   (H)   An electrical outlet supplying at least 100 volts shall be provided
for each mobile home space.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.060)
§ 158.07 WATER.
   (A)   An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes
shall be supplied by pipes to all buildings and mobile home spaces within a
mobile home park, to meet the requirements of the park.
   (B)   Each mobile home space shall be provided with a cold water tap at
least four inches above the ground.
   (C)   An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at all times in
service buildings for bathing, washing, cleaning and laundry facilities.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.070)
§ 158.08 SANITATION FACILITIES.
   Each mobile home park accommodating dependent mobile homes shall be provided
with toilets, baths or showers, slop sinks and other sanitation facilities
which conform to the following requirements.
   (A)   Toilet facilities for males shall consist of not less than one flush
toilet and one urinal for the first 15 dependent mobile-homes or any fraction
thereof. For dependent mobile homes in excess of 15, not less than one
additional flush toilet and one additional urinal for every 15 additional
dependent mobile homes or fraction thereof shall be provided.
   (B)   Toilet facilities for females shall consist of not less than one flush
toilet for the first ten dependent mobile homes or fraction thereof. For
dependent mobile homes in excess of ten, not less than one additional flush
toilet for every ten additional dependent mobile homes or fraction thereof
shall be provided.
   (C)   Each sex shall be provided with not less than one lavatory and one
shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for the first ten
dependent mobile-homes or fraction thereof. For dependent mobile homes in
excess of ten, not less than one additional lavatory and one additional shower
or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for every ten additional
dependent mobile homes or fraction thereof shall be provided.
   (D)   Each toilet and shower or bathtub with individual dressing
accommodations, for which provision is made in divisions (A), (B) and (C)
above, shall be in a private compartment or stall.
   (E)   The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and females shall
be either in separate buildings or, if in the same building, shall be separated
by a soundproof wall.
   (F)   There shall be provided in a separate compartment or stall not less
than one flush toilet bowl receptacle for emptying bed pans or other containers
of human excreta and an adequate supply of hot running water for cleaning the
bed pans or containers.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.080)
§ 158.09 LAUNDRY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Laundry facilities shall be provided in mobile home parks in either of
the following ratios:
      (1)   Not less than one double laundry tray and one conventional wringer-
type washing machine for the first 25 mobile home spaces or any fraction
thereof, and for mobile home spaces in excess of 25, not less than one
additional double laundry tray and one additional conventional wringer-type
washing machine for every additional 25 mobile home spaces or fraction thereof;
or
      (2)   Not less than one single laundry tray and one automatic or
semiautomatic-type washing machine for the first 25 mobile home spaces or any
fraction thereof, and for mobile home spaces in excess of 25, not less than one
additional single laundry tray and one additional automatic or semiautomatic-
type washing machine for every 25 additional mobile home spaces or fraction
thereof.
   (B)   An ample number of electrical outlets shall be provided supplying
current sufficient to operate each washing machine. Sufficient drying spaces
shall be provided to accommodate the laundry of mobile home occupants if
automatic drying equipment is not supplied.
   (C)   Laundry facilities shall be either in a separate building or, if in
the same building where sanitation facilities are housed, shall be separated
from the room housing the sanitation facilities by a soundproof wall.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.090)
§ 158.10 SERVICE BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Service buildings housing sanitation and/or laundry facilities shall
be permanent structures complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes
regulating buildings, electrical installations and plumbing and sanitation
systems.
   (B)   Service buildings shall be well-lighted at all times of the day and
night, shall be well-ventilated with screened openings, shall be constructed of
the moisture-proof material, including painted woodwork, as will permit
repeated cleaning and washing, and shall be maintained at a temperature of at
least 68°F from October 1 to May 1. The floor of the service building shall be
of water-impervious material.
   (C)   Service buildings housing sanitation facilities shall be located not
closer than ten feet nor farther than 200 feet from any mobile home space upon
which a dependent mobile home is harbored.
   (D)   Service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in a
clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will menace the
health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.100)
§ 158.11 SEWERS.
   (A)   Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, lavatories, slop
sinks and laundries in service and other buildings within a park shall be
discharged into a public sewerage system in compliance with applicable
ordinances or into a private sewer and disposal plant or septic tank system of
the construction and in such a manner as will present no health hazard.
   (B)   Each mobile home space shall be provided with a trapped sewer, at
least four inches in diameter, which shall be connected to receive the waste
from the shower, bathtub, flush toilet, lavatory and kitchen sink of the mobile
home harbored in such space. The trapped sewer in each space shall be connected
to discharge the mobile home waste into a public sewerage system in compliance
with applicable ordinances or into a private sewer and disposal plant or septic
tank system of the construction and in such a manner as will present no health
hazard.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.110)
§ 158.12 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH.
   (A)   Metal garbage cans with tightly fitting covers shall be provided in
quantities adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish.
   (B)   Garbage cans shall be located not farther than 300 feet from any
mobile home space.
   (C)   The cans shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times.
   (D)   Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as frequently
as may be necessary to ensure that the garbage cans do not overflow.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.120)
§ 158.13 FIRE EXTINGUISHERS; OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Every mobile home park shall be equipped, at all times, with fire
extinguishing equipment in good working order, of such a type, size and number
and so located within the park as to satisfy applicable reasonable regulations
of the Fire Department.
   (B)   No open fire is permitted at any place which may endanger life or
property. No fire shall be left unattended at any time.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.130) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 158.14 ANIMALS.
   No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other pet animal shall
permit the animal to run at large or commit any nuisance in any mobile home
park.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.140) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 158.15 REGISTER OF OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   Each licensee and permittee shall keep a register containing a record
of all mobile home owners and occupants located within the mobile home park.
The register shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of each mobile-home occupant;
      (2)   The name and address of the owner of each mobile home and motor
vehicle by which it is towed;
      (3)   The make, model, year and license number of each mobile home and
motor vehicle;
      (4)   The state, territory or country issuing such licenses;
      (5)   The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home; and
      (6)   Whether or not each mobile home is a dependent or independent
mobile home.
   (B)   The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times
by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials whose
duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register.
The register record for each registrant shall not be destroyed for three years
following the date of his or her departure from the park.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.150)
§ 158.16 CLEANLINESS AND SANITATION; RESPONSIBILITIES OF LICENSEES AND
ATTENDANTS OR CARETAKERS.
   (A)   The licensee or permittee, or a duly authorized attendant or
caretaker, shall, at all times, keep the mobile home park and its facilities
and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition.
   (B)   The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with the licensee or
permittee, for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter to which
the licensee or permittee is subject.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.160)
§ 158.17 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The Health Department may revoke any license to maintain or operate a
mobile home park when the licensee is found guilty of a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   After the conviction, the license may be reissued if the circumstances
leading to conviction have been remedied and the park is being maintained and
operated in full compliance with law.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.170)
§ 158.18 POSTING OF LICENSES AND TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   The license or temporary permit certificate shall be conspicuously posted in
the office or on the premises of the mobile home park at all times.
(2000 Code, § 5.36.180)
CHAPTER 159: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
159.01   Purposes
   
159.02   Definitions
   
159.03   Enforcement by City Administrator
   
159.04   Duties of City Administrator
   
159.05   Determination of base flood elevation
   
159.06   Permitting requirements applicable to all floodplain areas
   
159.07   Other development requirements
   
159.08   Variances
   
159.09   Disclaimer of liability
   
159.10   Notice of violation; remedies
   
159.11   Abrogation and greater restrictions
Occupation and Use of Flood Fringe Areas
   
159.25   General requirements for flood fringe areas
   
159.26   Development permits for flood fringe areas
   
159.27   Preventing increased damages in flood fringe areas
   
159.28   Construction of the lowest floor below the base flood elevation (BFE)
in flood fringe areas
Occupation and Use of Designated Floodways
   
159.40   Applicability of subchapter
   
159.41   Development permits for designated floodways
   
159.42   Preventing increased damages; list of appropriate uses
Occupation and Use of SFHA Areas Where Floodways are not Identified
   
159.60   Development requirements generally
   
159.61   Development permits for areas where floodways are not identified
   
159.62   Preventing increased damages in areas where floodways are not
identified
   
159.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 159.01 PURPOSES.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city
by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-1-1 et seq., 1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-2, 11-30-8, and
11-31-2 and the city's home rule powers pursuant to Art. VII, Sec. 6 of the
1970 Illinois Constitution. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain this
city's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; to minimize
potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of
surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise
utilization of water and related land resources. This chapter is adopted in
order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
   (A)   To meet. the requirements of ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5, § 18(g), Rivers,
Lakes and Streams Act;
   (B)   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage
hazards to others, or creating unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
   (C)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (D)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
   (E)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and
relief operations;
   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in
the city by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program;
   (G)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified as 44 C.F.R. §§ 59 - 79, as amended;
   (H)   To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and
water resources; and
   (I)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019)
§ 159.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A non-habitable structure which is on the same parcel
of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
   ACT. An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams
of the State of Illinois, ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5, §§ 5 et seq.
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.
   APPROPRIATE USE. Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible
and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed
are as specified in §
159.42.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location
is as defined in §
159.05.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT. That portion of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also
includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more
than 180 days per year.
   CHANNEL. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or man-made drainageway, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either
perennially or intermittently and may have a dry bed from time to time.
   CHANNEL MODIFICATION. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION includes
damming, rip-rapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form
of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross-
section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g.
straightening).
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the special flood hazard area (see definition below)
used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill
or structures are placed within the floodplain. The uncompensated loss of
natural floodplain storage can increase off-site floodwater elevations and
flows.
   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE. Preconstruction
approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map. This
preconstruction approval, pursuant to this chapter, gives assurances to the
property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to
permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon
review and acceptance of as-built plans.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A letter which indicates that
FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map or
flood insurance rate map, once the as-built plans are submitted and approved.
   CONTROL STRUCTURE. A structure designed to control the rate of flow that
passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water
surface elevation.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where flood
protection should be required  include: emergency services facilities (such as
fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care
facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances). Examples
of critical facilities where flood protection is recommended include: sewage
treatment plants, water treatment plants, and pumping stations.
   DAM. All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Dams may also include weirs, restrictive
culverts or impoundment structures. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
   DESIGNATED FLOODWAY. The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that
portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally
depicted on the FEMA FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the existing
100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in
stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10%
increase in velocities.
      (1)   The floodways are designated on the countywide flood insurance rate
maps of Cook County prepared by FEMA are generally identified as such on panel
numbers 17031C0618J, 17031C0619J, 17031C0706J, 17031C0707J, 17031C0709J,
17031C0726J, 17031C0727J, 17031C0728J, and 17031C0729J dated August 19, 2008
and panel numbers 17031C0618K, 17031C0619K, and 17031C0707K dated November 1,
2019. When two floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive
floodway limit shall prevail.
      (2)   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that
are generally identified as such on panel numbers 17031C0618J, 17031C0619J,
17031C0706J, 17031C0707J, 17031C0709J, 17031C0726J, 17031C0727J, 17031C0728J,
and 17031C0729J dated August 19, 2008 and panel numbers 17031C0618K,
17031C0619K, and 17031C0707K dated November 1, 2019 on the countywide flood
insurance rate maps prepared by FEMA.
      (3)   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the
designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map
and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the designated
floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any man-made change to real estate, including:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, or placement
of a building or any addition to a building;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is
on site for more than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway
use;
         (c)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads,
bridges, or similar projects;
         (d)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site;
         (e)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction;
         (f)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or
culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving,
or other non-agricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of
materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste;
         (g)   Any other activity of man that might change the direction,
height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation
removal; and
         (h)   Substantial improvement of an existing building.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities such as re-roofing or re-surfacing of roads when there
is no increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a building has been elevated.
   EROSION. The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or
wave action.
   EXEMPT ORGANIZATION. Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per
Illinois Compiled Statutes, including state, federal or local units of
government.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1,
1990.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 C.F.R.
§§ 59-79, as amended.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the
special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOODPLAIN. That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground
surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas,
ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard
area (SFHA).
      (1)   The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the city
that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood.
The SFHAs of the city are generally identified as such on panel numbers
17031C0706J, 17031C0709J, 17031C0726J, 17031C0727J, 17031C0728J, and
17031C0729J dated August 19, 2008 and panel numbers 17031C0618K, 17031C0619K,
and 17031C0707K dated November 1, 2019 of the countywide flood insurance rate
map of the city prepared by FEMA.
      (2)   The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed
into the city are generally identified as such on panel numbers 17031C0706J,
17031C0709J, 17031C0726J, 17031C0727J, 17031C0728J, 17031C0729J dated August
19, 2008 and panel numbers 17031C0618K, 17031C0619K, and 17031C0707K dated
November 1, 2019 of the countywide flood insurance rate map prepared for Cook
County by FEMA.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood or 100-
year frequency floods plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in the
SFHA.
   FLOODWAY. See definition of DESIGNATED FLOODWAY.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized
conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice
or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; and
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS. Engineering analysis which determine
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). Official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a 100-year floodplain; amends the FIRM.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). Letter that revises base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations, floodplains or floodways as shown on an effective
FIRM.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than 180 consecutive days. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MITIGATION. Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative
effects which floodplain development activities might have on the public
health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include: excavation of
compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and  channel
restoration. Mitigation may also include those activities taken to reduce a
structure's susceptibility to flooding.
   NATURAL. When used in reference to channels, means those channels formed by
the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A
natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross-section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is re-
established. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more  natural
conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
   NAVD 88. National American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by
a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April
1, 1990.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM). The point on the bank or shore up to which
the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures, including a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and
proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude
the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a
flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies.
   PUBLIC BODIES OF WATERS. All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes,
and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were
capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or
discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the state, together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters, and
submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly
accessible thereto.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGIONAL PERMITS. Regional permits are offered for pre-approved projects
which are considered minor projects that are permissible per IDNR/OWR Part 3708
rules for Northeastern Illinois regulatory floodways. A complete listing of the
terms and conditions for specific project types can be obtained from the IDNR/
OWR website.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered in the State of
Illinois, under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 330, §§ 1 et
seq.
   REGISTERED OR LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer registered in the
State of Illinois, under the Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act,
ILCS Ch. 225, Act 325, §§ 1 et seq.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. See definition of DESIGNATED FLOODWAY.
   REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE. Development activities which do not
result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes
to the dimensions of a structure.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY. A retention facility stores stormwater runoff
without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
flood or storm.
   RIVERINE SFHA. Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified
channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.
   RUNOFF. The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
   SEDIMENTATION. The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). See definition of FLOODPLAIN.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial
improvement, actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STATEWIDE PERMITS. Statewide permits are offered for pre-approved projects
that are considered minor projects which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR Part
3700 rules. A complete listing of the statewide permits and permit requirements
can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
   STRUCTURE. See definition of BUILDING.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work
performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this
determination. The term includes repetitive loss buildings. See definition of
REPETITIVE LOSS.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
improvement of a structure taking place in which the cumulative percentage of
improvements equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before
the improvement or repair is started.
      (1)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building. This term includes structures which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.
      (2)   The term does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure.
   TRANSITION SECTION. Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from
a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice versa.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019)
§ 159.03 ENFORCEMENT BY CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The City Administrator or his designee shall be responsible for
fulfilling all of the duties listed in §
159.04.
   (B)   To fulfill those duties, the City Administrator or his designee should
first use the criteria listed in §
159.05 to determine whether the development site is located within a
floodplain.
   (C)   Once it has been determined that a site is located within a
floodplain, the City Administrator or his designee must determine whether the
development site is within a flood fringe, a designated floodway, or within a
SFHA or floodplain for which no floodway has been identified.
      (1)   If the site is within a flood fringe, the City Administrator or his
designee shall require that the minimum requirements of §§
159.25 through
159.28 be met.
      (2)   If the site is within a floodway, the City Administrator or his
designee shall require that the minimum requirements of §§
159.40 through
159.42 be met.
      (3)   If the site is located within a SFHA or floodplain for which no
detailed study has been completed and approved, the City Administrator or his
designee shall require that the minimum requirements of §§
159.60 through
159.62 be met.
   (D)   In addition, the general requirements of §
159.06 shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of §§
156.25 through
159.62.
   (E)   The City Administrator or his designee shall assure that all
subdivision proposals meet the requirements of §
159.07.
   (F)   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the City Administrator
or his designee shall review the requirements of §
159.08 to make sure they are met. In addition, the City Administrator or his
designee shall complete all notification requirements.
   (G)   In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in
this chapter, the City Administrator or his designee may take any and all
actions as outlined in §
159.10 and
159.99.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019)
§ 159.04 DUTIES OF CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Administrator or his designee shall be responsible for the general
administration and enforcement of this chapter, which shall include the
following:
   (A)   Determining the floodplain designation.
      (1)   Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a
special flood hazard area (SFHA).
      (2)   If they are in a SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway,
flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been
conducted and which drains more than one square mile.
      (3)   Check whether the development is potentially within an extended
SFHA (with a drainage area less than one square mile), indicating that the
development would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance, or
inundation which would be the basis for the applicant being required to
delineate the floodplain and floodway and be subject to the remaining sections
of this chapter.
   (B)   Professional engineer review.
      (1)   If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for
which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one
square mile, the permit shall be referred to a licensed professional engineer
under the employ or contract of the city for review to ensure that the
development meets §§
159.40 through
159.62.
      (2)   In the case of an appropriate use, the P.E. shall state in writing
that the development meets the requirements of §§
159.40 through
159.42.
   (C)   Dam safety requirements.
      (1)   Dams are classified as to their size and their hazard/damage
potential in the event of failure.
      (2)   The construction or major modification of all Class I (high hazard)
and Class II (moderate hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit.
      (3)   Some Class III (low hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety
permit, depending on the drainage area to the dam, the height of the dam and
the impounding capacity behind the dam. Most off-channel detention basins that
have an embankment are non-jurisdictional Class III dam. It is not required
that IDNR/OWR "sign off" on all non-jurisdictional Class III dams.
      (4)   A consulting engineer with dam safety knowledge can estimate a
hazard classification and determine if an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit is
required.
      (5)   A permit application submittal must be made to IDNR/OWR for the
construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams.
      (6)   Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or
impoundment structures.
   (D)   Other permit requirements. Ensure any and all required federal, state
and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit.
   (E)   Plan review and permit issuance.
      (1)   Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the
jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this chapter; and
      (2)   Issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this community when the
development meets the conditions of this chapter.
   (F)   Inspection review.
      (1)   Assure that the city receives record drawings (paper and
electronic) for each project which are certified by a licensed professional
engineer; and
      (2)   Schedule on an annual basis an inspection of the floodplain and
document the results of the inspection.
   (G)   Damage determinations. Establish procedures for administering and
documenting determinations, as outlined below, of substantial improvement and
substantial damage made pursuant to §
159.06(C)(3).
      (1)   Determine the market value or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building before the start of construction of the proposed work. In the case
of repair, the market value of the building shall be the market value before
the damage occurred and before any repairs are made.
      (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building.
      (3)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or substantial damage.
      (4)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the village and this
chapter is required.
   (H)   Elevation and floodproofing certificates. Maintain permit files
including:
      (1)   An elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of a residential or non-residential building subject
to §
159.06; and/or
      (2)   The elevation to which a non-residential building has been
floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to §
159.06.
   (I)   Records for public inspection. Maintain for public inspection and
furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies
of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, conditional
letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and
"as-built" elevation and floodproofing and/or elevation certificates for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter.
   (J)   State permits. Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to §§
159.40 through
159.62, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the city.
However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the city and shall
require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
      (1)   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the
Illinois Compiled Statutes;
      (2)   IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in §
159.02 and all other state, federal or local unit of government projects,
including projects of the city and county, except for those projects meeting
the requirements of §
159.42(A);
      (3)   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per §
159.42(C)(5);
      (4)   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to §
159.42(C)(4);
      (5)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage as indicated in §
159.42(C)(1), (2), and (8);
      (6)   Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly
navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
      (7)   Any changes in the mapped floodway or published flood profiles; and
      (8)   BFE determinations where none now exist.
   (K)   Cooperation with other agencies.
      (1)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve
the administration of this chapter;
      (2)   Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a
regulatory map within six months whenever a modification of the floodplain may
change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain map;
      (3)   Submit reports as required for the National Flood Insurance
Program; and
      (4)   Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
   (L)   Promulgate regulations. Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject however to
the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any chapter changes.
   (M)   Variances. If a variance is to be granted, review the requirements of
§
159.08 to make sure they are met. In addition, complete all notifications
requirements.
   (N)   Enforcement. In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as
required in this chapter, take any and all actions as outlined in §
159.10.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019)
§ 159.05 DETERMINATION OF BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   (A)   This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance
study for the city.
      (1)   If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is
not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be
according to the best existing data available from federal, state or other
sources, as approved by the city.
      (2)   When a party disagrees with the best available data, they shall
submit a detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better
data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and consideration prior to
any development of the site.
   (B)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs
shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance
study of Cook County prepared by FEMA dated November 1, 2019 and such
amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
   (C)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of Cook
County prepared by FEMA and dated November 1, 2019, and such amendments or
revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
   (D)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA
delineated as an "AH Zone" or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or depth)
delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Cook County panels
17031C0706J, 17031C0709J, 17031C0726J, 17031C0727J, 17031C0728J, 17031C0729J
dated August 19, 2008 and panel numbers 17031C0618K, 17031C0619K, and
17031C0707K dated November 1, 2019.
   (E)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the
remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A Zone" on the countywide flood insurance
rate map of Cook County shall be according to the best existing data available
from federal, state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an
engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine base flood
elevations.
      (1)   When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists,
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall
be determined from an accepted hydraulic model, based on current industry
standards.
      (2)   The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from
an accepted hydrologic model, based on current industry standards, or by
techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States
Geological Survey for estimating peak flood discharges.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord 2019-10-07590, passed 10-22-
2019)
§ 159.06 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS.
   In addition to the requirements found in §§
159.25 through
159.62 for development in flood fringes, designated floodways, and SFHA or
floodplains where no floodways have been identified, the following requirements
shall be met.
   (A)   Public health standards.
      (1)   No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood
protection elevation (FPE) unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed
and anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or
floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements of division (C)
of this section.
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      (4)   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer
lines and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other above ground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
      (5)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
   (B)   Carrying capacity and notification.
      (1)   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
      (2)   In addition, the city shall notify adjacent communities in writing
30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of
the watercourse.
   (C)   Protecting buildings.
      (1)   All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also known as a
SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. However, existing buildings located within a regulatory floodway
shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in §§
159.40 through
159.42. This building protection criteria applies to the following situations:
         (a)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than $1,000 or 70 square feet;
         (b)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20% or equal or
exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section;
         (c)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively. If substantially damaged the entire structure
must meet the flood protection standards of this section;
         (d)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do
not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage);
         (e)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site
for more than 180 days per year; and
         (f)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in §
159.02. This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following
methods.
      (2)   A residential or non-residential building, when allowed, may be
constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation; and
         (b)   Fill requirements:
            1.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
            2.   The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection
elevation. However, the ten foot minimum may be waived if a structural engineer
certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages due to
hydrostatic pressures;
            3.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or other structural measure;
            4.   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporate
debris or refuse materials; and
            5.   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties, and when necessary, stormwater
management techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      (3)   A residential or non-residential building may be elevated in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space,
stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or
100-year frequency flood. Designs must include a minimum of two permanent
openings, one on each wall, no more than one foot above existing grade. The
openings must have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood
elevation;
         (b)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and
aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating
debris;
         (c)   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage:
            1.   The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical,
heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility
meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation; and
            2.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the flood protection elevation provided they are waterproofed;
         (d)   No area below the flood protection elevation shall be used for
storage of items or materials;
         (e)   Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a
site for more than 180 days, shall be elevated to or above the flood protection
elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement by being tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for
the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code Part
870 or any successor provisions. In addition, all manufactured homes shall meet
the following elevation requirements:
            1.   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage
from a flood, the top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation.
            2.   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured
home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest floor is above the
base flood elevation or the chassis is at least 36 inches in height above grade
and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of equivalent strength,
whichever is less.
         (f)   Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to
meet the elevation and anchoring requirements of this division (C)(3)(f) of
this section unless:
            1.   They are on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
            2.   They are fully licensed, ready for highway use, and used only
for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as a permanent
dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
      (4)   Only a non-residential building may be structurally dry
floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that:
         (a)   A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection
elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and
capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood;
         (b)   The building design shall take into account flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of
buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice; and
         (c)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms,
floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose
of this division).
      (5)   A building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade;
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade;
         (d)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four
feet at any point;
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period
of time after a flood event;
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
      (6)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet above the
level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
      (7)   Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also
meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in §§
159.40 through
159.42. Non-conforming structures located in a designated floodway may remain
in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered in accordance
with §
159.42. A non-conforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other
natural or man-made disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds 50% of
its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this
chapter.
   (D)   Record drawings. For all developments in the SFHA, record drawings
shall be submitted to the City Administrator or his designee, before occupancy
permits will be issued. The record drawings shall be prepared by a registered
land surveyor or the licensed professional engineer who prepared the design
drawings. Three paper copies of these drawings, signed and sealed by the
surveyor or engineer, and one electronic copy, are required. Electronic files
shall be provided in Adobe Portable Document File ".pdf' formats.
   (E)   Timely construction. A development permit or approval shall become
invalid unless the start of construction, for work authorized by such permit,
is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is
suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. All
permitted work shall be completed within (insert 12 months, 18 months or a
local permit expiration period) after the date of issuance of the permit or the
permit shall expire. Time extensions, of not more than 180 days each, may be
granted, in writing, by the City Administrator or his designee. Time extensions
shall be granted only if the original permit is compliant with this chapter and
the FIRM and FIS in effect at the time the extension is granted.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019)
§ 159.07 OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   The Council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they
are known in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and
planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure
that the proposed developments are consistent with §§
159.06,
159.25 through
159.62 and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new
subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall
include a signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the plat or
plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with
the Plat Act, ILCS Ch. 725, Act 205, § 2.
   (B)   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel
trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured
home parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this
information is not available from an existing adopted study, the applicant's
engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation per §
159.05(D) and the floodway delineation per the definition in §
159.02.
   (C)   For all new subdivisions, the special flood hazard area must be shown
graphically on the plat.
   (D)   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
   (E)   The Council shall not approve any planned unit development (PUD) or
plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement
or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019) Penalty, see §
 159.99
§ 159.08 VARIANCES.
   (A)   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
designated floodway as defined in §
159.02.
      (1)   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply for a variance pursuant
to §§
160.465 through
160.470, as amended.
      (2)   The City Administrator or his designee shall review the applicant's
request for a variance and shall submit their recommendations to the Planning
and Zoning Commission in advance of the scheduled public hearing. The Planning
and Zoning Commission may recommend such conditions to granting of a variance
as it deems necessary to further the flood protection intent of this chapter.
      (3)   The City Council has final approval authority for any variation and
may approve the variation request, approve the variation with modifications or
other conditions or deny the variation request. The decision of the City
Council will be a final legislative act.
   (B)   In addition to the standards set forth in §§
160.465 through
160.470, as amended, no variance shall be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety,
beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation
of a nuisance;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public
facilities;
      (6)   The provisions of §§
159.27 and
159.62 shall still be met;
      (7)   The activity is not in a designated floodway;
      (8)   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP;
      (9)   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character
of the area involved including existing stream uses; and
      (10)   All other required state and federal permits or waivers have been
obtained.
   (C)   The City Administrator or his designee shall notify an applicant in
writing that a variance from the requirements of §
159.06 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as $25 per $100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant will acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk
and liability.
   (D)   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site
or historic structure, as defined in §
159.02, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of
divisions (A) and (B) of this section, subject to the conditions that:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure; and
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
   (E)   The findings of fact and conclusions of law made by the Planning and
Zoning Commission according to §
159.08(B), the notifications required by §
159.08(C), and a record of hearings and evidence considered as justification
for the issuance of all variances from this chapter shall be maintained by the
city in perpetuity.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019) Penalty, see §
 159.99
§ 159.09 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.
   (B)   Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made
or natural causes.
   (C)   This chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside
of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage.
   (D)   This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019)
§ 159.10 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REMEDIES.
   (A)   Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a
variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due
investigation, the City Administrator or his designee may determine that a
violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exist. The City
Administrator or his designee shall notify the owner in writing of such
violation.
   (B)   If such owner fails after ten days' notice to correct the violation:
      (1)   The city may make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court.
      (2)   The city shall record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   (C)   The City Administrator or his designee shall inform the owner that any
such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and,
therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.
      (1)   The City Administrator or his designee is authorized to issue an
order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop-work order
shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall
order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the
stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      (2)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the Council. Written notice of such hearing
shall be served on the permittee and shall state: the grounds for complaint or
reasons for suspension or revocation; and the time and place of the hearing. At
such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on his or her behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, Council shall determine
whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019)
§ 159.11 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
   (B)   Where this chapter and other ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
   (C)   This chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or
resolution which was adopted to meet the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the city passed
in order to establish initial eligibility for the program.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019)
OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS
§ 159.25 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR FLOOD FRINGE AREAS.
   Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if
protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by
proper elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions of
this chapter. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of
drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe
shall meet the requirements of this subchapter, along with the requirements of
§
159.06.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019)
§ 159.26 DEVELOPMENT PERMITS FOR FLOOD FRINGE AREAS.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law
shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a
development permit from the City Administrator or his designee.
   (B)   Submittals for a development permit shall include the following:
      (1)   The submittal shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn
to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the
property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor;
existing grade elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings.
      (2)   For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted
plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of §
159.06.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a development permit submittal, the City Administrator
or his designee shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation.
      (1)   Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher than
the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map and which has
not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
without a permit as required by this chapter is not in the SFHA and, therefore,
not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any development
located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically
connected, but shown on the current flood insurance rate map is subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The City Administrator or his designee shall maintain documentation
of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that
this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood
insurance rate map identification.
   (D)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas shall be
submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.
   (E)   The City Administrator or his designee shall require certification
from the design engineer that all federal, state and local permits, approvals
or waivers that may be required by this type of activity have been obtained.
The City Administrator or his designee shall not issue a permit unless this
certification has been obtained.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019) Penalty, see §
 159.99
§ 159.27 PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES IN FLOOD FRINGE AREAS.
   No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health
and safety.
   (A)   If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-
year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data and
obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of removing
the site from the floodplain.
   (B)   Compensatory storage.
      (1)   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
      (2)   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
      (3)   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
      (4)   All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation.
      (5)   All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019) Penalty, see §
 159.99
§ 159.28 CONSTRUCTION OF THE LOWEST FLOOR BELOW THE BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)
IN FLOOD FRINGE AREAS.
   A person who has obtained a letter of map revision based on fill that
removes a site in the flood fringe from the floodplain due to the use of fill
to elevate the site above the BFE, may apply for a permit from the city to
construct the lowest floor of a residential building below the BFE in the flood
fringe. The City Administrator or his designee shall not issue such a permit
unless the applicant has complied with all the criteria set forth in the this
section.
   (A)   Compensatory storage shall be provided per §
159.27(B).
   (B)   The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e., window
wells, access ways) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation (FPE).
   (C)   The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above the
FPE, for a minimum distance of ten feet beyond the outside face of the
structure.
   (D)   The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a
distance of 20 feet from the structure, shall be above the BFE.
   (E)   The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets all
requirements of this section and is at least five feet thick under the basement
floor slab. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the removal
or replacement of fill that was placed as part of a LOMR-F, if such fill
consists of material, including soils of similar classification and degree
permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL, SC or ML according to ASTM
standard D-2487, Classification of Soils for Engineering Purposes.
   (F)   The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic; that is, the soil
must be all of one material, and the engineering priorities must be in the same
direction.
   (G)   All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and
inspected by an Illinois licensed professional engineer, as warranted by the
site conditions.
   (H)   The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than five
below the BFE.
   (I)   There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab, and
minimum of one-quarter horsepower sump pump with a backup power supply shall be
provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at four times the
estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and away from the
building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the floor
under the effect of the seepage pressure.
   (J)   The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of
preventing backflow.
   (K)   All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand hydrostatic
pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.
   (L)   In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site, in no
case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the lot
exceed 18 inches, as measured from the previously existing natural grade. The
rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of excavation, if
necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and openly
to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of mechanical means to drain
the compensatory storage area will not be permitted.
   (M)   The builder and design engineer must certify that the design for the
development is reasonably safe from flooding in accordance with FEMA's
Technical Bulletin 10-01, and in accordance with accepted professional
practices.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019) Penalty, see §
 159.99
OCCUPATION AND USE OF DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS
§ 159.40 APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site
modification or building modification within a designated floodway. The
designated floodway for Natalie Creek, Boca Rio Ditch, the Western Tributary to
Midlothian Creek, Midlothian Creek, and Twin Lakes Reservoir shall be as
delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Cook County and
referenced in the commentary of flood insurance rate maps in §
159.02. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the
criteria in this subchapter. All floodway modifications shall be the minimum
necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also
meet the requirements of §
159.06.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019)
§ 159.41 DEVELOPMENT PERMITS FOR DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS.
   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law
shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining a
development permit from the City Administrator or his designee and IDNR/OWR.
   (A)   Submittals for a development permit shall include the following:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn
to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to
be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
      (3)   Name of stream or body of water affected;
      (4)   Description of proposed activity;
      (5)   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
      (6)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
      (7)   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if
different from the applicant;
      (8)   Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent;
      (9)   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other
authorized officer shall sign the application form;
      (10)   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the
application form;
      (11)   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the
name of the trustee by him or her as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit
shall be filed with the submittal, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by
name and address and defining the respective interests therein;
      (12)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as
a minimum:
         (a)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow;
         (b)   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance
between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), designated
floodway floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed
channel modifications, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow,
and a graphic or numerical scale;
         (c)   Cross-section views of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water
elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
         (d)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas.
This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and
the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to
mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance;
         (e)   A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any
proposed change in the designated floodway location;
      (13)   Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approval
letters that may be required for this type of development;
      (14)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of §
159.42;
      (15)   If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
submittal will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated
conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may
be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA;
      (16)   The submittal for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of
the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing ground
elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or
filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a licensed professional
engineer, licensed architect or licensed land surveyor; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevation of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the
requirements of §
159.06; and
      (17)   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
         (a)   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
         (b)   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations
or methods (see §
159.42(C)(9) to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
         (c)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each
feasible alternative identified in §
159.42(C)(9) would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body
of water affected; and
         (d)   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering
cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected.
   (B)   The City Administrator or his designee shall require certification
from the design engineer that all federal, state and local permits, approvals
or waivers that may be required by this type of activity have been obtained.
      (1)   The City Administrator or his designee shall not issue a permit
unless this certification has been obtained.
      (2)   A licensed professional engineer, under the employ or contract of
the city shall review and approve applications reviewed under this section.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019) Penalty, see §
 159.99
§ 159.42 PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES; LIST OF APPROPRIATE USES.
   (A)   The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are
appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and
which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood
heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or
impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or
channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as
called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses listed in 17 Ill. Adm.
Code Part 3708 will be allowed. The approved appropriate uses are as follows:
      (1)   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or
private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or
water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
      (2)   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring
access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities,
and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial
shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
      (3)   Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls;
      (4)   Underground and overhead utilities;
      (5)   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems,
including any related fencing (at least 50% open when viewed from anyone
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open
air pavilions and toilet facilities (four stall maximum) that will not block
flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
      (6)   Detached garages, storage sheds, or other non-habitable accessory
structures that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
      (7)   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and
taxiways and any modification thereto;
      (8)   Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:
         (a)   The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will
not exceed 1.0 foot; or
         (b)   The applicant of a short-term recreational use facility parking
lot formally agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events and
accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all overbank
flooding events;
      (9)   Designated floodway regarding, without fill, to create a positive
non-erosive slop toward a watercourse;
      (10)   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures, or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or
industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be
no more than ten feet away from the exterior wall of the existing structure,
and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the structure;
      (11)   The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building,
provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the building was
damaged to 50% or more of the market value before the damage occurred, the
building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation; and
      (12)   Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the
enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and which will not block flood flows including but not limited to,
fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios, and second story additions. If the
building is improved to 50% or more of the market value before the modification
occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will be protected from
flooding to the flood protection elevation.
   (B)   Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any
new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or
channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise non-appropriate uses in the
floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a
fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an
appropriate use.
   (C)   Within the designated floodway, the construction of an appropriate use
will be considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets the
following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with
supporting plans, calculations and data by a licensed professional engineer and
provided that any structure meets the protection requirements of §
159.06:
      (1)   Preservation of flood conveyance, so as not to increase flood
stages upstream. For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings,
on-stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost
due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
         (a)   Designated floodway conveyance, "K" = (1.486/n)(AR2/3) where "n"
is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective flow area of the cross-
section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Ven Te
Chow, Open Channel Hydraulics, (McGraw-Hill, New York 1959)).
         (b)   The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and
proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal,
state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a non-vegetative
land cover.
         (c)   Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations
of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to
IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
            1.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's length.
            2.   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section,
the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length.
            3.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a
minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length
shall be used.
            4.   Transition sections shall be provided between cross-sections
with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated floodway
delineation on adjacent properties.
            5.   All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
      (2)   Preservation of floodway storage so as not to increase downstream
flooding.
         (a)   Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or
structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
         (b)   Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at
least 1.5 times the volume of floodplain storage lost.
         (c)   Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head
loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.
         (d)   The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed
between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood
elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the existing ten-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation.
All designated floodway storage lost above the existing ten-year flood
elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All
such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse.
         (e)   If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location
of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate
through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that
the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.
         (f)   There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result
of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce
flooding at existing structure.
      (3)   Preservation of floodway velocities so as not to increase stream
erosion or flood heights.
         (a)   For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or on-
stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the
average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage for all flood events
up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
         (b)   In the case of bridges or culverts or on-stream structures built
for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows,
velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures.
      (4)   Construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and roadway
approaches.
         (a)   The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of
upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the
channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks)
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or
within recorded flood easements.
         (b)   If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood stages
greater than 0.1 feet, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a permit
for a dam or waiver.
            1.   The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be
calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in §
159.05. Bridges and culverts must be analyzed using any commonly accepted FEMA
approved hydraulic models.
            2.   Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per division (C)
(2) of this section.
            3.   Velocity increases must be mitigated per division (C)(3) of
this section.
            4.   If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used
for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be received.
            5.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge
showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by this
section.
            6.   All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be
designed per division (C)(8) of this section.
      (5)   Reconstruction or modification of existing bridges, culverts, and
approach roads.
         (a)   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and
including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of
flood damage.
         (b)   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
         (c)   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is
a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 (Floodway Construction in
Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence
before a permit is issued.
      (6)   On-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water.
         (a)   Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot when
compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency event, shall be contained within the channel banks (or
within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the
design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded
flood easements.
         (b)   A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be
obtained from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing up
water in the stream during normal or flood flow.
         (c)   All dams and impoundment structures as defined in §
159.02 shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702
(Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity involves a
modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall
be demonstrated that:
            1.   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by
providing flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater detention;
            2.   The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous
fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life
cycle, such as for spawning;
            3.   The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water
quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual bank
slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a pre-sedimentation basin;
            4.   A non-point source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants.
If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with
upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control; and
            5.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of §§
159.40 through
159.42.
      (7)   Floodproofing of existing habitable, residential and commercial
structures.
         (a)   If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction
shall be placed no further than ten feet from the outside of the building.
         (b)   Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required
for floodproofing activities.
      (8)   Excavation in the floodway.
         (a)   When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert
openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing bridge and
culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance or other appropriate
uses, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation.
         (b)   The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used
unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering
calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the
same efficiency:
            1.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's length;
            2.   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section,
the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length;
            3.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a
minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length
shall be used; and
            4.   Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and
downstream of the transition sections.
      (9)   If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall
be demonstrated that:
         (a)   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which
would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the
body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank
stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from
the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment
of a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel modification is acceptable
if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and
fish and wildlife habitat;
         (b)   Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values;
         (c)   The activity has been planned and designed and will be
constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following
criteria:
            1.   The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall
match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross-
section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously
modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be
incorporated into channel modification design, where practical;
            2.   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both
the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will
prevent erosion;
            3.   One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when
feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one
side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization
effects of the vegetation;
            4.   Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to that
which is essential for construction of the channel;
            5.   Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no
steeper than 3:1 horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Native
vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or rip-rap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as
concrete, gabions, or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives;
            6.   All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative
cover;
            7.   If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity
such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such features shall be
provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow
characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established, where
appropriate;
            8.   A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of
the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality;
            9.   New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all
items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel;
            10.   There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the
channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless
necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is
justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project; and
            11.   Unless the modification is for a public flood control
project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage
outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and
         (d)   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of §§
159.40 through
159.42.
      (10)   Seeding and stabilization plan. For all activities located in a
floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
      (11)   Soil erosion and sedimentation measures. For all activities in the
floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is
potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
         (a)   The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum
vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time soil
is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be
destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than 15 days prior to the initiation of
improvements. Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to
denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be
provided within three days after final grade is reached on any portion of the
site, and within three days to denuded areas which may not be at final grade
but will remain undisturbed for longer than 21 days.
         (b)   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any
significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement
of eroded sediments off-site or into the channel. Potential sediment control
devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion
ditches, and sediment traps and basins.
         (c)   A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width shall be
preserved and/or re-established, where possible, along existing channels (see
division (C)(16) of this section). Construction vehicle use of channels shall
be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where necessary,
to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be
restabilized immediately.
         (d)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards for Urban
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also known as the
"Green Book" and "The Illinois Urban Manual" (NRCS, 2002, or most recent
edition).
      (12)   Public flood control projects. For public flood control projects,
the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the
applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or easements
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
      (13)   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations.
         (a)   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated
floodway study, referenced in §
159.05, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data
appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted
for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
         (b)   If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of the
proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to
meet:
            1.   The requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency
flood elevations of the designated floodway conditions; and
            2.   Conditions with the receiving stream at normal water
elevations.
         (c)   If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a
private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to
be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
      (14)   Conditional letter of map revision.
         (a)   If the appropriate use would result in a change in the
designated floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the
applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and
documents necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map revision
and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway
change before a permit is issued.
         (b)   The final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA
until as-built plans or record drawings of initial filing, grading, dredging,
or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR.
         (c)   In the case of non-government projects, the municipality in
incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the
proposed conditional designated floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval
can be given.
         (d)   No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place
until a conditional approval is issued.
         (e)   After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no
activities shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is
issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
      (15)   Professional engineer's supervision. All engineering analyses
shall be performed by or under the supervision of a licensed professional
engineer.
      (16)   For all activities in the floodway involving construction within
25 feet of the channel, the following criteria shall be met:
         (a)   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at
least 25 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
         (b)   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the
construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction.
      (17)   After receipt of conditional approval of the designated floodway
change and issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of map revision,
construction as necessary to change the floodway designation may proceed but no
buildings or structures or other construction that is not an appropriate use
may be placed in that area until the designated floodway map is changed and a
final letter of map revision is received. The designated floodway map will be
revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the "as-built"
plans.
   (D)   Development activities in delegated communities requiring state
review. For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the
following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and
concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or
county-delegated state permitting authority in the floodway.
      (1)   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed
bridge pursuant to division (C)(4) of this section.
      (2)   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, pursuant to division (C)(5) of this section.
      (3)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
storage pursuant to division (C)(1), (C)(2) and (C)(8) of this section.
      (4)   The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in §
159.02) and all other federal, state, or local units of government projects,
including projects of the municipality or county.
      (5)   An engineer's determination that a proposed bridge affected by
backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller
opening.
      (6)   Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood
profiles.
      (7)   Projects in public bodies of water.
   (E)   Other permits.
      (1)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a
development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless
the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is
not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5, §§ 5 et
seq.
      (2)   No correspondence from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the project
meets the requirements of Regional Permit 3.
      (3)   No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated
this responsibility to the city.
   (F)   Permits for dams.
      (1)   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a
dam as defined in §
159.02 per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall
obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of a dam.
      (2)   If the City Administrator or his designee finds a dam that does not
have an IDNR/OWR permit, the City Administrator or his designee shall
immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office.
      (3)   If the City Administrator or his designee finds a dam which is
believed to be in unsafe condition, the City Administrator or his designee
shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office,
and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
   (G)   Activities that do not require a licensed professional engineer's
review. The activities in Regional Permit 3 may be permitted without a licensed
professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements. Regional
Permit 3 authorizes certain items to be constructed or activities to be
performed in the floodway under certain circumstances, including underground
and overhead utilities, storm and sanitary sewer outfalls, sidewalks, patios,
athletic fields, playground equipment and streambank protection activities.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019) Penalty, see §
 159.99
OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA AREAS
WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED
§ 159.60 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.
   In SFHA or floodplains, (including AE, AH, AO and Unnumbered A Zones) where
no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile,
no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the
proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and
structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of
the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019)
§ 159.61 DEVELOPMENT PERMITS FOR AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by
state law, shall commence any development in a SFHA or floodplain without first
obtaining a development permit from the City Administrator or his designee.
   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided
by the City Engineer.
      (1)   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn
to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and
all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed
engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings
and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
159.06.
      (2)   The application for a development permit shall also include the
following information:
         (a)   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose,
and intended use;
         (b)   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
         (c)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
         (d)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include
as a minimum:
            1.   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow;
            2.   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is in or near a commercially navigable body of water), floodplain
limit, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphical
or numerical scale;
            3.   Cross-section views of the project perpendicular to the flow
of floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed
conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view,
existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency
flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical
scales (horizontal and vertical); and
            4.   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities, and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.
      (3)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of §
159.62.
      (4)   Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approvals
that may be required for this type of development.
   (C)   Based on the best available existing data according to federal, state
or other sources, the City Engineer shall compare the elevation of the site to
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
      (1)   Should no elevation information exist for the site, the developer's
engineer shall calculate the elevation according to §
159.05(D).
      (2)   Any development located on land that can be shown to have been
higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map
identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   The City Engineer shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate
map identification.
   (D)   The City Engineer shall require certification from the design engineer
that all federal, state and local permits, approvals or waivers that may be
required by this type of activity have been obtained. The City Engineer shall
not issue a permit unless this certification has been obtained.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019) Penalty, see §
 159.99
§ 159.62 PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES IN AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT
IDENTIFIED.
   (A)   No development in the SFHA where a floodway has not been determined
shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural
hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair
existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be
minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter.
   (B)   Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been determined,
the following standards shall apply:
      (1)   The developer shall have a licensed professional engineer state in
writing and show through supporting plans, calculations, and data that the
project meets the engineering requirements of §
159.42(C)(1) through §
159.42(C)(9) for the entire floodplain as calculated under the provisions of §
159.05(D).
      (2)   As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study
performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to IDNR/OWR
and FEMA for acceptance as a designated floodway.
      (3)   Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR and FEMA, the developer
shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of §§
159.40 through
159.42 for the designated floodway. The floodway shall be defined according to
the definition in §
159.02.
      (4)   A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first
obtains an IDNR/OWR permit or written documentation that a permit is not
required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5, §§ 5 et seq.
      (5)   No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the division has
delegated permit responsibility to the city per 17 Ill. Adm. Code, Part 3708,
for designated floodways.
      (6)   Permits for dams.
         (a)   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of
a dam as defined in §
159.02 per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall
obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of a dam.
         (b)   If the City Engineer finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR
permit, the City Engineer shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett
office.
         (c)   If the City Administrator or his designee finds a dam which is
believed to be in unsafe condition, the City Administrator or his designee
shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office,
and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
   (C)   The following activities may be permitted without a licensed
professional engineer's review or calculation of base flood elevation and
designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of
this chapter.
      (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 2;
      (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit No. 3;
      (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit No. 4;
      (4)   Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit
No. 5;
      (5)   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 6. Activities (not involving fill or positive change in
grade) are covered by this permit;
      (6)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7;
      (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8;
      (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 9;
      (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10;
      (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit No. 11;
      (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings
meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 12;
      (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 13;
      (13)   Special uses of public waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 14; and
      (14)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   (D)   The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse
shall be maintained.
   (E)   Compensatory storage.
      (1)   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
      (2)   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
      (3)   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
      (4)   All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All such excavations
shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019) Penalty, see §
 159.99
§ 159.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for each offense.
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008; Am. Ord. 2019-10-0759O, passed 10-22-
2019)
CHAPTER 160: ZONING
Section
   
160.01   Incorporation by reference
§ 160.01 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.
   Zoning regulations adopted in Ordinance No. 2014-03-0487O, as amended from
time to time, are incorporated herein as if set out in full. They may be viewed
on the city’s website.
(Ord. 2014-03-0487O, passed 3-11-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-08-0507O, passed 8-12-
2014; Am. Ord. 2014-08-0510O; passed 8-26-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-09-0518O, passed
9-9-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-11-0524O, passed 11-11-2014; Am. Ord. 2016-01-0578O,
passed 1-12-2016; Am. Ord. 2016-09-0618O, passed 9-13-2016; Am. Ord. 2017-04-
0637O, passed 4-11-2017; Am. Ord. 2017-10-0664O, passed 10-24-2017; Am. Ord.
2017-12-0675O, passed 12-12-2017; Am. Ord. 2018-03-0683O, passed 3-13-2018; Am.
Ord. 2018-06-0693O, passed 6-26-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-09-0704O, passed 9-25-2018;
Am. Ord. 2019-04-0730O, passed 4-9-2019; Am. Ord. 2019-11-0761O, passed 11-12-
2019; Am. Ord. 2019-11-0762O, passed 11-12-2019; Am. Ord. 2019-11-0770O, passed
11-26-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-02-0783O, passed 2-25-2020; Am. Ord. 2021-03-0825O,
passed 3-9-2021; Am. Ord. 2021-03-0829O, passed 3-23-2021; Am. Ord. 2021-05-
0838O, passed 5-11-2021; Am. Ord. 2021-05-0839O, passed 5-11-2021; Am. Ord.
2021-06-0848O, passed 6-8-2021; Am. Ord. 2021-08-0860O, passed 8-10-2021; Am.
Ord. 2021-10-0868O, passed 10-12-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-05-0909O, passed 5-24-
2022; Am. Ord. 2022-11-0936O, passed 11-22-2022; Am. Ord. 2023-02-0957O, passed
2-28-2023; Am. Ord. 2024-05-1031O, passed 5-14-2024; Am. Ord. 2025-04-1069O,
passed 4-22-2025)
CHAPTER 161: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
   
161.01   Incorporation by reference
§ 161.01 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.
   Subdivision regulations adopted in Ordinance 2014-06-0498O, as amended from
time to time, are incorporated herein as if set out in full. They may be viewed
on the city’s website.
(Ord. 2014-06-0498O, passed 6-10-2014; Am. Ord. 2016-09-0619O, passed 9-13-
2016)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
         
I.   USE OF LAND
         
II.   PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS
         
III.   TAXATION
         
IV.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: USE OF LAND
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
2006- 2-14-
02-   2006   Granting a rear yard setback variation for 14906 Park Avenue
0002O
2006- 2-14-  Granting a special use permit for a multi-family planned unit development,
02-   2006   concept plan approval and preliminary plat approval
0003O
2006- 2-28-
02-   2006   Approving a final plat of subdivision for Oak Forest Commons
0004O
2006- 2-28-  Granting a special use permit for a convent and accessory child day care
02-   2006   facility in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District
0005O
2006- 3-14-  Granting a special use permit for a mixed use condominium and commercial
03-   2006   planned unit development, and concept and final plan approval
0009O
2006- 3-14-
03-   2006   Granting a rear yard setback variation for 15580 Natalie Drive
0010O
2006- 4-11-  Granting a special use permit for the construction of a second floor addition
04-   2006   to a single-family residence in B-3 Zoning District, 15401 S. Lamon Avenue
0013O
2006- 4-25-
04-   2006   Granting site plan approval for 15324 South Cicero Avenue
0022O
2006- 4-25-
04-   2006   Granting site plan approval for 15711 South Cicero Avenue
0023O
2006- 5-9-   Ratifying the vacation of and conveying title to certain platted unimproved
04-   2006   right-of-way
0025O
2006- 6-13-  Granting a special use permit for a bank to operate a drive-up facility
06-   2006   associated with a bank facility within the B-2 General Commercial District,
0029O        5520 West 159th Street
2006- 7-11-
07-   2006   Granting a rear yard setback variation for 14858 Parkside Avenue
0042O
2006- 9-26-
09-   2006   Granting a maximum rear yard lot coverage variation for 16038 Long Avenue
0058O
2006- 9-26-  Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement and authorizing
09-   2006   the transfer of certain property located within the City of Oak Forest
0059O
2006- 11-14-
11-   2006   Granting a rear yard setback variation for a three-season room
0065O
2006- 12-12- Granting a special use permit for yard requirements to construct a single-
12-   2006   family home within the R-5 Planned Residential District
0071O
2007- 1-23-  Granting a special use permit for a drive- through bank facility with a drive-
01-   2007   through ATM facility in the B-2 General Commercial District
0081O
2007- 3-27-  Amending the official zoning district map and establishing zoning for certain
03-   2007   property
0092O
2007- 4-10-  Approving a redevelopment agreement for the Gateway Corridor Metra site
04-   2007   redevelopment at 159th Street and Cicero Avenue
0093O
2007-        Proposing amendment of the TIF #1 redevelopment plan and project, confirmation
05-   5-8-   of the redevelopment project area and confirmation of tax increment allocation
0104O 2007   financing therefore, convening a joint review board and calling a public
             hearing in connection therewith
2007- 5-22-  Amending the City of Oak Forest official zoning district map, as amended, and
05-   2007   establishing zoning for certain property
0105O
2007- 5-22-  Granting B-3 Planned Commercial District site plan approval for 15426 South
05-   2007   Cicero Avenue, Elite Restaurant and Banquet
0106O
2007- 5-22-  Granting B-3 Planned Commercial District site plan approval for 15600 South
05-   2007   Cicero Avenue, Beggar’s Pizza
0107O
2007- 6-26-  Granting front yard and height variations to construct a fence in the front
06-   2007   yard at 16114 Latrobe Avenue
0113O
2007- 7-24-  Granting a special use permit for a church to operate an accessory child day
07-   2007   care facility in the B-2 General Commercial District
0115O
2007- 8-14-  Granting a variation to construct in the front yard, 4936 - 42 West 159th
08-   2007   Street
0118O
2007- 9-11-  Redesignating the TIF district No. 1 redevelopment project area pursuant to
09-   2007   the Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act
0124O
2007- 9-25-  Granting a special use permit to operate an auto repair business in the B-
09-   2007   2 General Commercial District
0127O
2007- 11-13- Granting a special use permit for a church to operate in an existing building
11-   2007   in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District
0133O
2008- 1-22-  Granting a special use permit for a drive- through pharmacy facility in the B-
01-   2008   1 Local Commercial District, NWC of 159th Street and Cicero Avenue, lot 3 of
0150O        the Oak Forest Gateway Corridor development
2008- 3-25-  Granting a special use permit for a drive-up bank facility in the B-1 Local
03-   2008   Commercial District; NWC of 159th Street and Cicero Avenue, lot 1 of the Oak
0163O        Forest Gateway Corridor development
2008- 6-24-  Granting a special use permit for a gas station in the B-2 General Commercial
06-   2008   District
0189O
2008- 8-26-  Granting B-3 Planned Commercial District site plan approval for 15427 South
08-   2008   Cicero Avenue, Taps Pub
0198O
2008- 9-9-   Granting a front yard setback variance to construct an addition to a single-
09-   2008   family home at 14801 Parkside Avenue
0200O
2008- 10-28- Granting a side yard setback variance for an accessory structure located at
10-   2008   15961 Jamie Court
0206O
2009- 1-13-  Granting a front yard setback variance to construct an eave on a front porch
01-   2009   to a single-family home at 5565 Ann Marie Lane
0215O
2009- 2-10-  Granting B3 Planned Commercial District site plan approval for 15426 South
02-   2009   Cicero Avenue
0218O
2009- 5-26-  Granting a special use permit for a support group services center in the M2
05-   2009   Heavy Manufacturing District, 16405 South Frontage Road
0237O
2009- 6-9-
06-   2009   Granting a variance to construct an oversized shed at 17004 Forest Avenue
0243O
2010- 4-27-  Granting an amendment to a special use permit and planned unit development for
04-   2010   the Gateway Corridor Development, northwest corner of 159th Street and Cicero
0288O        Avenue.
2014- 7- -   Granting a special use permit allowing the use of a display window electronic
07-   2014   message center of Quick India Pak at 5233 W. 159th Street
0505O
2016- 1-12-  Granting a special use permit to allow an automotive dealer in the I-
01-   2016   1 Industrial District
0579O
2016- 6-14-  Granting a special use permit allowing construction of an electronic message
06-   2016   center signage at 6040-6080 West 159th Street, Golfview Shopping Center
0602O
2016- 6-28-  Amending TIF #3 to extend life of tax increment financing district beyond
06-   2016   original termination date
0603O
2016- 6-28-  Amending TIF #3 by revising the redevelopment project area legal description,
06-   2016   the general street location and the map of the redevelopment project area
0604O
2016- 6-28-  Amending TIF #3 by revising the redevelopment project area legal description,
06-   2016   the general street location and the map of the redevelopment project area
0605O
2016- 7-12-  Designating West 159th Street Corridor Tax Increment Financing District
06-   2016   Redevelopment Project Area as TIF District #7
0608O
2016- 7-12-  Approving execution of intergovernmental agreement between Oak Forest, several
06-   2016   south suburban municipal corporations and Cook County amending the boundaries
0610O        of the Cal Sag Enterprise Zone
2016- 10-25-
10-   2016   Revising legal description for TIF #3 to correct scrivener's error
0620O
2017- 1-24-  Granting special use permit to allow a multi-family planned unit development
01-   2017   in the R4 Single-Family Residence District - 16131 Grove Avenue
0631O
2017- 1-24-
01-   2017   Revising legal description for TIF #3 to correct scrivener's error
0632O
2017- 2-14-
02-   2017   Granting Level 3 Design Approval for B&M Auto - 6100 W. 159th Street
0633O
2017- 3-28-  Granting special use permit to allow a gasoline station with an associated
03-   2017   convenience store in the C1 Local Commercial District - 5347 West 159th Street
0636O
2017- 4-11-  Granting special use permit and variations for a drive-thru associated with a
04-   2017   full service in the C2 General Service Commercial District - 6441 West 159th
0638O        Street
2017- 4-11-
04-   2017   Granting Level 3 Design Review Approval for McDonalds - 5441 West 159th Street
0639O
2017- 5-23-  Declaring surplus revenue in TIF #1 and authorizing payment of that surplus to
05-   2017   Cook County Treasurer for distribution to affected taxing districts on pro
0645O        rata basis
2017- 6-13-
06-   2017   Vacating and conveying title to Lavergne Avenue Row
0646O
2017- 6-27-  Granting a Level 3 Design Review Permit Approval for Kevin Vernick - 5338 W.
06-   2017   159th Street
0648O
2017- 6-27-  Granting a special use permit to allow a used automobile dealership in the C3
06-   2017   District for Sergio Garcia and Kayode Fleming - 15350 Cicero Avenue
0649O
2017- 8-8-   Granting a special use permit to allow a used automobile dealership in the C2
08-   2017   District for Ata Ihmoud - 5904 W. 159th Street
0653O
2017- 8-8-
08-   2017   Vacating and conveying title to Sheila Court Row
0654O
2017- 8-22-  Granting a special use permit to allow a hall and banquet room in the C2
08-   2017   District for Kirk Fallah - 6080 W. 159th Street
0655O
2017-        Granting a special use permit to allow a boat repair and maintenance facility,
08-   8-22-  considered similar in use to that of an automobile mechanical and electrical
0656O 2017   repair and maintenance facility, with boat sales as an accessory use in the C3
             District for Donald Coday - 15335 Cicero Avenue
2018- 1-9-   Modifying an existing special use permit to allow the expansion of an existing
01-   2018   self-storage facility at Cubesmart Self-Storage, 4325 Frontage Road in the I1
0678O        District
2018-        Approving a special use permit to allow a hotel in the I1 District to allow a
03-   3-13-  variation to allow 164 parking spaces where 199 are required and a variation
0684O 2018   to allow a four story principal structure where three stories are permitted at
             the property commonly referred to as 4375 Frontage Road
2017- 5-24-
05-   2018   Granting Level 3 Design Review Approval, Fierke Education Center
0691O
2018- 5-22-  Granting a special use permit amendment to allow a time extension for a hall
05-   2018   and banquet room in the C2 District for Kirk Fallah - 6080 W. 159th Street
0691O
Res.
2018- 6- -   Approving a redevelopment agreement between Halikias Family Company, LLC
06-   2018
0333R
2018- 7-10-  Granting a variation to allow a six foot fence to be installed in the front
07-   2018   yard of a property zoned R3 for Ron Miller - 15227 Kilpatrick Avenue
0694O
2018-        Approving a special use permit to allow a planned development concept plan for
07-   7-24-  a residential dwelling unit addition to an existing restaurant and the
0697O 2018   expansion of an existing outdoor patio at the property commonly referred to as
             6150 W. 159th Street
Res.
2018- 9-25-  Approving a minor plat of subdivision at the property commonly referred to as
09-   2018   16001 and 16005 Lorel Avenue in the R3 District
0339R
2018- 9-25-  Granting a special use permit to allow an automotive mechanical and electrical
09-   2018   repair and maintenance shop at 5434 W. 159th Street in the C2 District - 5434
0702O        W. 159th Street
2018- 9-25-  Granting a major amendment to a special use permit to change the permit holder
09-   2018   for a used automobile dealership in C2 District - 5904 W. 159th Street
0703O
2018- 10-23- Approving a special use permit to approve a planned development concept plan
10-   2018   concurrently with a planned development final plan for property commonly
0705O        referred to as 16250 Cicero Avenue
2018- 11-13- Approving a variation to allow reduction in the amount of required parking
11-   2018   stalls and encroachment of proposed parking stalls into the required side yard
0706O        in relation to construction of an accessory structure at 15601 Central Avenue
2018- 11-13-
11-   2018   Granting Level III design review permit approval - First Secure Bank
0707O
2018- 11-13- Granting a special use permit to allow automotive parts and accessories store
11-   2018   at 15324 Cicero Avenue
0708O
2018- 12-11-
12-   2018   Granting Level III design permit approval - Heidner Properties Strip Center
0741O
2019- 1-8-   Granting a special use permit to allow an automotive oil change and
01-   2019   lubrication shop at 6230 E. 159th Street
0716O
2019- 1-8-   Granting a special use permit to allow an electronic message center on a new
01-   2019   ground sign larger than the maximum area permitted at 5201 - 5211 W. 159th
0717O        Street
2019- 2-25-  Approving a variation to allow the reduction of required parking stalls at
02-   2019   6040 - 6080 W. 159th Street
0721O
2019- 4-23-  Approving a planned development final plan for property at 6150 W. 159th
04-   2019   Street
0737O
2019- 7-9-   Granting a special use permit to allow an automotive mechanical and electrical
07-   2019   repair and maintenance shop at 5135 W. 159th Street
0744O
2019- 7-9-
07-   2019   Granting Level 3 design review permit approval at 5233 W. 159th Street
0745O
2019- 8-13-  Granting a variation to allow a six-foot fence to be installed in the front
08-   2019   yard of a property at 15920 Latrobe Avenue
0749O
2019- 8-27-
08-   2019   Amending current existing Cal Sag Enterprise Zone
0752O
2019- 9-24-
09-   2019   Granting Level 3 design review permit approval at 5200 W. 159th Street
0755O
2019- 11-26- Granting a special use permit to allow a psychic reader at 15120 S. Cicero
11-   2019   Avenue
0767O
2019- 11-26- Granting a special use permit to allow an automobile dealer at 7043 W. 153rd
11-   2019   Street
0768O
2019- 11-26- Granting a special use permit to allow a gasoline station with a convenience
11-   2019   store at 15229 S. Cicero Avenue
0769O
2019- 12-10- Granting a variation to allow a six foot fence to be installed in the front
12-   2019   yard of a property zoned R2 for Mike Duffin - 15051 Ridgeland Avenue
0775O
2019- 1-28-  Granting a special use permit to allow an automotive mechanical and electrical
10-   2020   repair and maintenance shop at 5135 W. 159th Street
0760O
2020- 2-25-  Granting a variation to allow a temporary sign beyond the standard time
02-   2020   allowance of a temporary sign permit at 15000 Cicero Avenue
0782O
2020- 5-26-  Granting a special use permit to allow child day care services at 5488-5496 W.
05-   2020   159th Street
0793O
2020- 5-26-
05-   2020   Granting Level 3 Design Review Approval at 5950 W. 159th Street
0794O
2020-        Granting a special use permit to allow an automotive mechanical and electrical
06-   - -    repair and maintenance shop at 15330 S. Cicero Avenue
0796O
2020- 6-23-  Granting a variation to allow a six foot fence to be installed in the front
06-   2020   yard of a property zoned R3 for Kris Mazurek - 17092 Bonnie Trail West
0798O
2020- 8-25-  Granting a special use permit to allow an automotive mechanical and electrical
08-   2020   repair and maintenance shop at 5434 W. 159th Street
0801O
2020- 8-25-  Granting a variation to allow a four-foot fence to be installed in the front
08-   2020   yard of a property zoned R4
0802O
2020- 10-27- Granting a variation allowing a structural alteration of a nonconforming use
10-   2020   in a structure not designed for a permitted use in a property zoned C3
0809O
2020- 11-10- Granting a special use permit for Foresight Children Learning Center to
11-   2020   operate a child day care service for a property located at 5101-5103 W. 159th
0811O        Street
2021- 2-23-
02-   2021   Granting level 3 design review permit approval at 15211 S. Cicero Avenue
0824O
2021- 3-23-
03-   2021   Granting a zoning map amendment at 14900 S. Cicero Avenue
0828O
2021- 5-25-  Granting a variation to allow a 960 square foot garage in an area of property
05-   2021   zoned R1 at 5001 152nd Street
0843O
2021- 5-25-  Granting a special use permit to allow a drive-up facility at 5201 W. 167th
05-   2021   Street
0844O
2021- 6-8-   Approving a special use permit to allow a planned development concept plan for
06-   2021   a residential dwelling unit addition to a new dental office and a variation
0850O        approval for a rear yard setback at 6154 W. 159th Street
2021- 7-13-  Granting a special use permit to allow a child day care services at 5488- 5496
07-   2021   W. 159th Street
0853O
2021- 8-10-  Approving a planned unit development final plan in substantial compliance with
08-   2021   the concept plan for 6154 W. 159th Street
0857O
             Authorizing a special use permit to allow a planned development concept plan
2021- 9-28-  for a mixed use development including 75 multi-family units and 16 row homes
09-   2021   including a variation for height, stories, and parking variations for number
0867O        of parking spaces and dimensions at 15644 Cicero Avenue, 15659 Lamon Avenue,
             4820 157th Street, and 4816 157th Street
2021- 11-23- Granting a variation to allow a sign on a wall not parallel to a street or
11-   2021   providing a customer entrance of a property
0876O
2021- 11-23- Authorizing substitute notice requirements for special use at 5940 W. 159th
11-   2021   Street - Island Thyme LLC.
0877O
2021- - -    Granting a special use permit to allow an automobile dealership at 16341
12-   2021   Frontage Road Unit B in the I1 Industrial District
0880O
2021- - -    Granting a special use permit to allow a cannabis dispensary at 5940 W. 159th
12-   2021   Street in the C2 General Service Commercial District
0881O
2022- 1-11-  Granting a special use permit to allow an automobile dealership at 15350 -
01-   2022   15360 S. Cicero Avenue in the C3 Central Business District
0883O
2022- 2-2-   Granting a zoning map amendment at 4250 W. 167th Street. 4201 W. 166th Street,
02-   2022   and 4207 W. 166th Street
0887O
2022- 2-8-   Granting a variation to allow a monument sign beyond the height allowance of a
02-   2022   monument sign of a property zoned C2 - General Service Commercial District at
0888O        4250 W. 167th Street
2022- 2-22-  Approving an amendment to a planned development final plan for property at
02-   2022   6154 W. 159th Street
0892O
2022- 3-8-   Authorizing an extension of time (4250 W. 167th Street - Kensington
03-   2022   Development Partners, Inc.)
0895O
2022- 5-10-
05-   2022   Vacating right- of-way (Kilpatrick Avenue)
0904O
2022- 5-24-  Authorizing the redevelopment agreement for the project located at Cicero
05-   2022   Avenue and 157th Street (Deshe at 157th LLC)
0905O
2022-        Approving a planned development final plan in substantial conformance with the
05-   5-24-  concept plan as approved by Ord. 2021-09-0867O for the property commonly
0906O 2022   referred to as 15644 Cicero Ave., 15659 Lamon Ave., 4820 157th St., and 4816
             157th St.
2022- 5-24-  Granting a special use permit to allow an outdoor beer garden/eating patio at
05-   2022   5420 W. 159th St. in the C2 - General Service Commercial District (Grey’s
0907O        Social)
2022- 5-24-  Granting a special use permit to allow an automotive mechanical and electrical
05-   2022   repair and maintenance shop at 16430 - 16436 S. Kilbourne Ave. in the I1 -
0908O        Industrial District (iQuality Logistics)
2022- 5-24-  Granting a special use permit to allow a psychic reading establishment at 5251
05-   2022   W. 147th St. in the C1 - Local Commercial District (Just Witchy’s)
0910O
2022-        Approving an amendment to a planned development final plan in substantial
07-   7-12-  conformance with the concept plan as approved by Ord. 2016-02-0585O for the
0914O 2022   property commonly referred to as 15848 S. Cicero Ave. (Gateway Lot 2 - First
             in Realty Executives)
2022- 8-9-   Approving a planned development final plan for the property at 4758 W. 151st
08-   2022   St. (Carefree Village, LP)
0921O
2022- 9-27-  Granting a special use permit to allow a drive-thru and an outdoor eating
09-   2022   patio at 5410 W. 159th Street in the C2 - General Service Commercial District
0926O
2022- 10-11- Granting a special use permit to allow a drive-thru at 16200 S. Cicero Avenue
10-   2022   in the C3 - Central Business District
0927O
2022- 10-11- Granting a variation to allow a second shed and a 288 square foot shed in a
10-   2022   lot allowed only 192 square foot floor area of a property zoned R2 - Single
0930O        Family District
2022- 11-2-  Granting a special use permit to allow a pole sign and a variation for an
11-   2022   electronic message center not displayed between eight feet and ten feet at
0934O        15201 S. Central Avenue in the IB - Institutional Building District
2022- 11-2-  Granting a special use permit to allow a tattoo parlor at 15701 Waverly Avenue
11-   2022   in the C3 - Central Business District
0937O
2022- 11-22- Granting a variation to allow four ground signs on one property in the IB -
11-   2022   Institutional Building District at 15201 S. Cicero Avenue
0935O
2022- 11-22- Granting extension of special use authorizing a cannabis dispensary (Island
11-   2022   Thyme, LLC - 5940 W. 159th Street)
0938O
2022- 12-13- Granting a variation to allow the reduction of required parking stalls at the
12-   2022   property located at 15150 - 15158 S. Cicero Avenue in the C3 - Central
0947O        Business District
2022- 12-13- Granting a variation to allow the reduction of required parking stalls at the
12-   2022   property located at 15417 - 15427 S. Cicero Avenue in the C3 - Central
0948O        Business District
2022- 12-13- Granting a special use permit to allow a pole sign and a variation for height
12-   2022   and an electronic message center not displayed between eight feet and ten feet
0949O        at 15548 S. Cicero Avenue in the C3 - Central Business District
2022- 12-13- Approving redevelopment agreement for the LPC Oak Forest, LP Project (east of
12-   2022   Cicero Avenue, south of 167th Street, and northwest of I-57)
0952O
2023- 3-14-  Granting a special use permit to allow drive-up donation in the C3 - Central
03-   2023   Business District at 15441 S. Cicero Avenue
0959O
2023- 4-11-  Granting approval of a plat of easement vacation for public utilities at 4250
04-   2023   W. 167th Street
0961O
2023- 4-11-  Granting approval of a public utility and drainage easement grant agreement at
04-   2023   4250 W. 167th Street
0962O
2023- 4-11-
04-   2023   Granting approval of a plat of easement at 4250 W. 167th Street
0963O
2023- 4-25-  Granting a special use permit to allow a tattoo parlor in the C2 - General
04-   2023   Service Commercial District at 4849 W. 167th Street
0970O
2023- 4-25-  Granting a special use permit to allow a youth indoor recreation facility in
04-   2023   the C2 - General Service Commercial District at 15801 S. Oak Park Avenue
0971O
2023- 5-9-   Amending Ordinance 2014-08-0508O granting a special use permit for the use of
05-   2023   a gun club with retail in the C2 - General Service District
0974O
2023- 5-23-  Granting a variation to allow a 224 square foot shed in a lot allowed only 168
05-   2023   square foot floor area of a property zoned R2 - Single Family District
0976O
2023- 6-27-  Granting a special use permit to allow an outdoor beer garden/eating patio and
06-   2023   a variation for parking requirements in the C3 - Central Business District at
0980O        15548 S. Cicero Avenue
2023- 7-25-  Granting a special use permit to allow an automotive mechanical and electrical
07-   2023   repair and maintenance shop in the C2- General Service commercial District at
0984O        6240 W. 159th Street
2023- 8-8-   Correcting formerly approved special use permit Ordinance 2023-05-09740 for
08-   2023   the use of a gun club in the C2- General Service Commercial District
0986O
2023- 8-22-  Granting a special use permit to allow an outdoor beer garden/eating patio in
08-   2023   the C1- Local Commercial district at 6119 W. 147
0990O
2023- 8-22-  Granting a variation for parking requirements in the R6 Multi-Family
06-   2023   Residential District at 16035 S. Laramie Avenue
0992O
2023- 8-22-  Approving a planned development for the property commonly referred to as 14650
08-   2023   S. Central Avenue
0994O
2023- 9-12-
09-   2023   Approving ROW parking use and maintenance agreement
0445R
2023- 9-26-
09-   2023   Approving a plat of easement
0996O
2023- 9-26-
09-   2023   Approving a plat of consolidation (157 Oak Forest Subdivision)
0446R
2023- 10-10- Approving a facade assistance grant agreement with Ken Keeler - Cooper’s Bar
10-   2023   and Grill
0447R
2023- 12-12-
12-   2023   Approving an agreement for lift station at 5410 W. 159th St.
0455R
2024- 1-9-   Granting a special use permit to allow a drive-thru in the C1 Local Commercial
01-   2024   District at 5301 W. 159th Street
1011O
2024- 1-9-   Granting a special use permit to allow a drive-thru and an outdoor patio in
01-   2024   the C3 Central Business District at 4801 W. 159th Street
1012O
2024- 1-9-   Granting a variation request to allow additional signage in the C3 Central
01-   2024   Business District at 4801 W. 159th Street
1013O
2024- 2-13-  Authorizing a zoning map amendment at 5601 Victoria Drive from R2 Single
02-   2024   Family District to IB Institutional Building District
1018O
2024- 2-13-  Approving a facade assistance grant agreement with Chirag Patel - HD
02-   2024   Hospitality Inc.
0456R
2024- 3-12-
03-   2024   Approving a facade assistance grant agreement with Shamrock TBC, Inc.
0457R
2024- 3-26-  Granting a special use permit to allow a gasoline station with a convenience
03-   2024   store in the C2 - General Service Commercial District at 16702 S. Cicero
1021O        Avenue
2024- 5-14-  Granting a preliminary planned unit development for the property commonly
05-   2024   known as 15801 Lorel Avenue (Water Tower Senior Apartments)
1029O
2024- 5-14-  Granting a final planned unit development for the property commonly known as
05-   2024   15139 S. Cicero Avenue (State Farm)
1030O
2024- 6-11-  Granting a special use permit to allow an outdoor patio in the C2 - General
06-   2024   Service Commercial District at 6050 W. 159th Street (Maiz y Barro)
1033O
2024- 6-25-  Granting a final planned unit development for the property commonly known as
05-   2024   15141 S. Cicero Avenue (Waverly Creek Townhomes)
1035O
2024- 6-25-  Supporting and consenting to a renewal application to the Cook County Assessor
06-   2024   of the Class 6B property tax incentive application for the property commonly
0459R        known as 16440 - 16452 Kilbourn Avenue (Kilbourn LLC)
2024- 7-9-   Granting a special use permit to allow an automotive parts, accessories and
07-   2024   tires store in the C3 - Central Business District at 15417 S. Cicero Avenue
1036O        (Vander Engines & Services)
2024- 8-27-  Granting a special use permit to allow an automotive parts, accessories and
08-   2024   tires store in the C3 - Central Business District at 15150 S. Cicero Avenue
1039O        (Vander Engines & Services)
2024- 8-27-  Supporting and consenting to a renewal application to the Cook County Assessor
08-   2024   of the Class 8 property tax incentive application for the property commonly
0460R        known as 15505 S. Cicero Avenue, Unit 1A (Geraldo Chavez - State Farm)
2024-        Supporting and consenting to a renewal application to the Cook County Assessor
08-   8-27-  of the Class 8 property tax incentive application for the property commonly
0461R 2024   known as 15505 S. Cicero Avenue, Unit 1B (James Brigham - Brigham
             Construction)
2024- 8-27-  Supporting and consenting to a renewal application to the Cook County Assessor
08-   2024   of the Class 8 property tax incentive application for the property commonly
0462R        known as 4821 W. 153rd Street (4821 W. 153rd St. LLC - John Amico)
2024- 9-24-  Granting a special use permit to allow an automotive mechanical and electrical
09-   2024   repair and maintenance shop in the C3 - Central Business District at 16044 S.
1042O        Cicero Avenue (JTM Auto Repair)
2024- 10-22- Authorizing a first amendment to the redevelopment agreement for the LPC Oak
10-   2024   Forest, LP Project located east of Cicero Avenue, south of 167th Street, and
1044O        northwest of I-57
2024- 11-12- Granting a special use permit to allow office space for an automobile
11-   2024   dealership in the C2 - General Service Commercial District at 5320 W. 159th
1046O        Street Unit 303 H
2024- 12-10- Approving a plat of consolidation at 16440 Kilbourn Avenue (Dunn Kilbourne
12-   2024   plat of consolidation)
0466R
2024- 12-10- Designating EM8 Oak Forest Waverly Creek, L.P. as the developer and
12-   2024   authorizing negotiation of necessary agreements for completion of
0467R        redevelopment project at 15541 S. Cicero Avenue
2025-        Authorizing a variation for the location of an electronic message sign in
01-   1-28-  relation to residential property and allowance for the location of the
1058O 2025   existing sign in the IB - Institutional Building District at 5300 W. 155th
             Street
2025- 1-28-  Granting a special use permit for a child day care service facility in the C3
01-   2025   - Central Business District at 15120 S. Cicero Avenue Unit 3-5
1059O
2025- 1-28-  Approving a plat of consolidation at 5301 W. 159th Street (Live Mas plat of
01-   2025   consolidation).
0468R
2025- 1-28-  Designating EM8 Oak Forest K Partners, LLC as the developer and authorizing
01-   2025   the negotiation of necessary agreements for the completion of the
0469R        redevelopment project at 15701 Lamon Avenue and 4823 W. 157th Street
2025- 2-25-  Authorizing a final planned development to allow mixed use in the C3 - Central
02-   2025   Business District at 15139 S. Cicero Avenue
1064O
2025- 2-25-  Authorizing a variation for the location of an electronic message sign in
02-   2025   relation to residential property and electronic message sign ratio allowance
1065O        in the IB - Institutional Building District at 5300 W. 151st Street
2025- 2-25-  Approving amended redevelopment agreement for the project located at Cicreo
02-   2025   Avenue and 157th Street
1066O
2025- 3-11-  Approving a commitment to funding and consenting to an Invest in Cook
03-   2025   application for Natalie Creek Trail along the east side of Central Avenue from
0482R        159th Street to 151st Street
2025- 4-8-   Approving a first amendment to the redevelopment agreement for the Waverly
04-   2025   Creek project located at 15541 S. Cicero Avenue
0483R
2025- 4-8-
04-   2025   Authorizing release of lien at 15541 S. Cicero Avenue
0484R
2025- 4-8-
04-   2025   Authorizing release and satisfaction of mortgage at 15541 S. Cicero Avenue
0485R
2025- 4-8-
04-   2025   Authorizing release (abrogation) of easement at 15541 S. Cicero Avenue
1070O
2025- 4-22-  Authorizing a plat of subdivision at 4758 W. 151st Street (Midlothian Farms II
04-   2025   subdivision)
0487R
2025- 4-22-
04-   2025   Approving the 2025 official zoning map
0488R
2025- 4-22-  Authorizing a special use permit for a monument sign in the R6 - Multi-Family
04-   2025   Residential District at 15923-38 Le Claire Avenue for the Woodland Trail
1075O        Apartments project
2025- 5-13-  Approving a second amendment to the redevelopment agreement for the Waverly
05-   2025   Creek project located at 15541 S. Cicero Avenue
0490R
2025- 5-13-
05-   2025   Approving a facade assistance grant agreement with Modern Way Cleaners
0491R
2025- 5-27-  Authorizing a variation request to allow the reduction of 15 parking spaces to
05-   2025   36 parking spaces where 51 are required in the C1 - Commercial Business
1088O        District at 14741 S. Cicero Avenue
2025- 6-10-  Authorizing a zoning map amendment at 15048 S. Cicero Avenue from O1 - Office
06-   2025   District to C3 - Central Business District
1094O
2025- 6-10-  Authorizing a final planned development to allow mixed use in the C3 - Central
06-   2025   Business District at 15048 S. Cicero Avenue
1095O
2025- 8-12-  Authorizing a variation request to allow additional signage in the C2 -
08-   2025   General Service Commercial District at 4152 W. 167th Street
1102O
2025- 8-12-  Authorizing a special use permit to allow an automobile dealership in the C3 -
08-   2025   Central Business District at 15360 S. Cicero Avenue
1103O
            
 
 
TABLE II: PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.           Date Passed Description
2006-09-0057O      9-12-2006   Authorizing the sale of personal property owned
                               by the City of Oak Forest
2006-10-0062O      10-24-2006  Authorizing the sale of personal property owned
                               by the City of Oak Forest
2007-06-0110O      6-12-2007   Terminating the lease of property at 159th
                               Street and Cicero Avenue to Sprintcom, Inc.
                               Authorizing the sale of personal property owned
2007-06-0112O      6-12-2007   by the City of Oak Forest, for items to be sold
                               on ebay or by public bid or auction
                               Annexing certain territory contiguous to the
2007-11-0132O      11-13-2007  City of Oak Forest, 16810 and 17000 South Cicero
                               Avenue
2007-11-0135O      11-27-2007  Annexing certain surrounded or nearly surrounded
                               territory that is less than 60 acres in area
2007-11-0136O      11-27-2007  Annexing certain surrounded or nearly surrounded
                               territory that is less than 60 acres in area
2007-12-0142O      12-11-2007  Authorizing the sale of personal property owned
                               by the City of Oak Forest by public auction
2008-03-0164O      3-26-2008   Authorizes the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
                               Authorizing the exchange of certain property
2009-01-0214O      1-13-2009   between the City of Oak Forest and Ms. Mary
                               Rehmeyer
2009-01-0216O      1-13-2009   Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
2014-03-0485O      3-11-2014   Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
2016-05-0600O      5-24-2016   Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
2016-08-0614O      8-9-2016    Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicle) owned by the City of Oak Forest
2017-03-0634O      3-14-2017   Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (bicycles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
2017-05-0635O      3-14-2017   Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
2017-07-0652O      7-25-2017   Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
2017-10-0662O      10-24-2017  Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
2018-0680O         2-27-2018   Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
                               Approving purchase of property and authorizing
Res. 2018-06-0332R 6-12-2018   execution of real estate sale agreement, Lot 2
                               at the Gateway Project Area
2018-12-0715O      12-11-2018  Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
2019-01-0718O      1-22-2019   Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
2019-04-0731O      4-9-2019    Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
2019-04-0736       4-23-2019   Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
                               Authorizing the sale of personal property
2019-09-0753O      9-24-2019   (vehicles; furniture; Fire Department equipment;
                               computer equipment) owned by the City of Oak
                               Forest
                               Authorizing the acquisition of real estate
2019-11-0763O      11-12-2019  commonly known as 4250 W. 167th Street through
                               eminent domain or otherwise
2019-11-07640      - -         Approving agreement of purchase and sale for
                               certain property located at 5400 W. 159th Street
2019-11-0766O      11-26-2019  Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicle) owned by the City of Oak Forest
2020-05-0792O      5-12-2020   Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
                               Approving a redevelopment agreement and a real
2020-10-0806O      10-13-2020  estate purchase agreement with Kensington
                               Development Partners Inc.
2021-01-0820O      1-12-2021   Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
2021-01-0821O      1-12-2021   Approving a preliminary development agreement
                               with 4816 W. 157th Street LLC
2021-01-0823O      1-26-2021   Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
2021-03-0826O      3-23-2021   Authorizing annexation agreement to property at
                               14900 S. Cicero Avenue
2021-03-0827O      3-23-2021   Annexing certain territory at 14900 S. Cicero
                               Avenue
2021-04-0836       4-27-2021   Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak Forest
2021-04-0837O      4-27-2021   Approving a redevelopment agreement with HD
                               Hotels LLC
                               Authorizing an addendum to the development
2021-05-0842O      5-11-2021   agreement with 4816 W. 157th Street for the sale
                               of property at 15644 Cicero Avenue, 4820 157th
                               Street and 15659 Lamon Avenue
                               Authorizing the demolition/disposal or sale of
2021-06-0847O      6-8-2021    property (5122 Aldersyde) owned by the City of
                               Oak Forest
2021-07-0854O      7-13-2021   Annexing 1.2 acres of territory at 167 and 16707
                               Kilpatrick Avenue
2021-07-0856O      7-13-2021   Authorizing the demolition/disposal or sale of
                               property owned by the City of Oak Forest
                               Authorizing an addendum to the development
2021-08-0862O      8-10-2021   agreement with 4816 W. 157th Street for the sale
                               of property at 15644 Cicero Avenue, 4820 157th
                               Street and 15659 Lamon Avenue
2021-08-0863O      8-10-2021   Authorizing a real estate purchase agreement
                               with LPC Acquisition Company, LLC
                               Calling for a public hearing and a joint review
                               board meeting to consider the designation of a
2021-11-0875O      11-23-2021  redevelopment project area and the approval of a
                               redevelopment plan and project for the city
                               known as the Cicero Avenue and I-57 Tax
                               Increment Financing District (TIF District #8)
2021-11-0878O      11-23-2021  Authorizing the demolition of property owned by
                               the city
2021-11-0879O      11-23-2021  Authorizing the contract for the sale of
                               property owned by the city
                               Approving a redevelopment agreement and real
2021-12-0882O      12-14-2021  estate purchase agreement with Kensington
                               Development Partners, Inc. at 4250 W. 167th
                               Street
2022-01-0884O      1-11-2022   Annexing certain territory at 16425 Kedvale
                               Avenue
                               Authorizing an addendum to the preliminary
2022-01-0885O      1-11-2022   development agreement with 4816 W. 157th Street
                               for the sale of property at 15644 Cicero Avenue,
                               4820 157th Street and 15659 Lamon Avenue
2022-03-0894O      4-12-2022   Authorizing a stipulation for final judgment
                               order (4250 W. 167th Street)
2022-03-0896O      4-12-2022   Authorizing the sale of property at 15624 S.
                               Lamon Avenue
2022-03-0897O      4-12-2022   Authorizing the sale of personal property
                               (vehicles) owned by the city
                               Authorizing the amendment and restatement of a
2022-03-0898O      4-12-2022   redevelopment agreement for the redevelopment of
                               4250 W. 167th Street and a portion of 4201 W.
                               166th Street
2022-04-0900O      4-12-2022   Approving purchase and sale agreement for 167th
                               Street and Kilbourn Avenue
                               Authorizing a real estate purchase and sale
                               agreement with Rar of Romeoville LLC to sell
2022-06-0912O      6-14-2022   1.31 acres of city owned property located at the
                               northwest side of 159th St. and Long Ave. (5400
                               W. 159th Street)
2022-07-0915O      7-12-2022   Authorizing the disposal/sale of property owned
                               by the city
2022-07-0916O      7-12-2022   Authorizing the demolition of property owned by
                               the city
                               Approving restatement of redevelopment agreement
                               for the redevelopment of 4250 W. 167th Street
2022-07-0917O      7-12-2022   and a portion of 4201 W. 166th Street and
                               amendment and restatement of real estate
                               purchase agreement (Kensington Development
                               Partners Inc.)
2022-08-0919O      8-9-2022    Authorizing an annexation agreement to property
                               at 14900 S. Cicero Avenue (4758 W. 151st Street)
                               Annexing certain territory to the city at 4758
2022-08-0920O      8-9-2022    W. 151st Street (4.15 acres) (4758 W. 151st
                               Street - Carefree Village, LP)
                               Annexing certain territory to the city at 5225
2022-08-0922O      8-9-2022    W. 147th Street (4.357 acres) (14950 S. Laramie
                               Avenue - Forest Ridge School District 142)
2022-08-0924O      8-9-2022    Authorizing the disposal/sale of property owned
                               by the city
2022-09-0925O      9-12-2022   Authorizing the demolition of property owned by
                               the city
                               Authorizing a redevelopment agreement between
2022-09-0928O      9-12-2022   the city and LPC Oak Forest LP for the subject
                               property located east of Cicero Avenue, south of
                               167th Street and northwest of I-57
2022-09-0952O      9-12-2022   Authorizing the demolition of property owned by
                               the city
2022-09-0929O      9-27-2022   Authorizing the disposal and transfer of
                               property owned by the city
                               Approving the first amendment to amendment and
                               restatement of real estate purchase agreement
2022-10-0931O      10-11-2022  and reinstatement of redevelopment agreement
                               (4250 W. 167th Street - Kensington Development
                               Partners, Inc.)
2022-10-0932O      10-11-2022  Authorizing the disposal/sale of property owned
                               by the city
                               Authorizing a real estate purchase and sale
2022-11-0939O      11-22-2022  agreement with TTK, LLC to sell 1.75 acres of
                               city-owned property, located at 5940 W. 159th
                               Street
                               Authorizing sale of city property and approving
                               a real estate purchase and sale agreement with
2023-03-0960O      3-28-2023   Nima Properties, Inc. to sell 0.97 acres of
                               city-owned property, located at 15426 S. Cicero
                               Avenue
2023-05-0975O      5-9-2023    Authorizing disposal or sale of property owned
                               by the city
2023-06-0981O      6-27-2023   Authorizing the disposal or sale of property
                               owned by the city
                               Approving the sale of city owned property and
2023-07-0985O      7-25-2023   authorizing execution of purchase and sales
                               contract (15900 S. Cicero Avenue)
                               Approving purchase of property and authorizing
2023-07-0441R      7-25-2023   execution of real estate purchase and sales
                               contract (15229 Cicero Avenue)
2023-08-0987O      8-8-2023    Authorizing the disposal/sale of property owned
                               by the city
2023-09-0995O      9-26-2023   Authorizing the disposal of property owned by
                               the city
2023-10-1002O      10-24-2023  Authorizing the disposal/sale of property owned
                               by the city
                               Authorizing the demolition/disposal/sale of
2023-11-1004O      11-14-2023  property owned by the city located at 15441 S.
                               Cicero Avenue
2024-04-1026O      4-23-2024   Authorizing the disposal/sale of property owned
                               by the city
                               Authorizing the demolition/disposal/sale of
2024-05-1028O      5-14-2024   property owned by the city located at 15229 S.
                               Cicero Avenue
2024-04-1038O      8-27-2024   Authorizing the disposal/sale of property owned
                               by the city
                               Calling for a public hearing and a joint review
                               board meeting regarding the extension and
2025-01-1053O      1-14-2025   amendment of a redevelopment project area and
                               the approval of a revised redevelopment plan for
                               the area known as TIF District #6
                               Granting reasonable accommodation under the Fair
2025-01-1056O      1-14-2025   Housing Act for property located at 15620 S. Oak
                               Park Avenue
2025-01-1057O      1-14-2025   Authorizing the disposal of property owned by
                               the city
                               Approving authorization, acknowledgment and
2025-02-0480R      2-11-2025   indemnification for site access and earthwork
                               agreement
2025-05-0489R      5-13-2025   Approving redevelopment agreement for the site
                               located at Lamon Avenue and 157th Street
                              
 
 
TABLE III: TAXATION
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.   Date   Description
No.    Passed
2007-  9-11-  Approving amendment No. 2 to the Tax Increment Redevelopment Plan and
09-    2007   Redevelopment Project for the TIF district No. 1 redevelopment project area
0123O
2007-  9-11-  Confirming tax increment allocation financing for the TIF district No. 1
09-    2007   redevelopment project area
0125O
2008-  12-9-  Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2008 and ending
12-    2008   on April 30, 2009.
0209O
2008-  12-9-  Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2008 and ending
12-    2008   on April 30, 2009.
0210O
2008-  12-9-  Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2008 and ending
12-    2008   on April 30, 2009.
0211O
2008-  12-9-  Levying taxes for the city for the fiscal year commencing on May 1, 2008 and
12-    2008   ending on April 30, 2009.
0212O
2012-  3-27-  Imposing a home rule municipal retailer’s occupation tax and a home rule
03-    2012   municipal service occupation tax.
0374O
2016-  12-13- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2016 and ending
12-    2016   on April 30, 2017.
0623O
2016-  12-13- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2016 and ending
12-    2016   on April 30, 2017.
0624O
2016-  12-13- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2016 and ending
12-    2016   on April 30, 2017.
0625O
2016-  12-13- Levying taxes for the city for the fiscal year commencing on May 1, 2016 and
12-    2016   ending on April 30, 2017.
0626O
2017-  12-12- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2017 and ending
12-    2017   on April 30, 2018.
0669O
2017-  12-12- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2017 and ending
12-    2017   on April 30, 2018.
0670O
2017-  12-12- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2017 and ending
12-    2017   on April 30, 2018.
0671O
2017-  12-12- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2017 and ending
12-    2017   on April 30, 2018.
0672O
2017-  12-12- Levying taxes for the city for the fiscal year commencing on May 1, 2017 and
12-    2017   ending on April 30, 2017.
0673O
2018-         Declaring surplus revenue in the city Redevelopment Project Area No. 1 (TIF
06-    6-12-  No. 1) TIF District Special Tax Allocation Fund and authorizing payment of
0692O  2018   that surplus revenue to the County Treasurer for distribution to affected
              taxing districts on a pro rata basis.
2018-  12-11- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2018 and ending
12-    2018   on April 30, 2019.
0710O
2018-  12-11- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2018 and ending
12-    2018   on April 30, 2019.
0711O
2018-  12-11- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2018 and ending
12-    2018   on April 30, 2019.
0712O
2018-  12-11- Levying taxes for the city for the fiscal year commencing May 1, 2018 and
12-    2018   ending April 30, 2019.
0713O
2019-  6-25-  Declaring surplus revenue in Redevelopment Project Area No. 1 and authorizing
06-    2019   payment to Cook County Treasurer for distribution of affected taxing districts
0742O         on a pro rata basis.
2019-  12-10- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2019 and ending
12-    2019   on April 30, 2020.
0771O
2019-  12-10- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2019 and ending
12-    2019   on April 30, 2020.
0772O
2019-  12-10- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2019 and ending
12-    2019   on April 30, 2020.
0773O
2019-  12-10- Levying taxes for the city for the fiscal year commencing May 1, 2019 and
12-    2019   ending April 30, 2020.
0774O
2020-         Declaring surplus revenue in the city Redevelopment Project Area No. 1 (TIF
07-    7-14-  No. 1) TIF District Special Tax Allocation Fund and authorizing payment of
0800O  2020   that surplus revenue to the County Treasurer for distribution to affected
              taxing districts on a pro rata basis.
2020-  12-8-  Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2020 and ending
12-    2020   on April 30, 2021.
0813O
2020-  12-8-  Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2020 and ending
12-    2020   on April 30, 2021.
00814O
2020-  12-8-  Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2020 and ending
12-    2020   on April 30, 2021.
0815O
2020-  12-8-  Levying taxes for the fiscal year commencing on May 1, 2020 and ending on
12-    2020   April 30, 2021.
0816O
2020-  12-8-
12-    2020   Dissolving TIF No. 2 Tax Increment Financing District.
0818O
2021-         Declaring surplus revenue in the city Redevelopment Project Area No. 1 (TIF
06-    6-8-   No. 1) TIF District Special Tax Allocation Fund and authorizing payment of
0852O  2021   that surplus revenue to the County Treasurer for distribution to affected
              taxing districts on a pro rata basis.
2021-  8-10-  Authorizing a study of the feasibility of establishing a tax increment
08-    2021   allocation financing to improve deteriorating physical conditions and
0858O         stimulate new economic development.
2021-  8-10-  Authorizing the re- establishment of a tax increment financing interested
08-    2021   parties registry and adopting rules for registration thereto.
0859O
2021-  12-14- Levying taxes for the city for the fiscal year commencing on May 1, 2021 and
12-    2021   ending on April 30, 2022.
0872O
2022-  2-22-  Approving the Cicero Avenue and I-57 Tax Increment Financing District (TIF No.
02-    2022   8) Redevelopment Project Area redevelopment plan and project
0889O
2022-  2-22-  Designating the Cicero Avenue and I-57 Tax Increment Financing District (TIF
02-    2022   No. 8) Redevelopment Project Area
0890O
2022-  2-22-  Adopting tax increment financing for the Cicero Avenue and I-57 Tax Increment
02-    2022   Financing District (TIF No. 8)
0891O
2022-         Declaring surplus revenue in the city Redevelopment Project Area No. 1 (TIF
06-    6-14-  No. 1) TIF District Special Tax Allocation Fund and authorizing the payment of
0913O  2022   that surplus revenue to Cook County Treasurer for distribution to affected
              taxing districts on a pro rata basis
2022-  12-13- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2022 and ending
12-    2022   on April 30, 2023
0941O
2022-  12-13- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2022 and ending
12-    2022   on April 30, 2023
0942O
2022-  12-13- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2022 and ending
12-    2022   on April 30, 2023
0943O
2022-  12-13- Levying taxes for the city for the fiscal year commencing on May 1, 2022 and
12-    2022   ending on April 30, 2023
0944O
2023-         Declaring surplus revenue in the city Redevelopment Project Area No. 1 (TIF
02-    2-28-  No. 1) TIF District Special Tax Allocation Fund and authorizing the payment of
0958O  2023   that surplus revenue to the Cook County Treasurer for distribution to affected
              taxing districts on a pro rata basis
2023-  4-25-
04-    2023   Approving an amendment to the RDA for the HD Hotels, LLC Project
0972O
2023-         Providing for the issuance of Tax Increment Financing Revenue Notes (Oak
05-    5-23-  Forest Cicero Avenue and I-57 Tax Increment Financing District (TIF District
0977O  2023   #8) Redevelopment Project), of the city, and providing for the execution of
              note orders in connection therewith
2023-  7-25-  Requesting the submission of a “no cash bid” on tax delinquent property to
07-    2023   acquire tax certificates of purchase for the benefit of the city
0422R
2023-         Memorializing the termination of the Oak Forest TIF No. 1 redevelopment
10-    10-10- project area, and authorizing payment of redevelopment project costs and
0997O  2023   distribution of surplus revenues from the special Oak Forest TIF No. 1 tax
              allocation fund
2023-  11-28- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2023 and ending
11-    2023   on April 30, 2024
1005O
2023-  11-28- Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2022 and ending
11-    2023   on April 30, 2023
1006O
2023-  11-28- Levying taxes for the city for the fiscal year commencing on May 1, 2023 and
11-    2023   ending on April 30, 2024
1007O
2023-  12-12- Supporting and consenting to a renewal application to the Cook County Assessor
12-    2023   of a class 8 property tax incentive application for the property commonly
0449R         known as 4243 W. 166th Street (Welsch Ready Mix Inc.)
2023-  12-12- Supporting and consenting to a renewal application to the Cook County Assessor
12-    2023   of a class 8 property tax incentive application for the property commonly
0450R         known as 6114 W. 159th Street (3 SPOS, LLC - CARS Automotive, Inc.)
2023-  12-12- Authorizing support and consent to designate 15900 S. Cicero Avenue as a
12-    2023   priority Southland Tax Reactivation Property
0451R
2024-  8-27-  Supporting and consenting to a renewal application to the Cook County Assessor
08-    2024   of a class 8 property tax incentive application for the property commonly
0461R         known as 15505 S. Cicero Avenue Unit 1B (James Brigham - Brigham Construction)
2024-  8-27-  Supporting and consenting to a renewal application to the Cook County Assessor
08-    2024   of a class 8 property tax incentive application for the property commonly
0462R         known as 4821 W. 153rd Street (4821 W. 153rd St. LLC - John Amico)
2024-  11-26- Authorizing a supplemental agreement and first amendment to memorandum
11-    2024   agreement at 4250 W. 167th - Aldi
1051O
2024-  12-10- Abate certain taxes for the fiscal year commencing on May 1, 2024 and ending
12-    2024   on April 30, 2025
1047O
2024-  12-10- Abate certain taxes for the fiscal year commencing on May 1, 2024 and ending
12-    2024   on April 30, 2025
1048O
2024-  12-10- Levying taxes for the fiscal year commencing on May 1, 2024 and ending on
12-    2024   April 30, 2025
1049O
2025-  3-25-  Amending Cicero Avenue Tax Increment Financing District redevelopment project
03-    2025   area (TIF District #6)
1061O
2025-  3-25-
03-    2025   Adopting tax increment financing for amended TIF District #6
1062O
2025-  5-13-  Providing for the issuance of a Tax Increment Financing Revenue Note (15541 S.
05-    2025   Cicero Avenue), of the city, and providing for the execution of certain
1081O         agreements in connection therewith
             
 
 
TABLE IV: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No.      Date Passed Description
                          Consenting to the change of control of the cable
2006-04-0014O 4-25-2006   franchisee from Wide Open West Holdings, LLC to
                          Racecar Acquisitions, LLC
2009-07-0250O 7-14-2009   Approving a cable franchise agreement with Comcast of
                          California / Illinois / Indiana / Michigan, LP
                          Approving a cable franchise agreement with Comcast of
2019-08-0746O 8-13-2019   California/Colorado/Illinois/Indiana/Michigan, LP for
                          ten years
                         
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to 2000 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Section Code Section
ILCS Section                        Code Section
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01              10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02              10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03              10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04              10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05              10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07              10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08              10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09              10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10              10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11              10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12              10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15              10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16              10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17              10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20              10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24              10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28              10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29              10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2                 10.04
Ch. 5, Act 120                      30.27
Ch. 5, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.      30.01
Ch. 5, Act 175, §§ 1-101 et seq.  10.02
Ch. 5, Act 315, § 3                30.46
Ch. 10, Act 5, § 1-3               30.46
Ch. 10, Act 5, § 2A-1.2            31.206
Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-1.4             30.46
Ch. 10, Act 5, § 10-2              32.146
Ch. 10, Act 5, § 10-3              31.206
                                    32.395,
Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.    32.398,
                                    32.406,
                                    32.409
Ch. 35, Act 120, § 3               33.031
Ch. 35, Act 120, § 7               33.094
Ch. 35, Act 630, §§ 1 et seq.     116.075
Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-1 et seq.   33.088
Ch. 40, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.   32.057
Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.      116.043
Ch. 50, Act 105, § 3               30.51
Ch. 50, Act 742                     32.074
Ch. 65, Act 5                       10.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-1-1 et seq.   159.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2             10.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1             10.99,
                                    159.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1           10.99,
                                    131.27
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3-14-1            31.206
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-5          31.206
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-20         32.059
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.1 - 8-2-9.1032.328
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1            33.030
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2            33.081,
                                    116.075
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2(d)         33.080
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-17           116.075
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-23           33.090 -
                                    33.092
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-24           33.070
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 10-1-1 - 10-1-4832.263
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-1            32.260
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-3            32.261
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-5            32.262
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-6            32.262
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-17           32.261
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1            32.059
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-1 et seq.  32.148
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-29         32.053
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-3            33.045
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-10-1 et seq. 110.066
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-10-1           32.229,
                                    32.232
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-12-1 et seq. 32.340
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-12          159.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-13-1 et seq. 32.340
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-2           159.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-8           159.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-2           159.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 15.3              32.194,
                                    32.214
Ch. 210, Act 45, §§ 1-101 et seq. 115.35
Ch. 210, Act 50, § 4.05            70.06
Ch. 220, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.  53.06
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 2-202            116.075
                                    33.080,
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-105            151.067,
                                    151.320
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-102           33.080,
                                    151.320
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-108.5(i)      151.320
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(v)        151.067
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)        116.043
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401           116.043,
                                    151.067
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)(6)     116.043
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801           116.043
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b)        116.043
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi) 116.043
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(d)        116.043
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501           116.049
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(r)(1)     116.999
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(s)        116.049
Ch. 220, Act 50, §§ 1 et seq.     151.081
Ch. 220, Act 65, § 4               151.070
Ch. 225, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.     115.15
Ch. 225, Act 70, § 4               115.15
Ch. 225, Act 320, § 3(1)           50.26
Ch. 225, Act 325, §§ 1 et seq.    159.02
Ch. 225, Act 330, §§ 1 et seq.    159.02
Ch. 225, Act 447, Art. 10           92.05
Ch. 225, Act 460, §§ 1 et seq.    90.085
Ch. 230, Act 15, § 4(a)(2)         114.080
Ch. 230, Act 15, § 8.1             114.087
Ch. 230, Act 40                     114.011
Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.     111.50
                                    111.40,
Ch. 230, Act 40, § 5               111.41,
                                    114.011
Ch. 230, Act 40, § 25(e)           114.011
Ch. 230, Act 40, § 58              114.011
Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq.      96.02
Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.    111.43
Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-3 et seq.    111.40
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 3-12(11.1)       111.44
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-2              111.45
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-27             111.44
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-9              111.71
Ch. 405, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.     117.35
Ch. 410, Act 82, §§ 1 et seq.     131.12
Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 - 51         33.115
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 19               50.26
Ch. 430, Act 20, § 1               118.005
Ch. 605, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.  151.067 ,
                                    151.320
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 18c-7201         151.320
                                    159.02,
Ch. 615, Act 5, §§ 5 et seq.      159.42,
                                    159.62
Ch. 615, Act 5, § 18g              159.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102.1          70.21
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162            70.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188            10.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-815            73.09
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-208            32.038
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101            32.117,
                                    70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303            70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3         32.005,
                                    32.035
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306           70.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-401           70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402           32.117,
                                    70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402(a)        32.117
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-403           70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501           70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-502(a)        32.117
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503           70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605           32.117
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707(b)        32.117
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707(d)        32.117
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002(e)       32.117
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1008          32.117
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201          32.117
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1305          32.037
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1306          32.037
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1402(b)       32.117
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1517          72.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-603.1         31.011
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-611           70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 20-204           71.01
Ch. 635, Act 5, § 11-710           32.117
Ch. 705, Act 405, § 1-1            133.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.    118.034
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 8-2              131.99
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 8-4              131.99
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 11-6 et seq.   114.072,
                                    114.073
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-9             96.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 11-14 et seq.  96.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-14            131.26
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-15            131.26
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-19            131.27
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 12-1 et seq.   96.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 12-5.1         96.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 12-15 et seq.  96.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 16               70.35
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 16-1             32.038
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 16A              70.35
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 21-1 et seq.   96.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-1             32.038,
                                    70.35
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 24-1 et seq.   96.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1             70.35,
                                    96.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1.2           96.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1.5           70.35
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1           70.35
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 25-1             96.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1             96.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1             96.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 36-1             70.35
Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 401 et seq.  96.02
Ch. 720, Act 570, § 505            131.11
Ch. 720, Act 675, § 1.5(a)         118.058
Ch. 725, Act 205, § 2              159.07
Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.  32.021,
                                    115.25
Ch. 735, Act 5, § 3-101            115.25
Ch. 735, Act 5, § 3-109            32.021
Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq. 32.023
Ch. 765, Act 605, §§ 1 et seq.    151.146,
                                    154.02
Ch. 810, Act 5, §§ 1101 et seq.   32.023
Ch. 820, Act 130, §§ 0.01 - 12    33.180
                                    
 
REFERENCES TO 2000 CODE
2000 Code Section 2008 Code Section
2000 Code Section     2008 Code Section
2.02.010              30.01
2.02.020              30.02
2.02.030              30.03
2.02.040              30.04
2.02.050              30.05
2.02.060              30.06
2.02.070              30.07
2.02.080              30.08
2.02.090              30.09
2.02.100              30.10
2.02.110              30.11
2.02.120              30.12
2.02.130              30.13
2.02.140              30.14
2.02.150              30.15
2.02.160              30.16
2.02.170              30.17
2.02.180              30.18
2.02.190              30.19
2.02.200              30.20
2.02.210              30.21
2.02.220              30.22
2.02.230              30.23
2.02.240              30.24
2.02.250              30.25
2.02.260              30.26
2.02.270              30.27
2.02.070              30.28
2.02.280              30.29
2.02.290              30.30
2.02.300              30.31
2.02.310              30.32
2.02.320              30.33
2.02.330              30.34
2.04.020              31.031
2.04.030              31.032
2.04.040              31.033
2.04.070              31.035
2.04.080              31.036
2.06.010              31.050
2.06.020              31.051
2.06.030              31.052
2.06.040              31.053
2.06.050              31.054
2.06.060              31.055
2.06.070              31.056
2.06.080              31.057
2.06.090              31.058
2.08.010              31.070
2.08.020              31.071
2.08.030              31.072
2.08.040              31.073
2.08.050              31.074
2.08.060              31.075
2.08.070              31.076
2.08.080              31.077
2.08.090              31.078
2.08.100              31.079
2.08.110              31.080
2.08.120              31.081
2.08.130              31.082
2.08.140              31.083
2.08.150              31.084
2.12.010              31.110
2.12.020              31.111
2.12.040              31.113
2.14.010              31.125
2.14.020              31.126
2.14.030              31.127
2.20.010              31.205
2.20.020              31.206
2.20.030              31.207
2.20.040              31.208
2.20.050              31.209
2.20.060              31.210
2.21.010              31.225
2.21.020              31.226
2.21.030              31.227
2.21.040              31.228
2.22.010              31.001
2.22.020              31.002
2.22.030              31.003
2.22.040              31.004
2.22.050              31.005
2.22.060              31.006
2.22.070              31.007
2.22.080              31.008
2.22.090              31.009
2.22.100              31.010
2.22.110              31.011
2.22.120              31.012
2.22.140              31.013,
                      31.014
2.22.150              31.015
2.28.010              33.100
2.28.020              33.101
2.28.030              33.102
2.28.040              33.103
2.28.050              33.104
2.34.030              32.052
2.34.040              32.053
2.34.050              32.054
2.34.060              32.055
2.34.070              32.056
2.34.080              32.057
2.34.090              32.058
2.34.100              32.059
2.36.010              32.070
2.36.030              32.072
2.36.060              32.075
2.36.070              32.076
2.36.090              32.078
2.36.110              32.080
2.36.120              32.081
2.36.130              32.082
2.36.140              32.083
2.36.150              32.084
2.36.160              32.085
2.36.170              32.086
2.36.180              32.087
2.36.190              32.088
2.36.200              32.089
2.36.210              32.090
2.36.220              32.091
2.36.230              32.092
2.36.240              32.093
2.36.250              32.094
2.36.260              32.095
2.36.270              32.096
2.36.280              32.097
2.36.290              32.098
2.36.300              32.099
2.36.310              32.100
2.36.320              32.101
2.44.010              32.145
2.44.020              32.146
2.44.030              32.147
2.44.040              32.148
2.44.050              32.149
2.46.010              32.160
2.46.020              32.161
2.46.030              32.162
2.46.040              32.163
2.50.010              32.175
2.50.020              32.176
2.50.030              32.177
2.50.040              32.178
2.50.050              32.179
2.52.010              32.190
2.52.020              32.191
2.52.030              32.192
2.52.040              32.193
2.52.050              32.194
2.52.060              32.195
2.54.010              32.210
2.54.020              32.211
2.54.030              32.212
2.54.040              32.213
2.54.050              32.214
2.56.010              32.225
2.56.020              32.226
2.56.030              32.227
2.56.040              32.228
2.56.050              32.229
2.56.060              32.230
2.56.070              32.231
2.56.090              32.233
2.56.100              32.234
2.58.010              32.425
2.58.020              32.426
2.58.030              32.427
2.58.040              32.428
2.58.050              32.429
2.58.060              32.430
2.66.010              32.260
2.66.020              32.261
2.66.030              32.262
2.66.040              32.263
2.66.050              32.264
2.68.010              32.275
2.68.020              32.276
2.68.030              32.277
2.70.010              32.290
2.70.020              32.291
2.70.030              32.292
2.70.040              32.293
2.70.050              32.294
2.72.010              32.445
2.72.020              32.446
2.72.030              32.447
2.72.040              32.448
2.80.020              32.321
2.80.030              32.322
2.80.040              32.323
2.80.050              32.324
2.80.070              32.326
2.80.080              32.327
2.80.090              32.328
2.80.100              32.329
2.86.010              32.340
2.86.020              32.341
2.86.030              32.342
2.86.040              32.343
2.86.050              32.344
2.86.060              32.345
2.86.070              32.346
2.86.080              32.347
2.86.090              32.348
2.86.100              32.349
2.88.010              32.360
2.88.020              32.361
2.88.040              32.363
2.94.010              32.375
2.94.020              32.376
2.94.030              32.377
2.94.040              32.378
2.94.050              32.379
2.94.060              32.380
2.96.010              32.460
2.96.020              32.461
2.96.030              32.462
2.96.040              32.463
2.96.050              32.464
2.96.060              32.465
2.97.010              32.480
2.97.020              32.481
2.97.030              32.482
2.97.040              32.483
2.98.010              32.535
2.98.020              32.536
2.98.030              32.537
2.99.010              32.560
2.99.020              32.561
2.99.030              32.562
2.99.040              32.563
2.99.050              32.564
3.04.010              33.030
3.04.020              33.031
3.04.030              33.032
3.08.010              33.045
3.12.010              33.115
3.12.020              33.116
3.12.030              33.117
3.12.040              33.118
3.12.050              33.119
3.12.060              33.120
3.12.070              33.121
3.12.080              33.122
3.12.090              33.123
3.12.100              33.124
3.12.110              33.125
3.16.010              33.140
3.16.020              33.141
3.16.030              33.142
3.16.040              33.143
3.16.050              33.144
3.16.060              33.145
3.16.070              33.146
3.16.080              33.147
3.16.090              33.148
3.16.100              33.149
3.16.110              33.150
3.16.120              33.151
3.16.130              33.152
3.20.010              33.165
3.20.020              33.166
3.24.010              33.180
3.24.020              33.181
3.24.030              33.182
3.24.040              33.183
3.28.010              33.001
3.28.020              33.002
3.28.030              33.003
3.28.040              33.004
3.28.050              33.005
3.28.060              33.006
3.28.070              33.007
3.28.080              33.008
3.28.090              33.009
3.28.100              33.010
3.28.110              33.011
3.28.120              33.012
3.28.130              33.013
3.28.140              33.014
3.28.150              33.015
3.28.160              33.016
3.28.170              33.017
3.28.180              33.018
3.32.020              117.15
3.36.010              33.060
3.36.020              33.061
3.36.030              33.062
3.36.040              33.063
3.36.050              33.064
3.36.060              33.065
3.36.070              33.066
3.80.060              32.325
5.02.010              110.001
5.02.020              110.002
5.02.030              110.003
5.02.040              110.004
5.02.050              110.005
5.02.060              110.006
5.02.070              110.007
5.02.080              110.008
5.02.090              110.009
5.02.100              110.010
5.02.110              110.011
5.02.120              110.012
5.02.130              110.013
5.02.140              110.014
5.02.150              110.015
5.02.160              110.016
5.02.170              110.017
5.02.180              110.018
5.04.010              115.01
5.04.030              115.02
5.04.040              115.99
5.06.010              113.01
5.06.020              113.02
5.06.030              113.03
5.06.040              113.04
5.06.050              113.05
5.06.060              113.06
5.06.070              113.07
5.06.080              113.08
5.06.090              113.09
5.06.100              113.10
5.06.110              113.11
5.06.120              113.12
5.08.010              111.40
5.08.020              111.62
5.08.030              111.68
5.08.040              111.41
5.08.050              111.43
5.08.060              111.46
5.08.080              111.45
5.08.100              111.48
5.08.110              111.50,
                      111.52
5.08.130              111.51
5.08.140              111.49
5.08.150              111.53
5.08.170              111.54
5.08.180              111.61
5.08.190              111.57
5.08.200              111.56
5.08.210              111.63
5.08.220              111.66
5.08.230              111.65
5.08.240              111.60
5.08.250              111.70
5.08.280              111.99
5.10.080              114.001
5.10.090              114.002
5.10.100              114.003
5.10.110              114.004
5.10.120              114.005
5.10.130              114.006
5.10.010              114.007
5.10.020              114.008
5.10.030              114.009
5.10.040              114.010
5.10.060              114.012
5.10.070              114.013
5.10.140              114.999
5.12.010              116.001
5.12.020              116.002
5.12.030              116.003
5.12.050              116.016
5.12.060              116.017
5.12.070              116.018
5.12.080              116.019
5.12.090              116.020
5.12.100              116.021
5.12.110              116.022
5.12.120              116.023
5.12.130              116.024
5.12.140              116.025
5.12.150              116.026
5.12.160              116.027
5.12.170              116.028
5.12.180              116.029
5.12.190              116.040
5.12.200              116.041
5.12.210              116.042
5.12.230              116.044
5.12.240              116.045
5.12.250              116.046
5.12.260              116.047
5.12.270              116.048
5.12.280              116.050
5.12.290              116.051
5.12.300              116.052
5.12.310              116.053
5.12.320              116.054
5.12.330              116.055
5.12.340              116.056
5.12.350              116.057
5.12.360              116.058
5.12.370              116.059
5.14.010              110.045
5.14.020              110.046
5.14.030              110.047
5.14.040              110.048
5.14.050              110.049
5.14.060              110.050
5.14.070              110.051
5.14.080              110.052
5.16.010              118.070
5.16.020              118.071
5.16.030              118.072
5.16.040              118.073
5.16.050              118.074
5.16.060              118.075
5.16.070              118.076
5.16.080              118.077
5.16.090              118.078
5.16.100              118.079
5.16.110              118.080
5.16.120              118.081
5.16.130              118.082
5.16.140              118.083
5.18.010              111.01
5.18.020              111.02
5.18.030              111.03
5.18.040              111.04
5.18.050              111.05
5.18.060              111.06
5.18.070              111.07
5.18.080              111.08
5.18.100              111.09
5.18.110              111.10
5.18.120              111.11
5.20.010              110.065
5.20.020              110.066
5.20.030              110.067
5.20.040              110.068
5.22.010              119.01
5.22.020              119.02
5.22.030              119.03
5.22.040              119.04
5.22.050              119.05
5.24.010              110.080
5.24.020              110.081
5.24.030              110.082
5.24.040              110.083
5.24.050              110.084
5.24.060              110.085
5.24.070              110.086
5.24.080              110.087
5.24.090              110.088
5.24.100              110.089
5.24.110              110.090
5.24.120              110.999
5.26.010              113.25
5.26.020              113.26
5.26.030              113.27
5.26.040              113.28
5.26.050              113.29
5.26.060              113.30
5.26.070              113.31
5.28.010              110.105
5.28.020              110.106
5.28.030              110.107
5.28.040              110.108
5.30.010              118.115
5.30.020              118.116
5.30.030              118.117
5.30.040              118.118
5.30.050              118.119
5.30.060              118.120
5.30.070              118.121
5.30.080              118.122
5.30.090              118.123
5.30.100              118.124
5.30.105              118.125
5.30.110              118.126
5.30.120              118.127
5.30.130              118.128
5.30.140              118.129
5.30.150              118.130
5.30.160              118.131
5.32.010              118.095
5.32.020              118.096
5.32.030              118.097
5.32.040              118.098
5.32.050              118.099
5.32.060              118.100
5.32.070              118.101
5.32.080              118.102
5.32.090              118.103
5.34.010              112.01
5.34.020              112.02
5.34.030              112.03
5.34.040              112.04
5.34.050              112.05
5.34.060              112.06
5.34.070              112.07
5.34.080              112.08
5.34.090              112.09
5.34.100              112.10
5.34.110              112.11
5.34.120              112.12
5.34.130              112.13
5.34.140              112.99
5.36.010              158.01
5.36.020              158.02
5.36.030              158.03
5.36.040              158.04
5.36.050              158.05
5.36.060              158.06
5.36.070              158.07
5.36.080              158.08
5.36.090              158.09
5.36.100              158.10
5.36.110              158.11
5.36.120              158.12
5.36.130              158.13
5.36.140              158.14
5.36.150              158.15
5.36.160              158.16
5.36.170              158.17
5.36.180              158.18
5.40.010              115.15
5.40.020              115.16
5.40.030              115.17
5.40.050              115.19
5.40.060              115.20
5.40.070              115.21
5.40.080              115.22
5.40.090              115.23
5.40.100              115.24
5.40.110              115.25
5.40.120              115.26
5.40.130              115.27
5.40.140              115.28
5.40.150              115.29
5.40.160              115.30
5.40.170              115.31
5.40.180              115.32
5.40.190              115.33
5.40.200              115.34
5.40.210              115.35
5.40.220              115.36
5.40.230              115.37
5.42.010              113.45
5.42.020              113.46
5.42.030              113.47
5.42.040              113.48
5.42.050              113.49
5.42.060              113.50
5.42.070              113.51
5.42.080              113.52
5.42.090              113.53
5.42.100              113.54
5.42.110              113.55
5.48.010              118.145
5.48.020              118.146
5.48.030              118.147
5.50.010              118.160
5.50.020              118.162
5.50.030              118.163
5.50.040              118.164
5.50.050              118.165
5.50.060              118.166
5.50.070              118.167
5.50.080              118.168
5.50.090              118.169
5.50.100              118.170
5.50.110              118.171
5.50.120              118.174
5.50.130              118.175
5.50.140              118.176
5.50.150              118.177
5.50.160              118.178
5.50.180              118.180
5.52.010              118.001
5.52.020              118.002
5.52.030              118.003
5.52.040              118.004
5.52.050              118.005
5.52.060              118.006
5.52.070              118.007
5.52.080              118.008
5.54.010              118.020
5.54.020              118.021
5.54.030              118.022
5.54.040              118.023
5.54.050              118.024
5.54.060              118.025
5.54.070              118.026
5.54.080              118.027
5.54.090              118.028
5.54.100              118.029
5.54.110              118.030
5.54.120              118.031
5.54.130              118.032
5.54.140              118.033
5.54.150              118.034
5.54.160              118.035
5.54.170              118.036
5.54.180              118.037
5.54.190              118.038
5.54.200              118.039
5.54.210              118.040
5.54.220              118.999
5.54.230              118.041
5.56.010              112.25
5.56.020              112.26
5.56.030              112.27
5.56.040              112.28
5.56.050              112.29
5.56.060              112.30
5.56.070              112.31
5.56.080              112.32
5.56.090              112.33
5.56.100              112.34
5.56.110              112.35
5.56.120              112.36
5.56.130              112.37
5.56.140              112.38
5.56.150              112.39
5.56.160              112.40
5.56.170              112.41
5.56.180              112.42
5.56.190              112.43
5.56.200              112.44
5.56.210              112.45
5.58.010              116.070
5.58.020              116.071
5.58.030              116.072
5.58.040              116.073
5.58.050              116.074
5.58.060              116.075
5.58.070              116.076
5.58.080              116.077
5.58.090              116.078
5.58.100              116.079
5.58.110              116.080
5.58.120              116.999
5.58.130              116.081
5.60.010              118.055
5.60.020              118.056
5.60.030              118.057
5.60.040              118.058
5.60.050              118.999
5.62.010              112.60
5.62.020              112.61
5.62.030              112.62
5.62.040              112.63
5.62.050              112.64
5.62.060              112.65
5.62.070              112.66
5.62.080              112.67
5.62.090              112.68
5.62.100              112.69
5.62.110              112.70
5.64.010              111.25
5.64.020              111.26
5.64.030              111.27
5.64.040              111.28
5.66.010              110.030
5.66.020              110.031
5.68.010              114.070
5.68.020              114.071
5.68.030              114.072
5.68.040              114.073
5.68.050              114.074
5.68.060              114.075
5.68.070              114.076
5.68.080              114.077
5.68.090              114.078
5.68.100              114.999
5.70.010              114.090
5.70.020              114.091
5.70.030              114.092
5.70.040              114.093
5.70.050              114.094
5.70.060              114.095
5.70.070              114.096
5.70.080              114.097
5.70.090              114.098
5.70.100              114.099
5.70.110              114.100
5.70.120              114.101
5.70.130              114.102
5.70.140              114.103
5.70.150              114.104
5.74.010              118.190
5.74.020              118.191
5.74.030              118.192
5.74.040              118.193
5.74.050              118.194
5.74.060              118.195
5.74.070              118.999
6.04.010              95.01
6.04.020              95.02
6.04.030              95.03
6.04.040              95.04
6.04.050              95.05
6.04.060              95.06
6.04.070              95.07
6.04.080              95.08
6.04.090              95.09
6.04.100              95.10
6.04.140              95.11
6.04.150              95.25
6.04.160              95.26
6.04.170              95.27
6.04.180              95.28
6.04.190              95.29
6.04.200              95.30
6.04.210              95.31
6.04.220              95.32
6.04.220              95.33
6.04.230              95.35
6.04.240              95.36
6.04.250              95.37
6.04.260              95.38
6.04.270              95.39
6.04.280              95.40
6.04.290              95.41
6.04.300              95.42
6.04.310              95.43
6.04.320              95.44
6.04.330              95.45
6.04.340              95.46
6.04.350              95.47
6.04.360              95.48
6.04.370              95.49
6.04.380              95.50
6.04.390              95.51
6.04.400              95.52
6.04.410              95.99
8.04.010              91.001
8.04.020              91.002
8.04.030              91.003
8.04.040              91.004
8.04.050              91.005
8.04.060              91.006
8.04.070              91.007
8.04.080              91.008
8.04.090              91.009
8.04.100              91.010
8.04.120              91.011
8.04.130              91.012
8.04.140              91.013
8.12.010              93.01
8.12.020              93.02
8.12.030              93.03
8.12.040              93.04
8.12.050              93.05
8.12.060              93.06
8.12.070              93.07
8.16.120              94.01
8.16.210              94.99
8.24.010              91.025
8.24.020              91.026
8.24.030              91.027
8.24.040              91.028
8.24.050              91.029
8.24.060              91.999
8.28.010              91.040
8.28.020              91.041
8.28.030              91.042
8.28.040              91.043
8.28.050              91.044
8.28.060              91.045
8.28.070              91.046
8.28.080              91.047
8.32.010              91.060
8.36.010              94.55
8.36.020              94.56
8.36.030              94.57
8.36.040              94.58
8.36.050              94.59
8.36.060              94.60
8.36.070              94.61
8.36.080              94.99
8.36.090              94.62
8.36.100              94.63
8.40.010              94.35
8.40.020              94.36
8.40.030              94.99
8.40.050              94.38
8.40.070              94.40
9.04.010              130.01
9.04.020              130.02
9.08.010              131.01
9.08.020              131.02
9.08.030              131.03
9.08.040              131.04
9.08.045              131.05
9.08.050              131.06
9.08.060              131.07
9.08.070              131.08
9.08.080              131.09,
                      131.99
9.08.090              131.10
9.08.100              131.11
9.08.110              131.12
9.08.120              131.25
9.08.130              131.26
9.08.140              131.27
9.08.150              131.28
9.08.160              131.29
9.08.170              131.30
9.08.180              131.99
9.12.010              132.01
9.12.020              132.02
9.12.030              132.03
9.12.040              132.04
9.12.050              132.05
9.12.060              132.06
9.12.070              132.07
9.12.080              132.08
9.12.090              132.09
9.12.100              132.10
9.12.110              132.11
9.12.120              132.12
9.12.130              132.13
9.12.140              132.14
9.12.150              132.15
9.12.160              132.16,
                      132.99
9.12.170              132.17,
                      132.99
9.16.020              133.02,
                      133.99
9.20.010              135.01
9.20.020              135.02
9.20.030              135.03,
                      135.99
9.20.040              135.04
9.24.010              134.01
9.24.020              134.02,
                      134.99
9.24.030              134.03
10.04.010             71.01
10.08.010             70.01
10.08.020             70.02
10.08.030             70.03
10.08.040             70.04
10.08.050             70.05
10.08.060             70.06
10.08.070             70.99
10.16.010             72.01
10.16.020             72.02
10.16.030             72.03
10.16.040             72.04
10.16.050A            Ch. 76, Sch. I
10.16.050B            72.99
10.16.060             72.05
10.20.010             70.20
10.20.020             70.21
10.20.030             70.22
10.20.040             70.23
10.20.050             70.24
10.24.010             73.01
10.24.020             73.02
10.24.030             73.03
10.24.040             73.04
10.24.050             73.05
10.24.060             73.06
10.24.070             73.07
10.24.080             73.08
10.24.090             73.09
10.24.100             73.10
10.24.110             73.11
10.24.120             73.25
10.24.130             73.26
10.24.140             73.27
10.24.150             73.28
10.24.160             73.29
10.24.180             73.32
10.28.010             Ch. 77, Sch. I
10.32.010 - 10.32.060 Ch. 77, Sch. II
10.36.010             74.01
10.36.020             74.02
10.36.030             74.03
10.36.040             74.04
10.36.050             74.05
10.36.060             74.06
10.36.070             74.07
10.36.080             74.08
10.36.090             74.09
10.36.100             74.10
10.40.010             75.01
10.40.020             75.02
10.40.030             75.03
10.40.040             75.04
10.40.050             75.05
10.40.060             75.06
10.40.070             75.07
12.04.010             90.001
12.04.020             90.002
12.04.030             90.003
12.04.040             90.999
12.08.010             90.015
12.08.020             90.016
12.08.030             90.017
12.08.040             90.018
12.08.060             90.019
12.08.070             90.020
12.08.080             90.021
12.08.090             90.022
12.08.100             90.023
12.08.110             90.024
12.08.120             90.025
12.08.130             90.026
12.08.140             90.999
12.16.010             90.070
12.16.020             90.071
12.16.030             90.072
12.16.040             90.999
12.20.020             90.085
12.20.030             90.086
12.28.010             90.120
12.28.020             90.121
12.28.030             90.122
13.04.010             51.01
13.04.020             51.02
13.04.030             51.03
13.04.040             51.04
13.04.050             51.05
13.04.060             51.06
13.04.070             51.07
13.04.080             51.08
13.04.090             51.09
13.04.100             51.10
13.04.110             51.11
13.04.120             51.12
13.04.140             51.13
13.04.150             51.14
13.04.160             51.15
13.04.170             51.16
13.04.180             51.17
13.04.190             51.18
13.04.200             51.19
13.04.210             51.20,
                      51.99
13.08.010             52.001
13.08.020             52.002
13.08.030             52.003
13.08.040             52.004
13.08.050             52.005
13.08.060             52.006
13.08.070             52.007
13.08.080             52.008
13.08.090             52.009
13.08.100             52.010
13.08.110             52.011
13.08.120             52.012
13.08.130             52.999
13.08.140             52.025
13.08.150             52.026
13.08.160             52.027
13.08.180             52.028
13.08.170             52.028
13.08.190             52.030
13.08.200             52.031
13.08.210             52.032
13.08.220             52.033
13.08.230             52.034
13.08.240             52.035
13.08.250             52.036
13.08.260             52.037
13.08.270             52.038
13.08.280             52.039
13.08.290             52.040
13.08.300             52.041
13.08.310             52.042
13.08.315             52.043
13.08.320             52.055
13.08.330             52.056
13.08.340             52.057
13.08.350             52.058
13.08.360             52.059
13.08.370             52.060
13.08.380             52.061
13.08.390             52.062
13.08.400             52.063
13.08.410             52.064
13.08.420             52.065
13.08.430             52.066
13.08.440             52.080
13.08.450             52.081
13.08.460             52.082
13.08.470             52.083
13.08.480             52.084
13.08.490             52.085
13.08.500             52.086
13.08.510             52.087
13.08.520             52.088
13.08.530             52.089
13.08.540             52.090
13.08.550             52.091
13.08.560             52.092
13.08.570             52.105
13.08.580             52.106
13.12.010             53.01
13.12.020             53.02
13.12.030             53.03
13.12.040             53.04
13.12.050             53.05
13.12.070             53.06
13.12.060             53.99
15.26.010             151.100
15.26.020             151.999
15.28.010             153.01
15.28.020             153.02
15.28.030             153.03
15.28.040             153.04
15.28.050             153.05
15.28.060             153.06
15.28.070             153.07
15.28.080             153.08
15.28.090             153.09
15.28.100             153.10
15.28.110             153.11
15.28.120             153.12
15.28.130             153.13
15.28.140             153.14
15.28.150             153.15
15.28.160             153.16
15.28.170             153.17
15.28.180             153.18
15.28.190             153.19
15.28.200             153.20
15.28.210             153.21
15.28.220             153.22
15.28.230             153.23
15.28.240             153.24
15.28.250             153.25
15.32.010             154.01
15.32.020             154.02
15.32.030             154.03
15.32.040             154.04
15.32.050             154.05
15.32.055             154.06
15.32.060             154.07
15.32.070             154.08
15.32.080             154.09
15.32.090             154.10
15.32.100             154.11
15.32.110             154.12
15.32.120             154.99
15.36.010             152.30
15.36.020             152.31
15.36.030             152.32
15.36.040             152.33
15.36.050             152.34
15.36.060             152.35
15.36.070             152.36
15.36.080             152.37
15.40.010             151.115
15.40.020             151.116
15.44.010             152.01
15.44.020             152.02
15.44.030             152.03
15.44.040             152.04
15.44.050             152.05
15.44.060             152.06
15.44.070             152.07
15.44.080             152.08
15.44.090             152.09
15.44.100             152.10
15.44.110             152.11
15.44.120             152.12
15.44.130             152.13
15.44.140             152.14
15.44.150             152.15
15.44.160             152.16
15.44.170             152.17
15.44.180             152.18
15.48.010             151.130
15.48.020             151.131
15.56.010             155.01
15.56.020             155.02
15.64.010             151.145
15.64.020             151.147
15.64.030             151.146
15.64.035             151.148
15.64.040             151.149
15.64.045             151.150
15.64.050             151.151
15.64.060             151.152
15.64.070             151.153
15.64.080             151.154
15.64.090             151.999
15.70.010             151.185
15.70.020             151.186
15.72.010             156.01
15.72.020             156.02
15.72.030             156.03
15.72.040             156.04
15.72.050             156.05
15.72.060             156.06
15.72.070             156.07
15.72.080             156.08
15.72.090             156.09
15.72.100             156.10
15.72.110             156.11
15.74.010             156.25
15.74.020             156.26
15.74.030             156.27
15.74.040             156.28
15.74.050             156.29,
                      156.33
15.74.050             156.30
15.74.070             156.31
15.74.080             156.32
15.74.100             156.34
15.74.110             156.35
15.74.120             156.36
15.74.130             156.37
15.76.010             151.200
15.76.020             151.201
15.80.010             151.215
15.80.020             151.216
15.80.030             151.217
15.80.040             151.218
15.80.050             151.219
15.80.060             151.220
15.80.070             151.221
15.80.080             151.222
15.80.090             151.223
15.84.010             152.50
15.84.020             152.51
15.84.030             152.52
15.84.040             152.53
15.84.050             152.54
15.84.060             152.55
15.84.070             152.56
15.84.080             152.57
15.84.090             152.58
15.84.100             152.59
15.84.110             152.60
15.84.120             152.61
15.84.130             152.62
15.84.140             152.63
15.84.150             152.64
15.84.160             152.65
15.84.170             152.99
15.88.010             157.01
15.88.020             157.02
15.88.030             157.03
15.88.040             157.04
15.88.050             157.05
15.88.060             157.06
15.88.070             157.07
15.88.080             157.08
15.88.090             157.09
15.88.100             157.10
15.88.110             157.11
15.88.120             157.12
15.88.130             157.13
15.88.140             157.14
15.88.150             157.15
15.88.160             157.16
15.88.170             157.17
15.88.180             157.18
15.88.190             157.19
                      
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No.      Date Passed Code Section
2018-06-0332R 6-12-2018   T.S.O. II
2018-06-0333R 6- -2018    T.S.O. I
2018-09-0338R 9-25-2018   T.S.O. I
2018-09-0339R 9-25-2018   T.S.O. I
2023-07-0422R 7-25-2023   T.S.O. III
2023-07-0441R 7-25-2023   T.S.O. II
2023-09-0445R 9-12-2023   T.S.O. I
2023-09-0446R 9-26-2023   T.S.O. I
2023-10-0447R 10-10-2023  T.S.O. I
2023-12-0449R 12-12-2023  T.S.O. III
2023-12-0450R 12-12-2023  T.S.O. III
2023-12-0451R 12-12-2023  T.S.O. III
2023-12-0455R 12-12-2023  T.S.O. I
2024-02-0456R 2-13-2024   T.S.O. I
2024-03-0457R 3-12-2024   T.S.O. I
2024-06-0459R 6-25-2024   T.S.O. I
2024-08-0460R 8-27-2024   T.S.O. I
2024-08-0461R 8-27-2024   T.S.O. I
2024-08-0462R 8-27-2024   T.S.O. I
2024-12-0466R 12-10-2024  T.S.O. I
2024-12-0467R 12-10-2024  T.S.O. I
2025-01-0468R 1-28-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-01-0469R 1-28-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-02-0480R 2-11-2025   T.S.O. II
2025-03-0482R 3-11-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-04-0483R 4-8-2025    T.S.O. I
2025-04-0484R 4-8-2025    T.S.O. I
2025-04-0485R 4-8-2025    T.S.O. I
2025-04-0487R 4-22-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-04-0488R 4-22-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-05-0489R 5-13-2025   T.S.O. II
2025-05-0490R 5-13-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-05-0491R 5-13-2025   T.S.O. I
                         
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.            Date Passed Code Section
21                  1-16-1948   91.013
177                 6-22-1960   158.06
177                 7-22-1960   158.02
733                 11-6-1973   32.052
2220, 1             - -1997     32.290
2220, 2             - -1997     32.291
2220, 3             - -1997     32.292
2220, 4             - -1997     32.293
2220, 5             - -1997     32.294
2272, 1             - -1997     32.340
2272, 2             - -1997     32.342
2272, 3             - -1997     32.343
2272, 5             - -1997     32.349
2272, 6             - -1997     32.344
2272, 13            - -1997     32.347
2272, 11 (part)     - -1997     32.341,
                                32.346
2272, 12 (part)     - -1997     32.345,
                                32.348
2324, 1             - -1998     30.15
2324, 2 (part)      - -1998     30.16 -
                                30.27
2327, 1             - -1998     30.01
2353, 1             - -1998     31.205
2353, 2             - -1998     31.206
2353, 3             - -1998     31.207
2353, 4             - -1998     31.208
2353, 5             - -1998     31.209
2353, 6             - -1998     31.210
2380, Art. 1        - -1999     151.145
2380, Art. 2        - -1999     151.147
2380, Art. 3        - -1999     151.146
2380, Art. 4        - -1999     151.149
2380, Art. 5        - -1999     151.151
2380, Art. 6        - -1999     151.152
2380, Art. 7        - -1999     151.153
2380, Art. 8        - -1999     151.154
2380, Art. 9        - -1999     151.999
                                31.011,
                                32.053,
                                32.055,
                                32.057,
                                32.059,
                                32.101,
                                32.148,
                                32.229,
2417, (part)        - -1999     32.232,
                                32.260 -
                                32.263,
                                32.328,
                                33.030,
                                33.031,
                                33.115,
                                70.06,
                                72.04,
                                73.09, 95.99
                                31.011,
                                32.053,
                                32.055,
                                32.057,
                                32.059,
                                32.101,
                                32.148,
                                32.229,
2418, (part)        - -1999     32.232,
                                32.260 -
                                32.263,
                                32.328,
                                33.030,
                                33.031,
                                33.115,
                                70.06,
                                72.04,
                                73.09
2371 2              - -1999     33.184
2411, 2             - -1999     151.149
2414, 2             - -1999     151.149
2422, Art. 1        - -1999     157.09
2422, Art. 2        - -1999     157.01
2422, Art. 3        - -1999     157.16
2371, 1             - -1999     33.183
2375, 1             - -1999     32.535
2375, 2             - -1999     32.536
2375, 3             - -1999     32.537
2410, 1             - -1999     32.375
2410, 2             - -1999     32.376
2412, 1             - -1999     32.099
2413, 1             - -1999     32.425
2413, 2             - -1999     32.426
2413, 3             - -1999     32.427
2413, 4             - -1999     32.428
2413, 5             - -1999     32.429
2413, 6             - -1999     32.430
2423, 2             - -1999     151.149
2429, 1 (part)      - -1999     95.28, 95.99
2454, 1 (part)      - -2000     70.20 -
                                70.22
2461, 1             - -2000     94.55
2461, 2             - -2000     94.56
2461, 3             - -2000     94.57
2461, 4             - -2000     94.58
2461, 5             - -2000     94.59
2461, 6             - -2000     94.60
2461, 7             - -2000     94.61
2461, 8             - -2000     94.99
2461, 9             - -2000     94.62
2461, 10            - -2000     94.63
2489, 1             - -2000     30.04
2493, 1             - -2000     33.001
2493, 2             - -2000     33.002
2493, 3             - -2000     33.003
2493, 4             - -2000     33.004
2493, 5             - -2000     33.005
2493, 6             - -2000     33.006
2493, 7             - -2000     33.007
2493, 8             - -2000     33.008
2493, 9             - -2000     33.009
2493, 10            - -2000     33.010
2493, 11            - -2000     33.011
2493, 12            - -2000     33.012
2493, 13            - -2000     33.013
2493, 14            - -2000     33.014
2493, 15            - -2000     33.015
2493, 16            - -2000     33.016
2493, 17            - -2000     33.017
2493, 18            - -2000     33.018
2479, 1             - -2000     151.100
2479, 2             - -2000     151.999
2486, 1 (part)      - -2000     73.25
                                90.018,
                                90.020,
                                90.023,
2506, 2 (part)      - -2001     90.025,
                                90.040,
                                90.070,
                                90.071
2507 1              - -2001     70.05
2556, 1             - -2001     156.25
2556, 2             - -2001     156.26
2556, 3             - -2001     156.27
2556, 4             - -2001     156.28
2556, 5             - -2001     156.29
2556, 6             - -2001     156.30
2556, 7             - -2001     156.31
2556, 8             - -2001     156.32
2556, 9             - -2001     156.33
2556, 10            - -2001     156.34
2556, 11            - -2001     156.35
2556, 12            - -2001     156.36
2556, 13            - -2001     156.37
2568, 1             - -2001     95.28
2573, 1             - -2001     73.05
2597, 1             - -2002     151.185
2597, 2             - -2002     151.186
2599, 1             - -2002     95.32
2599, 2             - -2002     95.33
2602, 1             - -2002     154.03
2602, 2             - -2002     154.04
2602, 3             - -2002     154.06
2603, 1             - -2002     151.146
2603, 2             - -2002     151.148
2603, 3             - -2002     151.149
2603, 4             - -2002     151.150
2603, 5 (part)      - -2002     151.152,
                                151.153
2632, 1             - -2002     90.120
2632, 2             - -2002     90.121
2632, 3             - -2002     90.122
2659                10-8-2002   33.101
2662, 1, 2          - -2002     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2675, 1, 2          - -2002     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2676, 2             - -2002     Ch. 77, Sch. II
2684, 2 (part)      - -2002     33.060 -
                                33.066
2696, 2             - -2003     33.062
2729, 1             - -2003     70.22
2731, 2             - -2003     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2745, 1             - -2003     32.291
2756, 1, 2          - -2003     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2757, 1, 2          - -2003     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2758, 2             - -2003     32.264
2763, 1             - -2003     72.05
2799, 2             - -2004     32.560
2799, 3             - -2004     32.561
2799, 4             - -2004     32.562
2799, 5             - -2004     32.563
2799, 6             - -2004     32.564
2809, 1, 2          - -2004     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2819, 1             - -2004     30.28
2838, 1             - -2004     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2842, 1             - -2004     32.445
2842, 2             - -2004     32.446
2842, 3             - -2004     32.447
2842, 4             - -2004     32.448
2846, 2 (part)      - -2004     31.225 -
                                31.228
2850, 1             - -2004     32.480
2850, 2             - -2004     32.481
2850, 3             - -2004     32.482
2850, 4             - -2004     32.483
2874, 1             - -2005     91.060
2882, Art. 2 (part) - -2005     32.460 -
                                32.465
2890, 1, 2          - -2005     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2895, 1, 2          - -2005     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2914 1              - -2005     94.35
2914 2 (part)       - -2005     94.36,
                                94.99
2914 3 (part)       - -2005     94.38,
                                94.40
2931, 2, 3 (Exh. A) - -2005     33.101
2943, 2             - -2005     31.111
2943, 5             - -2005     31.113
2006-02-0002O       2-14-2006   T.S.O. I
2006-02-0003O       2-14-2006   T.S.O. I
2006-02-0004O       2-28-2006   T.S.O. I
2006-02-0005O       2-28-2006   T.S.O. I
2006-02-0006O       2-28-2006   32.395 -
                                32.411
2006-02-0008O       2-28-2006   32.115,
                                32.116
2006-03-0009O       3-14-2006   T.S.O. I
2006-03-0010O       3-14-2006   T.S.O. I
2006-04-0013O       4-11-2006   T.S.O. I
2006-04-0014O       4-25-2006   T.S.O. IV
2006-04-0015O       4-25-2006   32.363
2006-04-0016O       4-25-2006   73.25
2006-04-0017O       4-25-2006   70.21
                                31.140 -
                                31.161,
2006-04-0021O       4-25-2006   31.999,
                                111.90 -
                                111.92
2006-04-0022O       4-25-2006   T.S.O. I
2006-04-0023O       4-25-2006   T.S.O. I
2006-04-0024O, 2    4-25-2006   32.320
2006-04-0025O       5-9-2006    T.S.O. I
2006-06-0029O       6-13-2006   T.S.O. I
2006-06-0033O       6-13-2006   30.04
2006-06-0034O       6-13-2006   32.480
2006-06-0036O       6-13-2006   32.060
2006-06-0037O       6-13-2006   51.02
                                90.040 -
2006-06-0038O       6-27-2006   90.063,
                                90.999
2006-07-0042O       7-11-2006   T.S.O. I
2006-07-0044O       7-11-2006   94.38
2006-07-0046O       7-11-2006   33.088
2006-07-0047O       7-25-2006   32.449
2006-07-0045O       8-8-2006    111.51,
                                111.52
2006-08-0050O       8-8-2006    30.01
                                90.015,
                                90.016,
2006-09-0054O       9-12-2006   90.018,
                                90.020,
                                90.021,
                                90.024
2006-09-0055O       9-12-2006   70.55
2006-09-0057O       9-12-2006   T.S.O. II
2006-09-0058O       9-26-2006   T.S.O. I
2006-09-0059O       9-26-2006   T.S.O. I
                                32.495 -
2006-10-0061O       10-24-2006  32.500,
                                32.515 -
                                32.520
2006-10-0062O       10-24-2006  T.S.O. II
2006-11-0065O       11-14-2006  T.S.O. I
2006-11-0067O       11-14-2006  32.245 -
                                32.247
2006-11-0070O       11-28-2006  Ch. 77, Sch. I
2006-12-0071O       12-12-2006  T.S.O. I
                                110.007,
                                111.07,
                                112.70,
                                113.47,
2006-12-0072O       12-12-2006  114.008,
                                115.02,
                                115.18,
                                118.002,
                                118.071,
                                118.163
2006-12-0073O       12-12-2006  117.01 -
                                117.03
2006-12-0075O       12-12-2006  117.15 -
                                117.23
                                33.080 -
2006-12-0078O       12-12-2006  33.087,
                                33.999
2007-01-0080O       1-9-2007    111.51
2007-01-0081O       1-23-2007   T.S.O. I
2007-01-0082O       1-23-2007   158.05
                                111.45,
2007-02-0085O       2-13-2007   111.48,
                                111.50
                                50.01 -
                                50.07,
2007-03-0086O       3-13-2007   50.20 -
                                50.32,
                                50.99
                                32.001 -
                                32.006,
2007-03-0090O       3-27-2007   32.020 -
                                32.023,
                                32.035 -
                                32.039
2007-03-0092O       3-27-2007   T.S.O. I
2007-04-0093O       4-10-2007   T.S.O. I
                                51.03,
2007-04-0099O, § 3 4-24-2007   51.07,
                                51.12
                                52.056,
2007-04-0100O       4-24-2007   52.060,
                                111.52
2007-04-0097O       5-8-2007    33.104
2007-05-0104O       5-8-2007    T.S.O. I
2007-05-0105O       5-22-2007   T.S.O. I
2007-05-0106O       5-22-2007   T.S.O. I
2007-05-0107O       5-22-2007   T.S.O. I
2007-06-0108O       6-12-2007   116.015
2007-06-0109O       6-12-2007   31.240,
                                31.241
2007-06-0110O       6-12-2007   T.S.O. II
2007-06-0112O       6-12-2007   T.S.O. II
2007-06-0113O       6-26-2007   T.S.O. I
2007-07-0115O       7-24-2007   T.S.O. I
2007-08-0118O       8-14-2007   T.S.O. I
2007-08-0120O       8-28-2007   133.03,
                                133.99
2007-09-0123O       9-11-2007   T.S.O. III
2007-09-0124O       9-11-2007   T.S.O. I
2007-09-0125O       9-11-2007   T.S.O. III
2007-09-0126O       9-11-2007   111.52
2007-09-0127O       9-25-2007   T.S.O. I
                                151.065 -
2007-10-0128O       10-9-2007   151.088,
                                151.999
2007-10-0130O       10-9-2007   116.049,
                                116.999
2007-11-0132O       11-13-2007  T.S.O. II
2007-11-0133O       11-13-2007  T.S.O. I
2007-11 0134O       11-13-2007  Ch. 77, Sch. I
2007-11-0135O       11-27-2007  T.S.O. II
2007-11-0136O       11-27-2007  T.S.O. II
2007-11-0139O       11-27-2007  116.043
2007-11-0140O       11-27-2007  70.05
2007-11-01410       11-27-2007  70.07
2007-11-0138O       11-27-2007  Ch. 77, Sch. I
2007-11-0140O       11-27-2007  Ch. 76, Sch. I
2007-12-0142O       12-11-2007  T.S.O. II
2007-12-0146O       12-11-2007  111.52
                                30.45 -
2008-01-0148O       1-8-2008    30.52,
                                30.99
2008-01-0150O       1-22-2008   T.S.O. I
2008-02-0153O       2-12-2008   150.01
                                91.075 -
2008-02-0154O       2-12-2008   91.080,
                                91.999
2008-02-0155O       2-12-2008   111.52
2008-02-0156O       2-12-2008   111.52
                                151.001 -
2008-02-0158O       3-11-2008   151.005,
                                151.007 -
                                151.022
2008-03-0162O       3-11-2008   30.27
2008-02-160O        3-25-2008   151.165 -
                                151.172
2008-03-0163O       3-25-2008   T.S.O. I
2008-03-0164O       3-26-2008   T.S.O. II
2008-04-0165O       4-8-2008    111.51
2008-04-0166O       4-8-2008    111.51
2008-04-0167O       4-8-2008    111.51
2008-04-0168O       4-8-2008    111.51
2008-04-0169O       4-8-2008    111.51
2008-04-0170O       4-8-2008    111.51
2008-04-0171O       4-22-2008   T.S.O. I
                                51.03,
2008-04-0174O       4-22-2008   51.07,
                                51.08,
                                51.12
                                52.056,
2008-04-0175O       4-22-2008   52.060,
                                52.061
2008-04-0177O       4-22-2008   111.51
2008-05-0182O       5-13-2008   70.21,
                                70.22
                                51.03,
2008-05-0183O       5-13-2008   51.07,
                                51.08,
                                51.12
2008-05-0178O       5-27-2008   T.S.O. I
2008-05-0180O       5-27-2008   T.S.O. I
2008-05-0184O       5-27-2008   31.095 -
                                31.097
                                54.01 -
                                54.05,
2008-05-0185O       5-27-2008   54.20 -
                                54.25,
                                54.40
2008-05-0186O       5-27-2008   T.S.O. I
2008-05-0187O       6-10-2008   T.S.O. I
2008-06-0188O       6-10-2008   33.180
2008-06-0189O       6-24-2008   T.S.O. I
2008-07-0190O       9-9-2008    94.01
                                91.090 -
2008-07-0193O       7-22-2008   91.102,
                                91.999
2008-08-0195O       8-12-2008   Ch. 76, Sch. III
                                159.01 -
                                159.11,
                                159.25 -
                                159.28,
2008-08-0196O       8-12-2008   159.40 -
                                159.42,
                                159.60 -
                                159.62,
                                159.99
2008-08-0198O       8-26-2008   T.S.O. I
2008-09-0200O       9-9-2008    T.S.O. I
2008-10-0203O       10-28-2008  32.575 -
                                32.578
2008-10-0204O       10-14-2008  111.51
2008-10-0205O       10-14-2008  111.51
2008-10-0206O       10-28-2008  T.S.O. I
2008-11-0207O       11-25-2008  90.100 -
                                90.108
2008-12-0208O       12-9-2008   Adopting Ordinance
2008-12-0209O       12-9-2008   T.S.O. III
2008-12-0210O       12-9-2008   T.S.O. III
2008-12-0211O       12-9-2008   T.S.O. III
2008-12-0212O       12-9-2008   T.S.O. III
                                32.070,
                                32.075,
2008-12-0213O       12-9-2008   32.076,
                                32.078,
                                32.080
2009-01-0214O       1-13-2009   T.S.O. II
2009-01-0215O       1-13-2009   T.S.O. I
2009-01-0216O       1-13-2009   T.S.O. II
                                32.070,
                                32.075,
2009-01-0217O       1-27-2009   32.076,
                                32.078,
                                32.080
2009-02-0218O       2-10-2009   T.S.O. I
2009-02-0219O       2-10-2009   111.51
2009-02-0220O       2-10-2009   111.51
2009-02-0221O       2-10-2009   111.51
2009-04-0230O       4-28-2009   111.51
2009-05-0237O       5-26-2009   T.S.O. I
2009-05-0239O       5-26-2009   52.067
                                51.15,
2009-05-0240O       5-26-2009   51.21,
                                51.22,
                                51.25
2009-06-0243O       6-9-2009    T.S.O. I
2009-07-0250O       7-14-2009   T.S.O. IV
2009-07-0251O       7-28-2009   32.576,
                                32.577
2009-08-0252O       8-11-2009   111.51
2009-09-0257O       9-8-2009    32.291
                                118.115 -
                                118.117,
2009-09-0259O       9-22-2009   118.123,
                                118.129,
                                118.131
2009-09-0260O       9-22-2009   111.52
2009-12-0264O       11-24-2009  111.51
2009-11-0265O       11-24-2009  111.51
2009-12-0268O       12-8-2009   32.395 -
                                32.411
2009-11-0273O       12-14-2009  111.51
2010-01-0276O       1-26-2010   111.51
                                112.60 -
2010-02-0277O       2-23-2010   112.71,
                                112.99
2010-02-0278O       2-23-2010   70.20 -
                                70.22
2010-03-0283O       3-9-2010    30.01
2010-03-0284O       3-23-2010   70.99,
                                Ch. 77, Sch. I
                                32.130 -
2010-04-0287O       4-27-2010   32.133,
                                32.590 -
                                32.593
2010-04-0288O       4-27-2010   T.S.O. I
2010-04-0289O       4-27-2010   33.064
2010-05-0291O       5-11-2010   111.51
2010-05-0292O       5-11-2010   111.51
2010-06-0295O       6-8-2010    32.605 -
                                32.607
2010-06-0296O       6-8-2010    133.01,
                                133.03
2010-07-0293O       7-13-2010   111.51
2010-07-0299O       7-27-2010   111.51
2010-07-0300O       7-27-2010   111.51
2010-07-0301O       7-27-2010   111.51
2010-08-0303O       8-10-2010   90.062
                                95.01 -
                                95.11,
2010-09-0307O       9-28-2010   95.25 -
                                95.54,
                                95.99
2010-11-0314O       11-23-2010  51.03,
                                51.07
2010-12-0315O       12-14-2010  111.52
2010-12-0316O       12-14-2010  70.07
2011-01-0321O       1-11-2011   32.038,
                                32.039
2011-01-0324O       1-25-2011   32.061
2011-01-0325O       2-8-2011    92.01 -
                                92.11
                                151.001,
                                151.002,
                                151.006,
                                151.008,
                                151.009,
2011-02-0329O       2-22-2011   151.010,
                                151.011,
                                151.015,
                                151.016,
                                151.017,
                                151.019
2011-02-0330O       2-22-2011   151.035,
                                151.050
2011-04-0334O       4-12-2011   51.13
2011-04-0335O       4-12-2011   32.576,
                                32.577
2011-04-0336O       4-26-2011   92.04
2011-04-0341O       4-26-2011   33.064
2011-06-0345O       6-14-2011   32.446
2011-06-0346O       6-15-2011   32.449
2011-08-0351O       8-23-2011   31.013
2011-09-0353O       9-27-2011   111.51
2011-09-0362O       9-27-2011   90.085
2011-10-0355O       10-25-2011  111.51
2011-10-0356O       10-25-2011  111.51
2011-11-0360O       11-22-2011  111.51
2011-11-0361O       11-22-2011  111.51
2011-11-0362O       11-22-2011  90.042
2011-11-3570O       11-6-2011   32.002
2012-03-0274O       3-27-2012   T.S.O. III
2012-03-0375O       3-27-2012   111.51
2012-04-0377O       4-24-2012   94.35
                                31.030,
2012-05-0379O       5-8-2012    31.034 -
                                31.036
2012-06-0386O       6-26-2012   111.57
2012-07-0390O       7-24-2012   32.246
2012-08-0391O       8-28-2012   32.361
2012-09-0393O       9-11-2012   32.481
2012-09-0394O       9-11-2012   32.606
2012-09-0400O       9-25-2012   32.275
2012-09-0401O       9-25-2012   111.51
2012-09-0402O       9-25-2012   111.51
2012-10-0408O       10-19-2012  111.51
2012-10-0405O       10-23-2012  114.011
2012-10-0411O       11-27-2012  111.51
2012-11-0412O       11-27-2012  111.51
2013-01-0428O       1-8-2013    111.51
2013-02-0430O       2-12-2013   51.23,
                                51.24
                                95.01 -
                                95.11,
2013-03-0434O       3-12-2013   95.25 -
                                95.54,
                                95.99
                                114.050 -
2013-03-0435O       3-12-2013   114.057,
                                114.999
2013-04-0438O       4-23-2013   70.21,
                                70.22
2013-04-0439O       4-23-2013   111.51
2013-04-0440O       4-23-2013   111.51
2013-05-0442O       5-14-2013   31.112
2013-05-0445O       5-14-2013   111.51
2013-05-0446O       5-14-2013   111.51
2013-05-0447O       5-14-2013   111.51
2013-07-0454O       7-9-2013    32.058
2013-09-0461O       9-24-2013   117.35 -
                                117.45
2013-10-0462O       10-8-2013   111.51
2013-10-0463O       10-8-2013   111.51
2013-11-0470O       11-26-2013  111.51
2013-11-0471O       11-26-2013  111.51
                                51.03,
2013-12-0474O       12-10-2013  51.07,
                                51.12
2013-12-0475O       12-10-2013  52.056,
                                52.060
2014-01-0482O       1-14-2014   94.37,
                                94.38
2014-03-0485O       3-11-2014   T.S.O. II
2014-03-0487O       3-11-2014   160.01
2014-03-0889O       3-20-2014   111.51
                                111.40 -
2014-03-0488O       3-25-2014   111.71,
                                111.99
2014-04-0490O       4-8-2014    111.52
                                118.160 -
2014-05-0493O       5-27-2014   118.180,
                                118.199
2014-05-0495O       5-27-2014   33.101
2014-06-0498O       6-10-2014   161.01
2014-07-0503O       7-22-2014   32.073,
                                32.074
2014-07-0504O       7-22-2014   32.050,
                                32.051
2014-07-0505O       7- -2014    T.S.O. I
2014-08-0507O       8-12-2014   160.01
2014-08-0510O       8-26-2014   160.01
2014-08-0513O       8-26-2014   32.449
2014-08-0515O       8-26-2014   111.70
2014-09-0518O       9-9-2014    160.01
2014-11-0524O       11-11-2014  160.01
2014-12-0533O       12-16-2014  51.03,
                                51.07
2014-12-0534O       12-16-2014  52.056
2015-08-0554O       9-22-2015   94.38
2015-09-0556O       9-22-2015   112.61
2015-09-0557O       9-22-2015   70.35 -
                                70.42
2015-10-0562O       10-27-2015  110.012
2015-10-0565O       10-27-2015  32.576
2015-11-0569O       11-24-2015  151.006
2016-01-0578O       1-12-2016   160.01
2016-01-0579O       1-12-2016   T.S.O. I
2016-04-0590O       4-12-2016   32.117
2016-05-0600O       5-24-2016   T.S.O. II
2016-05-0601O       5-24-2016   111.51
2016-06-0602O       6-14-2016   T.S.O. I
2016-06-0603O       6-28-2016   T.S.O. II
2016-06-0604O       6-28-2016   T.S.O. II
2016-06-0605O       6-28-2016   T.S.O. II
                                111.50,
2016-06-0607O       6-28-2016   111.52,
                                111.53
2016-06-0608O       7-12-2016   T.S.O. I
2016-06-0609O       7-12-2016   T.S.O. I
2016-06-0610O       7-12-2016   T.S.O. I
2016-07-0611O       7-12-2016   T.S.O. I
2016-07- 0612O      8-9-2016    111.51
2016-08-0614O       8-9-2016    T.S.O. II
                                95.02 -
2016-08-0615O       8-9-2016    95.05,
                                95.29
                                111.40,
                                111.41,
2016-08-0616O       9-13-2016   111.50 -
                                111.52,
                                114.011
2016-08-0617O       - -2016     31.220 -
                                31.223
2016-09-0618O       9-13-2016   160.01
2016-09-0619O       9-13-2016   161.01
2016-10-0620O       10-25-2016  T.S.O. I
2016-07-0621O       11-8-2016   111.51
2016-12-0621O       12-13-2016  T.S.O. III
2016-12-0624O       12-13-2016  T.S.O. III
2016-12-0625O       12-13-2016  T.S.O. III
2016-12-0626O       12-13-2016  T.S.O. III
2016-12-0627O       12-13-2016  111.51
                                33.001,
2016-12-0628O       12-13-2016  33.002,
                                33.185
2017-01-0629O       1-10-2017   111.51
2017-01-0630O       1-10-2017   32.192,
                                32.193
2017-01-0631O       1-24-2017   T.S.O. I
2017-01-0632O       1-24-2017   T.S.O. I
2017-02-0633O       2-14-2017   T.S.O. I
2017-03-0634O       3-14-2017   T.S.O. II
2017-03-0635O       3-14-2017   T.S.O. II
2017-03-0636O       3-28-2017   T.S.O. I
2017-04-0637O       4-11-2017   160.01
2017-04-0638O       4-11-2017   T.S.O. I
2017-04-0639O       4-11-2017   T.S.O. I
                                51.03,
2017-04-0640O       4-25-2017   51.07,
                                51.12
2017-04-0641O       4-25-2017   52.056,
                                52.060
2017-04-0643O       4-25-2017   31.004
2017-05-0644O       5-9-2017    111.51
2017-01-0645O       5-23-2017   T.S.O. I
2017-06-0646O       6-13-2017   T.S.O. I
2017-06-0647O       6-27-2017   111.51
2017-06-0648O       6-27-2017   T.S.O. I
2017-06-0649O       6-27-2017   T.S.O. I
2017-07-0650O       7-11-2017   111.51
2017-07-0651O       7-11-2017   111.51
2017-07-0652O       7-25-2017   T.S.O. II
2017-08-0653O       8-8-2017    T.S.O. I
2017-08-0654O       8-8-2017    T.S.O. I
2017-08-0655O       8-22-2017   T.S.O. I
2017-08-0656O       8-22-2017   T.S.O. I
2017-09-0659O       9-12-2017   31.036,
                                31.037
2017-09-0660O       9-12-2017   111.51
2017-10-0662O       10-24-2017  T.S.O. II
2017-10-0664O       10-24-2017  160.01
                                151.066,
                                151.067,
2017-10-0665O       10-24-2017  151.070,
                                151.080,
                                151.081,
                                151.321
2017-10-0666O       10-24-2017  111.51
2017-11-0667        11-14-2017  32.382 -
                                32.385
2017-12-067O        12-12-2017  T.S.O. III
2017-12-0669O       12-12-2017  T.S.O. III
2017-12-0671O       12-12-2017  T.S.O. III
2017-12-0672O       12-12-2017  T.S.O. III
2017-12-0673O       12-12-2017  T.S.O. III
2017-12-0674        12-12-2017  111.07
2017-12-0675O       12-12-2017  160.01
2018-01-0678O       1-9-2018    T.S.O. I
2018-02-0679O       2-13-2018   111.51
2018-0680O          2-27-2018   T.S.O. II
                                95.01 -
                                95.11,
2018-02-0681O       2-27-2018   95.25 -
                                95.54,
                                95.99
2018-03-0682O       3-13-2018   111.52
2018-03-0683O       3-13-2018   160.01
2018-03-0684O       3-13-2018   T.S.O. I
                                51.03,
2018-04-0686O       4-24-2018   51.07,
                                51.12
2018-04-0687O       4-24-2018   51.03,
                                51.07
2018-04-06880       4-24-2018   32.099
2018-04-06890       4-24-2018   94.40
2018-04-06900       4-24-2018   32.102
2018-05-0691O       5-22-2018   T.S.O. I
2017-05-0961O       5-24-2018   T.S.O. I
2018-06-0692O       6-12-2018   T.S.O. III
2018-06-0693O       6-26-2018   160.01
2018-07-0694O       7-10-2018   T.S.O. I
2018-07-0695        - -2018     Ch. 77, Sch. I,
                                II
2018-07-0696O       7-24-2018   111.51
2018-07-0697O       7-24-2018   T.S.O. I
2018-08-0699O       8-28-2018   92.02
2018-08-0700O       - -2018     Ch. 77, Sch. II
2018-09-0702O       9-25-2018   T.S.O. I
2018-09-0703O       9-25-2018   T.S.O. I
2018-09-0704O       9-25-2018   160.01
2018-10-0705O       10-23-2018  T.S.O. I
2018-11-0706O       11-13-2018  T.S.O. I
2018-11-0707O       11-13-2018  T.S.O. I
2018-11-0708O       11-13-2018  T.S.O. I
2018-11-0709O       11-13-2018  111.51
2018-12-0710O       12-11-2018  T.S.O. III
2018-12-0711O       12-11-2018  T.S.O. III
2018-12-0712O       12-11-2018  T.S.O. III
2018-12-0713O       12-11-2018  T.S.O. III
2018-12-0714O       12-11-2018  T.S.O. I
2018-12-0715O       12-11-2018  T.S.O. II
2019-01-0716O       1-8-2019    T.S.O. I
2019-01-0717O       1-8-2019    T.S.O. I
2019-01-0718O       1-22-2019   T.S.O. II
2019-01-0719O       1-22-2019   111.51
2019-02-0720O       2-12-2019   118.056 -
                                118.058
2019-02-0721O       2-26-2019   T.S.O. I
2019-03-0723        3-12-2019   91.060
                                151.005,
2019-03-0724        3-12-2019   151.007  -
                                151.009
2019-03-0726O       3-12-2019   94.01
2019-03-0728O       3-26-2019   111.51
2019-04-0727        4-9-2019    151.001,
                                151.002
                                94.01,
2019-04-0729O       4-9-2019    94.35,
                                94.36,
                                94.38
2019-04-0730O       4-9-2019    160.01
2019-04-0731O       4-9-2019    T.S.O. II
2019-04-0732        4-9-2019    155.01,
                                155.02
                                51.03,
2019-04-0733O       4-23-2019   51.07,
                                51.12
2019-04-0734O       4-23-2019   52.056,
                                52.060
2019-04-0736        4-23-2019   T.S.O. II
2019-04-0737O       4-23-2019   T.S.O. I
2019-06-0738O       6-11-2019   94.01
2019-06-0739O       6-11-2019   94.36
2019-06-0740O       6-11-2019   111.51
2019-06-0741O       6-25-2019   96.01 -
                                96.04
2019-06-0742O       6-25-2019   T.S.O. III
2019-07-0743O       7-9-2019    94.37
2019-07-0744O       7-9-2019    T.S.O. I
2019-07-0745O       7-9-2019    T.S.O. I
2019-08-0746O       8-13-2019   T.S.O. IV
2019-08-0747O       8-13-2019   151.300 -
                                151.321
2019-08-0748O       8-13-2019   114.011
2019-08-0749O       8-13-2019   T.S.O. I
2019-08-0750O       8-27-2019   94.02
2019-08-0751O       8-29-2019   94.01 
2019-08-0752O       8-27-2019   T.S.O. I
2019-09-0753O       9-24-2019   T.S.O. II
2019-09-0754O       9-24-2019   Ch. 77, Sch. III
2019-09-0755O       9-24-2019   T.S.O. I
2019-10-0756O       10-8-2019   94.02
2019-10-0757O       10-8-2019   111.51
2019-10-0785O       10-8-2019   111.51
                                159.01 -
                                159.11,
                                159.25 -
                                159.28,
2019-10-0759O       10-22-2019  159.40 -
                                159.42,
                                159.60 -
                                159.62,
                                159.99
2019-11-0761O       11-12-2019  160.01
2019-11-0762O       11-12-2019  160.01
2019-11-0763O       11-12-2019  T.S.O. II
2019-11-0764O       - -         T.S.O. II
2019-11-0765O       11-26-2019  Ch. 77, Sch. III
2019-11-0766O       11-26-2019  T.S.O. II
2019-11-0767O       11-26-2019  T.S.O. I
2019-11-0768O       11-26-2019  T.S.O. I
2019-11-0769O       11-26-2019  T.S.O. I
2019-11-0770O       11-26-2019  160.01
2019-12-0775O       12-10-2019  T.S.O. I
2019-12-0776O       12-10-2019  70.35
2019-12-0777O       12-10-2019  131.12
2019-12-0778O       12-10-2019  131.11
2020-01-0779O       1-14-2020   94.02
2019-10-0760O       1-28-2020   T.S.O. I
2019-12-0771O       12-10-2019  T.S.O. III
2019-12-0772O       12-10-2019  T.S.O. III
2019-12-0773O       12-10-2019  T.S.O. III
2019-12-0774O       12-10-2019  T.S.O. III
2020-01-0780O       1-28-2020   111.51
2020-02-0781O       2-11-2020   111.51
2020-02-0782O       2-25-2020   T.S.O. I
2020-02-0783O       2-25-2020   160.01
2020-02-0784O       2-25-2020   150.01
2020-02-0785O       2-25-2020   117.35 -
                                117.45
2020-03-0786O       3-26-2020   31.016
                                112.60 -
2020-04-0787O       4-14-2020   112.71,
                                112.99
                                51.03,
2020-04-0788O       4-28-2020   51.07,
                                51.12
2020-04-0789O       4-28-2020   52.056,
                                52.060
2020-05-0792O       5-12-2020   T.S.O. II
2020-05-0793O       5-26-2020   T.S.O. I
2020-05-0794O       5-26-2020   T.S.O. I
2020-06-0795O       - -         31.013
2020-06-0796O       - -         T.S.O. I
2020-06-0798O       6-23-2020   T.S.O. I
2020-07-0800O       7-14-2020   T.S.O. III
2020-08-0801O       8-25-2020   T.S.O. I
2020-08-0802O       8-25-2020   T.S.O. I
2020-10-0805O       10-8-2020   111.51
2020-10-0806O       10-13-2020  T.S.O. II
2020-10-0809O       10-27-2020  T.S.O. I
2020-11-0811O       11-10-2020  T.S.O. I
2020-12-0813O       12-8-2020   T.S.O. III
2020-12-00814O      12-8-2020   T.S.O. III
2020-12-0815O       12-8-2020   T.S.O. III
2020-12-0816O       12-8-2020   T.S.O. III
2020-12-0818O       12-8-2020   T.S.O. III
2020-12-0819O       12-8-2020   111.51
2021-01-0820O       1-12-2021   T.S.O. II
2021-01-0821O       1-12-2021   T.S.O. II
                                120.01,
2021-01-0822O       1-26-2021   120.02,
                                120.99
2021-01-0823O       1-26-2021   T.S.O. II
2021-02-0824O       2-23-2021   T.S.O. I
2021-03-0825O       3-9-2021    160.01
2021-03-0826O       3-23-2021   T.S.O. II
2021-03-0827O       3-23-2021   T.S.O. II
2021-03-0828O       3-23-2021   T.S.O. I
2021-03-0829O       3-23-2021   160.01
2021-03-0830O       3-23-2021   90.041,
                                90.042
                                51.03,
2021-04-0831O       4-13-2021   51.07,
                                51.12
2021-04-0832O       4-13-2021   52.056
2021-04-0834O       4-27-2021   111.51
2021-04-0836        4-27-2021   T.S.O. II
2021-04-0837O       4-27-2021   T.S.O. II
2021-05-0838O       5-11-2021   160.01
2021-05-0839O       5-11-2021   160.01
2021-05-0840O       5-11-2021   54.40
2021-05-0842O       5-11-2021   T.S.O. II
2021-05-0843O       5-25-2021   T.S.O. I
2021-05-0844O       5-25-2021   T.S.O. I
2021-05-0845O       5-25-2021   111.51
2021-05-0846O       5-25-2021   111.51
2021-06-0847O       6-8-2021    T.S.O. II
2021-06-0848O       6-8-2021    160.01
2021-06-0850O       6-8-2021    T.S.O. I
2021-06-0852O       6-8-2021    T.S.O. III
2021-07-0853O       7-13-2021   T.S.O. I
2021-07-0854O       7-13-2021   T.S.O. II
2021-07-0856O       7-13-2021   T.S.O. II
2021-08-0857O       8-10-2021   T.S.O. I
2021-08-0858O       8-10-2021   T.S.O. III
2021-08-0859O       8-10-2021   T.S.O. III
2021-08-0860O       8-10-2021   160.01
2021-08-0861O       8-10-2021   150.01
2021-08-0862O       8-10-2021   T.S.O. II
2021-08-0863O       8-10-2021   T.S.O. II
2021-08-0864O       8-24-2021   111.51
2021-08-0865O       8-24-2021   111.51
2021-09-0867O       9-28-2021   T.S.O. I
2021-10-0868O       10-12-2021  160.01
2021-10-0869O       10-26-2021  111.47
2021-10-0870O       10-26-2021  111.02,
                                111.40
2021-10-0871O       10-26-2021  111.50
2021-11-0872O       11-9-2021   111.51
2021-11-0873O       11-9-2021   111.51
2021-11-0875O       11-23-2021  T.S.O. II
2021-11-0876O       11-23-2021  T.S.O. I
2021-11-0877O       11-23-2021  T.S.O. I
2021-11-0878O       11-23-2021  T.S.O. II
2021-11-0879O       11-23-2021  T.S.O. II
2021-12-0872O       12-14-2021  T.S.O. III
2021-12-0880O       - -2021     T.S.O. I
2021-12-0881O       - -2021     T.S.O. I
2021-12-0882O       12-14-2021  T.S.O. II
2022-01-0883O       1-11-2022   T.S.O. I
2022-01-0884O       1-11-2022   T.S.O. II
2022-01-0885O       1-11-2022   T.S.O. II
2022-02-0887O       2-2-2022    T.S.O. II
2022-02-0888O       2-8-2022    T.S.O. I
2022-02-0889O       2-22-2022   T.S.O. III
2022-02-0890O       2-22-2022   T.S.O. III
2022-02-0891O       2-22-2022   T.S.O. III
2022-02-0892O       2-22-2022   T.S.O. I
2022-03-0894O       4-12-2022   T.S.O. II
2022-03-0895O       3-8-2022    T.S.O. I
2022-03-0896O       4-12-2022   T.S.O. II
2022-03-0897O       4-12-2022   T.S.O. II
2022-03-0898O       4-12-2022   T.S.O. II
2022-04-0900O       4-12-2022   T.S.O. II
2022-04-0901O       4-26-2022   52.056,
                                52.060
                                51.03,
2022-04-0902O       4-26-2022   51.07,
                                51.12,
                                51.13
2022-05-0904O       5-10-2022   T.S.O. I
2022-05-0905O       5-24-2022   T.S.O. I
2022-05-0906O       5-24-2022   T.S.O. I
2022-05-0907O       5-24-2022   T.S.O. I
2022-05-0908O       5-24-2022   T.S.O. I
2022-05-0909O       5-24-2022   160.01
2022-05-0910O       5-24-2022   T.S.O. I
2022-06-0912O       6-14-2022   T.S.O. II
2022-06-0913O       6-14-2022   T.S.O. III
2022-07-0914O       7-12-2022   T.S.O. I
2022-07-0915O       7-12-2022   T.S.O. II
2022-07-0916O       7-12-2022   T.S.O. II
2022-07-0917O       7-12-2022   T.S.O. II
2022-08-0918O       8-9-2022    111.51
2022-08-0919O       8-9-2022    T.S.O. II
2022-08-0920O       8-9-2022    T.S.O. II
2022-08-0921O       8-9-2022    T.S.O. I
2022-08-0922O       8-9-2022    T.S.O. II
2022-08-0923O       8-9-2022    33.090 -
                                33.094
2022-08-0924O       8-9-2022    T.S.O. II
2022-08-0925O       9-12-2022   T.S.O. II
2022-09-0928O       9-12-2022   T.S.O. II
2022-09-0952O       9-12-2022   T.S.O. II
2022-09-0926O       9-27-2022   T.S.O. I
2022-09-0929O       9-27-2022   T.S.O. II
2022-10-0927O       10-11-2022  T.S.O. I
2022-10-0930O       10-11-2022  T.S.O. I
2022-10-0931O       10-11-2022  T.S.O. II
2022-10-0932O       10-11-2022  T.S.O. II
2022-11-0934O       11-2-2022   T.S.O. I
2022-11-0937O       11-2-2022   T.S.O. I
2022-11-0933O       11-8-2022   33.093
2022-11-0935O       11-22-2022  T.S.O. I
2022-11-0936O       11-22-2022  160.01
2022-11-0938O       11-22-2022  T.S.O. I
2022-11-0939O       11-22-2022  T.S.O. II
2022-11-0940O       11-22-2022  111.51
2022-12-0941O       12-13-2022  T.S.O. III
2022-12-0942O       12-13-2022  T.S.O. III
2022-12-0943O       12-13-2022  T.S.O. III
2022-12-0944O       12-13-2022  T.S.O. III
2022-12-0945O       12-13-2022  111.51
2022-12-0946O       12-13-2022  111.51
2022-12-0947O       12-13-2022  T.S.O. I
2022-12-0948O       12-13-2022  T.S.O. I
2022-12-0949O       12-13-2022  T.S.O. I
2022-12-0952O       12-13-2022  T.S.O. I
2022-12-0953O       1-10-2022   111.51
2023-02-0957O       2-28-2023   160.01
2023-02-0958O       2-28-2023   T.S.O. III
2023-03-0959O       3-14-2023   T.S.O. I
2023-03-0960O       3-28-2023   T.S.O. II
2023-04-0961O       4-11-2023   T.S.O. I
2023-04-0962O       4-11-2023   T.S.O. I
2023-04-0963O       4-11-2023   T.S.O. I
                                51.03,
2023-04-0965O       4-25-2023   51.07,
                                51.12
2023-04-0966O       4-25-2023   52.056,
                                52.060
2023-04-0970O       4-25-2023   T.S.O. I
2023-04-0971O       4-25-2023   T.S.O. I
2023-04-0972O       4-25-2023   T.S.O. III
2023-05-0974O       5-9-2023    T.S.O. I
2023-05-0975O       5-9-2023    T.S.O. II
2023-05-0976O       5-23-2023   T.S.O. I
2023-05-0977O       5-23-2023   T.S.O. III
2023-06-0979O       6-13-2023   114.079 -
                                114.088
2023-06-0980O       6-27-2023   T.S.O. I
2023-06-0981O       6-27-2023   T.S.O. II
2023-06-0982O       6-27-2023   72.05,
                                72.06
2023-06-0983O       6-27-2023   111.51
2023-07-0984O       7-25-2023   T.S.O. I
2023-07-0985O       7-25-2023   T.S.O. II
2023-08-0986O       8-8-2023    T.S.O. I
2023-08-0987O       8-8-2023    T.S.O. II
2023-08-0988O       8-22-2023   111.51
2023-08-0989O       8-22-2023   111.51
2023-08-0990O       8-22-2023   T.S.O. I
2023-06-0992O       8-22-2023   T.S.O. I
2023-08-0994O       8-22-2023   T.S.O. I
2023-09-0995O       9-26-2023   T.S.O. II
2023-09-0996O       9-26-2023   T.S.O. I
2023-10-0997O       10-10-2023  T.S.O. III
2023-10-0998O       10-10-2023  111.51
2023-10-0999O       10-10-2023  111.51
2023-10-1001O       10-24-2023  111.51
2023-10-1002O       10-24-2023  T.S.O. II
2023-11-1003O       11-14-2023  111.51
2023-11-1004O       11-14-2023  T.S.O. II
2023-11-1005O       11-28-2023  T.S.O. III
2023-11-1006O       11-28-2023  T.S.O. III
2023-11-1007O       11-28-2023  T.S.O. III
2023-12-1010O       12-12-2023  117.50 -
                                117.56
2024-01-1011O       1-9-2024    T.S.O. I
2024-01-1012O       1-9-2024    T.S.O. I
2024-01-1013O       1-9-2024    T.S.O. I
2024-02-1018O       2-13-2024   T.S.O. I
2024-02-1019O       2-27-2024   30.40 -
                                30.43
2024-03-1021O       3-26-2024   T.S.O. I
                                51.03,
2024-04-1022O       4-23-2024   51.07,
                                51.12
2024-04-1023O       4-23-2024   52.056,
                                52.060
2024-04-1026O       4-23-2024   T.S.O. II
2024-05-1027O       5-14-2024   Ch. 77, Sch. I
2024-05-1028O       5-14-2024   T.S.O. II
2024-05-1029O       5-14-2024   T.S.O. I
2024-05-1030O       5-14-2024   T.S.O. I
2024-05-1031O       5-14-2024   160.01
2024-05-1032O       5-14-2024   111.51
2024-06-1033O       6-11-2024   T.S.O. I
2024-06-1034O       6-11-2024   111.51
2024-06-1035O       6-25-2024   T.S.O. I
2024-07-1036O       7-9-2024    T.S.O. I
2024-08-1038O       8-27-2024   T.S.O. II
2024-08-1039O       8-27-2024   T.S.O. I
2024-09-1042O       9-24-2024   T.S.O. I
2024-09-1043O       9-24-2024   73.10
2024-10-1044O       10-22-2024  T.S.O. I
2024-11-1046O       11-12-2024  T.S.O. I
2024-11-1051O       11-26-2024  T.S.O. III
2024-12-1047O       12-10-2024  T.S.O. III
2024-12-1048O       12-10-2024  T.S.O. III
2024-12-1049O       12-10-2024  T.S.O. III
2024-12-1052O       12-23-2024  33.185
2025-01-1053O       1-14-2025   T.S.O. II
2025-01-1056O       1-14-2025   T.S.O. II
2025-01-1057O       1-14-2025   T.S.O. II
2025-01-1058O       1-28-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-01-1059O       1-28-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-02-1060O       2-11-2025   94.02
2025-02-1064O       2-25-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-02-1065O       2-25-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-02-1066O       2-25-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-03-1061O       3-25-2025   T.S.O. III
2025-03-1062O       3-25-2025   T.S.O. III
2025-04-1069O       4-22-2025   160.01
2025-04-1070O       4-8-2025    T.S.O. I
                                51.03,
2025-04-1072O       4-22-2025   51.07,
                                51.12
2025-04-1073O       4-22-2025   52.056,
                                52.060
2025-04-1075O       4-22-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-04-1078O       4-22-2025   31.013
2025-04-1080O       4-22-2025   32.061
2025-05-1081O       5-13-2025   T.S.O. III
2025-05-1088O       5-27-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-06-1094O       6-10-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-06-1095O       6-10-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-07-1101O       7-22-2025   33.070
2025-08-1102O       8-12-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-08-1103O       8-12-2025   T.S.O. I
2025-08-1105O       8-12-2025   32.449
2025-08-1106O       8-12-2025   111.51
                               
 
 
