THE CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF
OAK PARK, ILLINOIS
1981
General Ordinances of the Village
Enacted as a Whole, March 3, 1981
Effective, August 3, 1981
Published by Order of the President and Board of Trustees
Code current through:
Ord. 25-142, passed 5-6-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE TO OAK PARK CODE
This Volume constitutes the first comprehensive revision and codification
of the general ordinances of the Village of Oak Park since the last version of
the Code was adopted in 1966. The ordinances were codified by Attorneys Arthur
C. Thorpe, Richard Martens, Raymond L. Heise and Bruno Graziano with the
assistance of the Village Clerk, Virginia Cassin. Textual editing and review
were performed by Clifford T. Osborn.
This Volume is dedicated to the public's right to know the status of the
most current laws of the Village.
PREAMBLE
This code of the Village of Oak Park, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including ordinance 25-142, passed May 6, 2025. Ordinances of the
Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to
the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
ORDINANCE 26-104
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ARTICLE 8 (“USES”) OF THE OAK PARK ZONING ORDINANCE
REGARDING BODY MODIFICATION ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
WHEREAS, on January 15, 2026 the Village of Oak Park Plan Commission (“ Plan
Commission ”) held a public hearing on the application of the Petitioner TAT3
Chicago, Inc.
(“ Petitioner ”), for a text amendment to Article 8 (“Uses”) – Table 8-1 (“Use
Matrix”) by adding
“Body Modification Establishment” as a special use in the NA – North Avenue
Zoning District; and
 
WHEREAS, notice of the public hearing was published in the Wednesday Journal on
December 24, 2025; and
 
WHEREAS, the Plan Commission recommended that the text amendment reflected in
this Ordinance be approved by a vote of five in favor and zero against upon the
close of the public hearing held on January 15, 2026 as reflected in the
minutes of the public hearing, incorporated herein by reference as though fully
set forth; and
 
WHEREAS, the Plan Commission adopted its “ Findings of Fact and Recommendation
” on January 15, 2026, which is adopted by the President and Board of Trustees
of the Village and incorporated herein as though fully set forth; and
 
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village have considered the
Plan Commission’s Findings of Fact and Recommendation and have determined that
it is appropriate to adopt the text amendment as provided in this Ordinance;
and
 
WHEREAS, the Village Board finds that the application meets the standards for a
Zoning Ordinance text amendment set forth in Section 14.1(E)2 (“Approval
Standards for Text Amendments”), of the Village of Oak Park Zoning Ordinance
and are approved.
 
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Oak Park, Cook County, Illinois, in the exercise of their home rule
powers, as follows:
 
Section 1. Recitals Incorporated. The above recitals are incorporated herein by
reference as though fully set forth.
 
Section 2. Adoption of Findings of Fact and Recommendation. The Findings of
Fact and Recommendation of the Plan Commission attached hereto as Exhibit A are
adopted by the President and Board of Trustees and incorporated herein.
 
Section 3. Zoning Ordinance Amended. Article 8 (“Uses”) - Table 8-1 (“Use
Matrix”) of the Oak Park Zoning Ordinance is amended by adding “Body
Modification Establishments” as a special use in the NA - North Avenue Zoning
District, to read as follows, with the change noted in red text:
 
*   *    *    *    *
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3968_9675x3945.jpg]  
*   *    *    *    *
Section 4. Severability and Repeal of Inconsistent Ordinances. If any section,
paragraph, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be held invalid, the
invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other provisions of this
Ordinance. All ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the
extent of such conflict.
 
Section 5. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect
after its approval, passage and publication as provided by law.
 
 
[REMAINDER OF PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
   ADOPTED this [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/IMAGES/0-0-0-3971_466x17.jpg]    day
of     , 2026, pursuant to a roll call vote at follows:
 
Voting                  Aye Nay Abstain Absent
President Scaman                      
Trustee Eder                          
Trustee Enyia                         
Trustee Leving Jacobson               
Trustee Straw                         
Trustee Taglia                        
Trustee Wesley                        
 
   APPROVED this [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/IMAGES/0-0-0-3974_449x17.jpg]    day
of     , 2026.
 
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3977_3995x17.jpg]
Vicki Scaman, Village President
 
ATTEST
  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3980_4321x17.jpg]
Christina M. Waters, Village Clerk
 
 
    Published in pamphlet form this     day of    , 2026.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3983_4062x597.jpg]
Christina M. Waters, Village Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE 26-109
 
AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING THE EXECUTION OF A DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE VILLAGE OF OAK PARK AND INTERFAITH HOUSING DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF 1106 MADISON STREET 
 
WHEREAS, the Village of Oak Park (“ Village ”) is a home rule unit of
government pursuant to Article VII, Section 6(a) of the Illinois Constitution;
and
 
WHEREAS, the Village Board desires to enter into the Development Agreement
between the Village and the Interfaith Development Housing Corporation of
Chicago (1106 Madison Street) attached to this Resolution as Exhibit A and made
a part hereof (“ Agreement ”); and
 
WHEREAS, the Village Board has determined that it is in the best interests of
the public’s health, safety, and welfare to approve the Agreement.
 
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the President and the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Oak Park, Cook County, Illinois, as follows:
 
Section 1. Recitals Incorporated. The above recitals are incorporated herein by
reference.  
 
Section 2. Approval and Execution. The Agreement is approved and the Village
Manager is authorized to execute the Agreement in substantially the form
attached.
 
 Section 3. Severability and Repeal of Inconsistent Approvals. If any section,
paragraph, clause or provision of this Resolution is held invalid, the
invalidity thereof will not affect any of the other provisions of this
Resolution. All resolutions and motions in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent of such conflict.
 
 Section 4. Effective Date. This Resolution will be in full force and effect
after its approval, passage and publication as provided by law.
 
 
[THIS SPACE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
 
ADOPTED this 10 th day of February, 2026, pursuant to a roll call vote as
follows:
 
Voting                  Aye Nay Abstain Absent
President Scaman                      
Trustee Eder                          
Trustee Enyia                         
Trustee Leving Jacobson               
Trustee Straw                         
Trustee Taglia                        
Trustee Wesley                        
     
APPROVED this 10 th day of February, 2026.
 
                                              __________________ 
                             Vicki Scaman, Village President
ATTEST
 
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3986_4320x17.jpg]                        
Christina M. Waters, Village Clerk
 
Published in pamphlet form this 10 th day of February, 2026.
 
 
                             [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/IMAGES/0-0-0-
3989_4320x17.jpg]                        
Christina M. Waters, Village Clerk
 
 
     
EXHIBIT A
 
AGREEMENT
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE ADOPTING A REVISION AND CODIFICATION OF THE GENERAL CODE OF THE
VILLAGE OF OAK PARK
BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Oak
Park, Cook County, Illinois, as follows:
SECTION 1:
That the following Chapters 1 to 28, both inclusive, are hereby ordained and
adopted as the general ordinances of the Village of Oak Park pursuant to the
Home Rule powers of Oak Park set forth in Article VII, Section 6 of the
Constitution of the State of Illinois and said Chapters shall constitute "The
Code of the Village of Oak Park".
SECTION 2:
That the provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect on and after
the 3rd day of August, 1981. Chapters 1 to 47 of the Code of The Village of Oak
Park of 1957 are repealed as of August 3, 1981.
SECTION 3:
That the repeal provided for in the preceding section of this ordinance shall
not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established accruing before the 3rd day of
August, 1981. That the repeal provided for in the previous section shall affect
only those ordinances contained in said 1957 Code as amended. Ordinances
relating to bond issues, contracts, conveyances, appropriation and levies,
salaries and wages, franchises, buildings, zoning, imposition of taxes and
other ordinances having been adopted independent of the Code of 1957 and shall
remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 4:
This ordinance and the Code of the Village of Oak Park shall be published in
book form prior to its effective date.
SECTION 5:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect as of August 3, 1981.
ADOPTED this 2nd day of March, 1981, pursuant to a roll call vote as follows:
AYES: Trustees Bode, Klem, Marshall, Philbin and Sokol and President McClure
NAYS: None
ABSENT: Trustee Fallon
APPROVED by me this 2nd day of March, 1981.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3328.gif]
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
General Provisions   1
Procedure For Issuance Of General Obligation Bonds   2
Procedure For Issuance Of Industrial And Commercial Revenue Bonds   3
Procedure For Execution Of Mortgage On Village Property   4
Tax Increment Financing Audit Committee   5
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-1-1: How Code Designated And Cited
1-1-2: Definitions And Rules Of Construction
1-1-3: Catchlines Of Sections
1-1-4: Severability Of Parts Of Code
1-1-5: General Penalty; Continuing Violations; Place Of Confinement
1-1-6: Record And Memorandum Of Ordinances
1-1-7: Provisions Construed As Continuations Of Existing Ordinances
1-1-8: Corporate Seal; Description; Facsimile
1-1-9: Corporate Seal; Use And Custody
1-1-10: Base Or Datum Established
1-1-11: Fiscal Year
1-1-12: Effect Of Repeal Of Ordinance
1-1-13: Effect Of Repeal Of Repealing Ordinance
1-1-14: Home Rule Powers; Procedures
1-1-15: Manner Of Correcting Inaccurate Bills
1-1-16: Sale Of Real Property Owned By The Village
1-1-1: HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED:
The ordinances codified herein and the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated "the code of the Village of Oak Park, Illinois,
1981", and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Oak Park
village code, 1981". (1981 Code)
1-1-2: DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the interpretation and construction of this code, the following definitions
and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the Board of Trustees or the context clearly requires
otherwise:
ACTION: Shall include suits, prosecutions and all judicial proceedings.
BOARD OR THE BOARD OR THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The President and the six (6)
Trustees of the Village of Oak Park, Illinois, acting together as a unit.
COUNTY OR THE COUNTY: Cook County in the state of Illinois.
COURT: Includes all courts of record.
GENDER: Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
IN THE VILLAGE OR WITHIN THE VILLAGE: Means and includes all territory over
which the Village now has or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the
exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers, including
extraterritorial land.
JOINT AUTHORITY: Words purporting to give a joint authority to three (3) or
more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such officers or persons.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUMBER: Words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to
several persons or things and words importing the plural may include the
singular.
OATH; SWORN: The word "oath" shall be deemed to include an affirmation and the
word "sworn" shall be construed to include the word affirmed.
OCCUPANT OR TENANT: The words "occupant" or "tenant" applied to a building or
land, mean any person who holds a written or an oral lease of or actually
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with
others.
OFFICER: Whenever the title of any Village officer is used, it shall be
construed as if the words "of the Village of Oak Park" followed it.
OR; AND: "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or", if the sense
requires it.
OWNER: The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant of
the whole or a part or the holder of any beneficial interest of such building
or land.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, state
agency, or any other legal entity, or its legal representative, agent or
assigns.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every species of property except "real property" as
defined by this section.
PRECEDING; FOLLOWING: The next before and next after, respectively.
PRESIDENT: The President of the Village of Oak Park.
PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and shall embrace
all chattels real.
SEAL: The seal of the Village of Oak Park.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines (or the lateral lines
of a roadway) and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of
whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a
matter of right for purposes of vehicular traffic.
TENSE: Words in the present tense include the future.
TIME, COMPUTATION OF: The time within which any act provided by law is to be
done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last,
unless the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday (as defined or fixed
in any statute now or hereafter in force in this state), and then it shall also
be excluded. If the day succeeding such Saturday or Sunday or holiday is also a
holiday or a Saturday or Sunday then such succeeding day shall also be
excluded.
VILLAGE: The Village of Oak Park in Cook County, state of Illinois, except as
otherwise provided.
WRITTEN; IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters.
YEAR: A calendar year unless otherwise expressed. (1981 Code)
1-1-3: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any
of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1981
Code)
1-1-4: SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE:
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this code be
declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining words,
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this code, since the
same would have been enacted by the Board of Trustees without the incorporation
in this code of any such invalid or unconstitutional word, phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph or section. (1981 Code)
1-1-5: GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS; PLACE OF CONFINEMENT:
Whenever in this code (or in any ordinance of the Village) any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in
such code (or ordinance) the doing of any act is required or the failure to do
any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided
therefor, the violation of any such provision of this code (or any ordinance)
shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), or less than twenty dollars ($20.00). Each day any violation of any
provision of this code (or of any ordinance) shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense. Any person failing to pay any such fine shall be punished as
provided in the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 2000-0-12, 3-20-2000)
1-1-6: RECORD AND MEMORANDUM OF ORDINANCES:
All ordinances passed by the Board of Trustees shall be recorded by the Village
Clerk in a proper book with indexes. The original shall be filed in the office
of the Village Clerk, and due proof of publication of all ordinances requiring
publication shall be procured by the Clerk, and such proof or affidavit of
publication shall be attached to and filed away with the ordinances; and the
Clerk shall also note in this book of ordinances, at the foot of the record of
each ordinance, a memorandum of the date of the passage, and, if published or
posted, of the date of the publication or posting of such ordinance. (1981
Code)
1-1-7: PROVISIONS CONSTRUED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES:
The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are substantially the
same as those of the municipal code of the Village of Oak Park of 1957 and
those of all other ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this
code, shall be construed as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.
(1981 Code)
1-1-8: CORPORATE SEAL; DESCRIPTION; FACSIMILE:
The corporate seal of the Village shall be circular in form and be so
constructed as to impress upon paper the words "Village of Oak Park, Illinois.
1901" within a circle formed by a circular wreath of oak leaves and acorns, and
the words "Organized, Village Seal", together with two (2) oak trees, an acorn
surmounted by an eagle with spreading wings, and a sunburst in the center of
the acorn, all enclosed within an inner circle. A facsimile of the seal showing
the words and figures thereof is as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3240.gif]
(1981 Code)
1-1-9: CORPORATE SEAL; USE AND CUSTODY:
The corporate seal of the Village shall be and remain in the custody of the
Village Clerk and any successor in office, to be used by the Clerk in all cases
provided for by any provisions of this code or other ordinances of the Village
or the laws of the state, and in all such other cases when the laws and customs
of any state or nation require the use of the corporate seal of the Village.
(1981 Code)
1-1-10: BASE OR DATUM ESTABLISHED:
The base or datum for the Village levels shall be, and the same is hereby
established, at the plane of the low water mark of Lake Michigan in the year
1847, as determined by the trustees of the Illinois and Michigan Canal, and
being indicated by bench marks within the Village limits as follows:
   43.176 feet below the top of the southwest corner of square base of column
at west side of south entrance to Emerson School;
   42.309 feet below the top of the southeast corner of square base of column
at east side of west entrance to Whittier School;
   49.503 feet below the top of the northwest corner of the square stone base
of the west column, at the north entrance to the former Municipal Building,
Lake Street and Euclid Avenue. (1981 Code)
1-1-11: FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal year of the Village shall begin on January 1 of each calendar year.
(1981 Code)
1-1-12: EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCE:
Whenever an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance,
the ordinance or part of ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in
force until the effective date of the ordinance repealing or modifying the
same; but no suit, proceeding, right, fine or penalty, instituted or created,
given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal, shall in
anywise be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and
recovered as fully as if such ordinance had continued in force, unless it shall
be therein otherwise expressly provided. (1981 Code)
1-1-13: EFFECT OF REPEAL OF REPEALING ORDINANCE:
When any ordinance repealing any former ordinance, clause or provision, shall
be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed so as to revive such
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be therein so expressly
provided. (1981 Code)
1-1-14: HOME RULE POWERS; PROCEDURES:
Procedures of the Village of Oak Park, including procedures for the adoption of
ordinances and resolutions, are governed by the Illinois municipal code.
However, any limitation in the Illinois municipal code in conflict with any
action taken by the Village of Oak Park pursuant to the home rule powers of the
Village, as set forth in section 6 of article VII of the 1970 constitution of
the state of Illinois, shall not be applicable to such Village action. (1981
Code)
1-1-15: MANNER OF CORRECTING INACCURATE BILLS:
   A.   In an instance where a customer's bill for water, sewer, and refuse and
recycling collection services provided by the Village has been incorrectly
calculated and the customer has been overbilled or underbilled, the Village
shall correct the charges for the erroneously billed period, not to exceed
twenty four (24) months, during which incorrect bills were rendered.
   B.   When a customer has been underbilled for any of the services set forth
in subsection
1-1-15A of this section, the Village may enter into a written deferred payment
agreement with the customer whereby the amount due may be paid in equal
installments within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of execution
of the agreement. (Ord. 15-123, 7-6-2015)
1-1-16: SALE OF REAL PROPERTY OWNED BY THE VILLAGE:
   A.   The Village Manager is authorized to negotiate agreements to sell real
property located outside of a tax increment financing district and any said
agreement shall be subject to approval by resolution adopted by a majority vote
of the Board of Trustees.
   B.   At the Village Manager's discretion, the Village may publish a notice
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village one time not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the Board of Trustees approval to sell real property
that the Village intends to sell real property pursuant to this section and
that the Village shall receive bids for such sale. The terms and conditions
upon which the Village shall consider bids for a sale shall be at the Village
Manager's discretion. (Ord. 15-133, 8-3-2015)
ARTICLE 2
PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS
SECTION:
1-2-1: Definitions
1-2-2: Authority To Issue General Obligation Bonds
1-2-3: Procedures
1-2-4: Public Purpose Of Borrowing
1-2-5: Details Of Bond Ordinance; Contract For Sale; Interest Savings
1-2-6: Execution Of Bonds; Form
1-2-7: Levy Of Taxes; Ordinance Filed; Future Levy Abatement
1-2-8: Appropriation
1-2-9: Illinois Municipal Code Superseded
1-2-10: Issuance Of Notes And Other Incurrence Of Debt
1-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
BOND ORDINANCE: One or more ordinances authorizing a specific issue or issues
of bonds adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village in accordance with the
policies and procedures set forth in this article.
BONDS: Any bonds issued pursuant to the authority of this article. (1981 Code;
amd. Ord. 1986-0-100, 11-3-1986)
1-2-2: AUTHORITY TO ISSUE GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS:
Section 6(a) of article VII of the 1970 constitution of Illinois provides that
"any municipality which has a population of more than 25,000 (is) a home rule
unit". The Village of Oak Park, with a current population in excess of twenty
five thousand (25,000) is, therefore, a home rule unit and may, under the power
granted by section 6(a) of article VII "exercise any power and perform any
function pertaining to its government and affairs, including but not limited
to, the power to . . . incur debt".
Section 6(d) of article VII of the 1970 constitution grants constitutional
authority for the Village of Oak Park to incur debt payable from ad valorem
property tax receipts maturing within forty (40) years from the time it is
incurred.
Section 6(k) of article VII of the 1970 constitution of Illinois grants
authority for the Village of Oak Park to incur debt payable from ad valorem tax
receipts without prior referendum approval. (1981 Code)
1-2-3: PROCEDURES:
It is in the best interests of the Village of Oak Park that procedures be
established for incurring debt and issuing bonds payable from ad valorem
property taxes. The Board of Trustees may, therefore, borrow money for lawful
purposes and, in evidence of such borrowing, issue general obligation bonds
payable from ad valorem taxes to be levied without limitation as to rate or
amount against all taxable property situated within the Village. Such bonds may
be issued without the submission of the question of their issuance to the
electors of the Village. The procedures for the adoption of the ordinance
authorizing the issuance of such bonds shall be in accordance with Article 5,
Division 3, of the Illinois Municipal Code, and said procedures shall be
substantially as hereinafter provided.
1-2-4: PUBLIC PURPOSE OF BORROWING:
The Board of Trustees shall adopt an ordinance (hereinafter designated as the
"Bond Ordinance") describing the public purpose or purposes to be served by
such borrowing. Said Bond Ordinance shall make a finding and determination that
such borrowing of money is necessary and pertains to the government and affairs
of the Village, is for a lawful public purpose or purposes, and is in the
public interest, which finding and determination shall be deemed conclusive.
1-2-5: DETAILS OF BOND ORDINANCE; CONTRACT FOR SALE; INTEREST SAVINGS:
The Bond Ordinance shall indicate the amount of money necessary to be borrowed,
the amount of bonds to be issued in evidence thereof, shall fix the details of
such bonds, including their date, number, denomination and maturity (which
cannot exceed forty [40] years from the date of said bonds) and their maximum
rate of interest. The bonds shall be sold in such manner as may be determined
in the Bond Ordinance. If the bonds are authorized to bear interest at the
maximum rate, they shall be sold at a price of not less than par and accrued
interest. If the bonds are authorized to bear interest at a rate less than the
maximum interest rate, they may be sold at a price of less than par, but in any
event, at such a price that the interest cost to the Village of the money
received by it from the proceeds of the sale of said bonds shall not exceed the
maximum interest rate per annum, computed to the average maturity of all bonds
sold as a single issue according to standard tables of bond values.
A contract for the sale of such bonds may be entered into prior to the adoption
of the Bond Ordinance, or the Bond Ordinance may provide for the subsequent
sale of the bonds therein authorized. In the event of such subsequent sale and
(if the bonds bear interest at a rate or rates less than that authorized in
such Bond Ordinance) prior to the delivery of such bonds, the taxes levied in
such Bond Ordinance shall be abated by that amount representing the savings
resulting from the sale of such bonds at a lower rate of interest than
authorized in such Bond Ordinance.
1-2-6: EXECUTION OF BONDS; FORM:
The Bond Ordinance: shall authorize the execution of the bonds therein
authorized on behalf of the Village by signature of the President and attested
by the Village Clerk; shall determine whether such bonds to be issued shall be
registered in the name of the owner as to principal only or whether the same
shall be fully registered as to both principal and interest; shall indicate the
place or places of payment of the principal and interest maturing on said bonds
and shall set forth the form of bond. (1981 Code)
1-2-7: LEVY OF TAXES; ORDINANCE FILED; FUTURE LEVY ABATEMENT:
The Bond Ordinance may make provision for the payment of such bonds, both
principal thereof and interest thereon until maturity, by the levy of a direct
annual tax upon all the taxable property within said Village sufficient for
such purpose. A copy of such Bond Ordinance, as adopted, certified to by the
Village Clerk, shall be filed in the office of the County Clerk of Cook County.
Such Bond Ordinance, as so filed, shall constitute the authority for the County
Clerk in and for each of the years for which taxes are levied in said Bond
Ordinance, to extend such taxes for collection against all the taxable property
situated within the Village of Oak Park. The taxes so levied in and by such
Bond Ordinance shall be extended annually by the County Clerk, in accordance
with law, without limitation as to rate or amount and such taxes shall be in
addition to and in excess of any and all other taxes levied or authorized to be
levied by the Board of Trustees. Such taxes so levied shall not be subject to
repeal or abatement in any manner whatsoever (except as provided below) until
such time as all the bonds authorized and issued under the terms of said Bond
Ordinance shall have been paid in full, both principal thereof and interest
thereon up to and including the date of maturity. However, the Board of
Trustees, having funds available, may appropriate same and order their payment
in trust to the paying agent for any maturities of bonds or interest thereon
due in the future, in which event the taxes to be levied at such future time to
pay such principal or interest may be abated by ordinance of the Board of
Trustees and placed on file with the County Clerk. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 1986-
0-100, 11-3-86)
1-2-8: APPROPRIATION:
The provisions of any bond ordinance shall constitute a repeatable annual
appropriation of the amounts required as therein referred to and described,
and, upon the delivery of the bonds therein authorized, the proceeds thereof
shall be used solely and only for the purpose or purposes for which the bonds
were authorized. Upon the adoption of any bond ordinance authorizing the
issuance of bonds and providing for the levy of taxes therefor, the same shall
be published by the Village Clerk as provided in the Bond Ordinance.
1-2-9: ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE SUPERSEDED:
Pursuant to the authority granted by section 6 of article VII of the 1970
Constitution of Illinois, the procedures hereby established for the issuance of
general obligation bonds, as herein provided for, shall be controlling and
shall be complied with by the Board of Trustees in the borrowing of money
through the issuance of general obligation bonds of the Village,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the provisions of the
Illinois Municipal Code of 1961, and all acts amendatory thereof and
supplementary thereto and any other law or laws of the State of Illinois. (1981
Code)
1-2-10: ISSUANCE OF NOTES AND OTHER INCURRENCE OF DEBT:
The Board of Trustees may issue notes or otherwise incur debt by motion of the
Board of Trustees duly adopted. (Ord. 1986-0-100, 11-3-86)
ARTICLE 3
PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL REVENUE BONDS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Definitions
1-3-2: Legislative Declaration of Purpose
1-3-3: Additional Powers
1-3-4: Exercise of Powers; Bonds
1-3-5: Covenants in Bonds
1-3-6: Signatures of Officers on Bonds; Validity of Bonds
1-3-7: Lien of Bonds
1-3-8: Liability for Bonds
1-3-9: Exemption From Construction and Bidding Requirements for Public
Buildings
1-3-10: Powers Conferred as Additional and Supplemental; Limitations Imposed;
Effect
1-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
BONDS: Means any bonds, notes, or other obligations of the Village issued
pursuant to the authority of this Article.
BOND ORDINANCE: Means one or more ordinances authorizing a specific issue or
issues of bonds adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village in accordance
with the policies and procedures set forth in this Article.
FINANCING AGREEMENT: Means any agreement, including without limitation, a lease
agreement, sale agreement, use agreement or loan agreement, entered into by the
Village with any person or persons which provides that the Village shall issue
its bonds to finance all or a portion of the costs of a project or projects,
title to which may or may not be vested in the Village, provided that said
bonds shall be limited obligations of the Village as provided in Section
1-3-8 of this Article.
PERSON: Means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political
subdivision, state agency, or any other legal entity, or its legal
representative, agent or assigns.
PROJECT: Means any land, interest in land, building, structure, facility,
system, fixture, improvement, addition, appurtenance, machinery or equipment or
any combination thereof, and all real and personal property deemed necessary in
connection therewith, for use by any person, provided that the existence of
such project will, in the judgment of the Board of Trustees of the Village,
create, enhance, or retain employment opportunities in the Village, or will
operate to prevent or eliminate blight within the Village.
PROJECT COSTS: Means and includes the sum total of all reasonable or necessary
costs incidental to the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair,
alteration, improvement, and extension of a project, including without
limitation, the cost of studies and surveys; plans, specifications,
architectural and engineering services; legal, marketing or other special
services; financing, acquisition, demolition, construction, equipment and site
development of new and rehabilitated buildings; rehabilitation, reconstruction,
repair or remodeling of existing buildings and all other necessary and
incidental expenses including an initial bond and interest reserve, together
with interest on bonds issued to finance a project to the estimated date of
completion.
VILLAGE: Means the Village of Oak Park, Cook County, Illinois.
1-3-2: LEGISLATIVE DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
It is hereby determined and declared that the purpose of this Article is to
provide a financing device which will aid in financing the cost of projects in
order to relieve conditions of unemployment, and to encourage the increase of
commerce and industry within the Village, thereby reducing the evils attendant
upon underemployment and unemployment and to prevent or eliminate blight within
the Village, and to provide for the increased welfare and prosperity of the
residents of the Village; and the same are hereby declared and determined to be
public purposes and functions pertaining to the government and affairs of the
Village.
1-3-3: ADDITIONAL POWERS:
In addition to powers which it may now have, the Village shall have the power:
   A.   To construct, acquire by gift, purchase or lease, to reconstruct,
improve, better or extend and to finance one or more projects, whether or not
now or hereafter in existence and whether or not the Village has any title to
such project or projects, within the Village, and, if desirable, to acquire by
gift, purchase or lease lands or rights in land in connection with any project.
   B.   To issue its revenue bonds to defray in whole or in part the project
costs of any project and to designate an appropriate name for such bonds.
   C.   To execute a financing agreement with any person or persons in such
manner that payments to be received with respect to such financing agreement
shall produce revenues and receipts sufficient to provide for the prompt
payment at maturity of principal, interest and redemption premiums, if any,
upon all bonds issued pursuant to such financing agreement. (1981 Code)
      1.   To charge a reasonable fee for financial analysis or other services
related to the feasibility of the project. (Ord. 1982-0-37, 7-19-82)
   D.   To pledge to the punctual payment of bonds authorized under this
Article, the interest thereon, and the redemption premiums, if any, the revenue
and receipts to be received pursuant to such financing agreement.
   E.   To mortgage a project or projects in favor of the holder or holders of
bonds issued therefor.
   F.   To sell and convey any project, including without limitation, the sale
and conveyance thereof subject to a mortgage, if any, as provided in the Bond
Ordinance, for such price and at such time as the Board of Trustees may
determine. However, no sale or conveyance of a project shall ever be made in
such manner as to impair the rights or interests of the holder or holders of
any bonds issued to finance the project costs of such project.
   G.   To issue its bonds to refund in whole or in part, bonds previously
issued by the Village under authority of this Article. (1981 Code)
   H.   To charge an applicant a nonrefundable fee of three thousand dollars
($3,000.00) for the bond application plus one percent (1%) of the bond amount
for issuance at closing. The application fee will be credited to the total
issuance fee. The total issuance fee shall not exceed a maximum of twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00). The applicant will also pay all related legal
fees. (Ord. 1986-0-105, 11-17-86)
1-3-4: EXERCISE OF POWERS; BONDS:
The exercise of all powers granted by this Article may be authorized, and bonds
may be authorized to to be issued pursuant to the authority of this Article for
the purposes herein set forth, by a Bond Ordinance which may be adopted at the
same meeting at which it is introduced and shall take effect immediately upon
adoption.
The bonds shall bear interest at such rate or rates, be payable at such times,
may be in one or more series, may bear such date or dates, may mature at such
time or times not exceeding forty (40) years from their respective dates, may
be payable in such medium of payment at such place or places, may carry such
registration privileges, may be subject to such terms of redemption at such
premiums, may be executed in such manner, may contain such terms, covenants and
conditions, and may be in such form, either coupon or registered, as the Bond
Ordinance may provide or as may be subsequently determined by the Board of
Trustees before the bonds are issued. The bonds may be sold at public or
private sale in such manner and upon such terms as may be deemed advisable by
the Board of Trustees. Such bonds shall be deemed to be securities and
negotiable instruments for all purposes within the meaning of the "Uniform
Commercial Code".
1-3-5: COVENANTS IN BONDS:
Any Bond Ordinance may contain covenants as to:
   A.   The use and disposition of the revenues and receipts from the financing
agreement pursuant to which the bonds are to be issued, including the creation
and maintenance of reserves;
   B.   The issuance of other or additional bonds relating to the project or
any rehabilitation, improvements, renovations, enlargements or additions
thereto;
   C.   The maintenance and repair of the project;
   D.   The amount of insurance to be carried thereon and the use and
disposition of any insurance moneys received;
   E.   The appointment of any bank or trust company within or outside the
State of Illinois, having the necessary trust powers as trustee for the benefit
of the bondholders, paying agent, and bond registrar;
   F.   The investment of any funds held by such trustee; and
   G.   The terms and conditions upon which the holders of the bonds, or any
portion thereof or any trustees therefor, are entitled to the appointment of a
receiver.
Any Bond Ordinance may provide that the principal of, and interest on, any such
bonds shall be secured by a mortgage or indenture of trust covering any such
project or projects for which the bonds are issued and may include any
improvements or extensions thereafter made. Such mortgage or indenture of trust
may contain such covenants and agreements to properly safeguard the bonds as
may be provided for in the Bond Ordinance, and shall be executed in the manner
as may be provided for in the Bond Ordinance. The provisions of any such Bond
Ordinance and any such mortgage or indenture of trust shall constitute a
contract with the holder or holders of the bond, and continue in effect until
the principal of, the interest on, and the redemption premiums, if any, on the
bonds so issued have been fully paid, as provided in the Bond Ordinance. The
duties of the Village and its officers under any Bond Ordinance, and any such
mortgage or indenture of trust, shall be enforceable by any bondholder by
mandamus, foreclosure of any such mortgage or indenture of trust or other
appropriate suit, action or proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction;
provided, the Bond Ordinance or any mortgage or indenture of trust under which
the bonds are issued may provide that all such remedies and rights to
enforcement may be vested in a trustee for the benefit of all the bondholders.
1-3-6: SIGNATURES OF OFFICERS ON BONDS; VALIDITY OF BONDS:
The bonds shall bear the manual or facsimile signatures of such officers of the
Village as may be designated in the Bond Ordinance, and such signatures shall
be the valid and binding signatures of the officers of the Village,
notwithstanding that before the delivery thereof and payments therefor, any or
all of the persons whose signatures appear thereon have ceased to be officers
of the Village. The validity of the bonds is not dependent on nor affected by
the validity or regularity of any proceedings relating to the acquisition,
purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping, betterment,
extension, or financing of the project for which the bonds are issued. The Bond
Ordinance may provide that the bonds shall contain a recital that they are
issued pursuant to this Article which recital shall be conclusive evidence of
their validity and of the regularity of their issuance.
1-3-7: LIEN OF BONDS:
All bonds issued under this Article shall have a lien upon the revenues and
receipts derived from the financing agreement for which the bonds have been
issued, and the Board of Trustees may provide in the Bond Ordinance for the
issuance of additional bonds to be equally and ratably secured by a lien upon
such revenues and receipts, or may provide that the lien upon such revenues and
receipts is subordinate.
1-3-8: LIABILITY FOR BONDS:
All bonds issued under and pursuant to this Article shall be limited
obligations of the Village payable solely out of the revenues and receipts
derived from the financing agreement with respect to which such bonds are
issued. No holder of any bonds issued under this Article has the right to
compel any exercise of the taxing power of the Village to pay the bonds, the
interest or premium (if any) thereon, and the bonds do not constitute an
indebtedness of the Village, or a loan of credit thereof within the meaning of
any constitutional or statutory provision. It shall be plainly stated on the
face of each bond that it has been issued under the provisions of this Article
and that it does not constitute an indebtedness of the Village or a loan of
credit thereof within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory
provisions.
1-3-9: EXEMPTION FROM CONSTRUCTION AND BIDDING REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC
BUILDINGS:
The acquisition and construction of a project shall not be subject to any
requirements relating to public buildings, structures, grounds, works or
improvements imposed by the Illinois Revised Statutes or any other similar
requirements which may be lawfully waived by this Section, and any requirement
of competitive bidding or restriction imposed on the procedure for award of
contracts for such purpose, or the lease, sale or other disposition of property
of the Village is not applicable to any action taken under authority of this
Article.
1-3-10: POWERS CONFERRED AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL; LIMITATIONS IMPOSED;
EFFECT:
The powers conferred by this Article are in addition and supplemental to, and
the limitations imposed by this Article shall not affect, the powers conferred
by any law or any other article or ordinance. Projects may be acquired,
purchased, constructed, reconstructed, improved, bettered, equipped, extended
and financed, and bonds may be issued under this Article for such purposes,
notwithstanding that any law or any other article or ordinance may provide for
the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement,
equipping, betterment, extension and financing of a like project, or the
issuance of bonds for like purposes, and without regard to the requirements,
restrictions, limitations or other provisions contained in any law or any other
article or ordinance.
ARTICLE 4
PROCEDURE FOR EXECUTION OF MORTGAGE ON VILLAGE PROPERTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Procedure
1-4-2: Details of Resolution Authorizing Mortgage
1-4-3: Illinois Municial Code Superseded
1-4-1: PROCEDURE:
The President, upon authorization of the Board of Trustees, may borrow money
for lawful purposes and, in evidence of such borrowing, execute notes secured
by mortgages on property owned or to be purchased by the Village. Such funds
shall be borrowed only for the purpose of purchasing the property to be subject
to the mortgage or for the purpose of improving such property. Such mortgage
and the note secured thereby may be issued without submission of the question
of their issuance to the electors of the Village. The mortgage may be in the
form of a trust deed. The procedures for the adoption of the resolution
authorizing the execution of such mortgage and note shall be in accordance with
the Illinois Municipal Code, except as provided herein.
1-4-2: DETAILS OF RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING MORTGAGE:
The resolution authorizing the execution of the mortgage shall set forth the
maximum amount to be borrowed and the form of note and mortgage or trust deed
which shall include the maturity of the note and interest rate. The maturity of
the note shall not in any event exceed forty (40) years from its date, and the
rate of interest shall be as provided in the authorizing resolution. The
resolution shall authorize the execution of the mortgage or trust deed and note
by the Village President and Village Clerk.
1-4-3: ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE SUPERSEDED:
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 6, Article VII of the 1970
Constitution of Illinois, the procedures hereby established for the execution
of mortgages and notes secured thereby shall be controlling notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in the provisions of the Illinois Municipal
Code or any other law or laws of the State of Illinois.
ARTICLE 5
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING AUDIT COMMITTEE
SECTION:
1-5-1: Audit Committee; Creation
1-5-2: Duties
1-5-3: Limits of Tax Increment Financing
1-5-4: Intent
1-5-1: AUDIT COMMITTEE; CREATION:
At such times as tax increment financing districts are established as provided
in the Illinois Municipal Code, a Tax Increment Financing Audit Committee
consisting of one member from the following governmental units is hereby
established:
   The Board of Education of School District No. 97
   The Board of Education of Consolidated High School District No. 200
   The Township of Oak Park
   The Oak Park Park District
   The Village of Oak Park
Each of the above governmental units shall appoint one of its members to the
TIF Audit Committee. All appointments shall be for two (2) year terms, provided
the terms shall not exceed the unexpired term of office of the appointee.
1-5-2: DUTIES:
The Audit Committee shall meet at least quarterly with the Village Finance
Director to review the receipts and disbursements relating to tax increment
financing project development costs and obligations. It shall report to the
Village Board or the appropriate County officials any instances where receipts
and disbursements are improperly made.
1-5-3: LIMITS OF TAX INCREMENT FINANCING:
The Audit Committee shall make recommendations to the Board of Trustees
regarding proposed limits to be established from time to time on the gross
amount of tax increment financing bonds to be issued or to be outstanding at
any one time.
1-5-4: INTENT:
It shall be the intent of the Village to use all of the funds in the tax
increment financing pool to pay the tax increment financing project
improvements and that when these funds exceed annual expenses, the excess shall
be placed in a reserve established to accelerate the repayment of the tax
increment financing bonds. (Ord. 1983-0-96, 12-19-83)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION
Officers And Employees Generally   1
Meetings Of The President And Board Of Trustees   2
Village President   3
Village Manager   4
Personnel Department   4A
Law Division   5
Finance Department   6
Public Works Department   7
Parking And Mobility Services Department   7A
Development Customer Services   8
Inspectors   9
Village Clerk   10
Health Department   11
Madison Street Coalition   12
Board Of Local Improvements   13
Recreation Board   14
Transportation Commission   15
Reserved   16
Plan Commission   17
Community Design Commission   18
Community Relations Commission   19
Building Codes Advisory Commission   20
Environment And Energy Commission   21
Reserved   22
Historic Preservation Commission   23
Cross References To Boards And
Commissions Established In Other
Chapters Of The Village Code   24
Conflict Of Interest And Ethics   25
Civic Information Systems Commission   26
Oak Park Emergency Service Disaster Agency   27
Board Of Fire And Police Commissioners   28
Entry Level Appointment Committee   29
Citizens Police Oversight Committee   30
Housing Programs Advisory Committee   31
Foreign Fire Insurance Board   32
Disability Access Commission   33
Community Development Citizens Advisory
Committee   34
Citizen Involvement Commission   35
Aging In Communities Commission   36
ARTICLE 1
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
SECTION:
2-1-1: Oath And Bond Of Officers Generally; Filed With Clerk
2-1-2: Requirements As To Execution Of Bond, Sureties
2-1-3: Bond Schedule
2-1-4: Failure Of Officers To Qualify For Office
2-1-5: Duty To Pay Money Over To Village Treasurer
2-1-6: Compensation Of Elected Officers
2-1-7: Designation Of Village Officers
2-1-8: Indemnification Of Village President And Trustees
2-1-9: Staggered Terms Of Trustees
2-1-10: Term Limits For Boards And Commissions
2-1-11:    Inauguration
2-1-1: OATH AND BOND OF OFFICERS GENERALLY; FILED WITH CLERK:
All officers of the Village, whether elected or appointed, shall, before
entering upon the duties of their respective offices, file their official bonds
and take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation:
I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of
                      according to the best of my ability.
The oath or affirmation shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
(1981 Code)
2-1-2: REQUIREMENTS AS TO EXECUTION OF BOND, SURETIES:
The bond of each officer where required, pursuant to section 2-1-3 of this
article, shall be executed to the Village, with a surety conditioned for the
faithful performance of the duties of the office and the payment to the proper
officers of all monies coming into the hands of the office holder by virtue of
the office. The sums stated in such justification on the bond of any officer
shall, in the aggregate, amount to the penalty of such bond.
Any surety company licensed to carry on business in Illinois is acceptable as
surety on such bonds. Individual sureties will not be accepted.
The execution of the bond shall be acknowledged by the officer and his surety
before some person authorized to take acknowledgment of deeds and a certificate
of such acknowledgment made thereon. After the approval of the bond by the
Board of Trustees the Clerk shall endorse thereon the date of its approval and
file the same. (1981 Code)
2-1-3: BOND SCHEDULE:
Bonds shall be required of the following officers in the amounts indicated.
President of the Board of Trustees                               $ 3,000.00
Village Manager                                                  3,000.00
Director of Finance                                              2,500.00
  (In addition to the above amount, the Director of Finance shall
 give a further and separate bond in double the amount of money on  
  average collected monthly for sewerage and water service.)
Director of Public Works                                         1,000.00
Director of Building and Zoning                                  1,000.00
Village Clerk                                                    10,000.00
Village Treasurer                                                250,000.00
Assistant Village Treasurer                                      250,000.00
Custodian of Lost and Stolen Property                            1,000.00
Director of Community Development                                5,000.00
Inspector of Weights and Measures                                5,000.00
 
(1981 Code)
2-1-4: FAILURE OF OFFICERS TO QUALIFY FOR OFFICE:
No officer shall be commissioned until he has given bond where such bond is
required. If he does not take the oath or affirmation and present the required
bond, where required, to the Village Clerk within ten (10) days after
notification by the Clerk of his election or appointment, his office shall
become vacant. If the Village Clerk does not file the bond of the Clerk's
office with the Director of Finance within thirty (30) days after his election,
his office shall thereupon become vacant. (1981 Code)
2-1-5: DUTY TO PAY MONEY OVER TO VILLAGE TREASURER:
Any money coming into the hands of any officer or employee of the Village for
the Village shall be paid over to the Village Treasurer daily. (1981 Code)
2-1-6: COMPENSATION OF ELECTED OFFICERS:
   A.   Effective for the terms of office commencing after the election of
April 1999, and prior to the election of April 2003, the compensation of
elected officials shall be established as follows:
      1.   The compensation of the Village President shall be nine hundred
dollars ($900.00) per month or ten thousand eight hundred dollars ($10,800.00)
per annum. The Village President shall not receive any insurance benefits
through the Village.
      2.   The compensation of Village Trustees shall be six hundred dollars
($600.00) per month or seven thousand two hundred dollars ($7,200.00) per
annum. The Village Trustees shall not receive any insurance benefits through
the Village.
   B.   Effective for the terms of office commencing after the election of
April 2003, the compensation of elected officials shall be established as
follows:
      1.   The compensation of the Village President shall be nine hundred
dollars ($900.00) per month or ten thousand eight hundred dollars ($10,800.00)
per annum. The Village President shall also qualify for the same health
insurance benefits as regular full time, nonunion employees of the Village as
approved in the annual budget, except that the total premium for any health
insurance option offered by the Village and accepted by the Village President
shall be paid by the Village President.
      2.   The compensation of Village Trustees shall be six hundred dollars
($600.00) per month or seven thousand two hundred dollars ($7,200.00) per
annum. The Village Trustees shall also qualify for the same health insurance
benefits as regular full time, nonunion employees of the Village as approved in
the annual budget, except that the total premium for any health insurance
option offered by the Village and accepted by the Village Trustee shall be paid
by the Village Trustee.
   C.   Effective for the terms of office commencing after the election of
April 2017, the compensation of elected officials shall be established as
follows:
      1.   The compensation of the Village President shall be two thousand one
hundred dollars ($2,100.00) per month or twenty five thousand two hundred
dollars ($25,200.00) per annum. The Village President shall also qualify for
the same health insurance benefits as regular full time, nonunion employees of
the Village as approved in the annual budget, except that the total premium for
any health insurance option offered by the Village and accepted by the Village
President shall be paid by the Village President.
      2.   The compensation of Village Trustees shall be one thousand two
hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) per month or fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) per annum. The Village Trustees shall also qualify for the same
health insurance benefits as regular full time, nonunion employees of the
Village as approved in the annual budget, except that the total premium for any
health insurance option offered by the Village and accepted by the Village
Trustee shall be paid by the Village Trustee.
   D.   The compensation of the Village Clerk shall be as follows:
      1.   Effective for the term of office commencing in April 2005, and
running through March 31, 2006, the Village Clerk shall be paid on the same
biweekly pay schedule as regular full time employees of the Village at a rate
of pay equal to seventy thousand one hundred twenty three dollars ($70,123.00)
per annum. The annual rate of pay for the Village Clerk shall be increased by
three percent (3%) on April 1, 2006, April 1, 2007, and April 1, 2008.
      2.   Effective for the term of office commencing after the election of
April 2025, the Village Clerk shall be paid on the same biweekly pay schedule
as regular full time employees of the Village at a rate of pay equal to eight
thousand nine hundred sixteen dollars and sixty seven cents ($8,916.67) per
month or one hundred seven thousand dollars ($107,000.00) per annum. The annual
rate of pay for the Village Clerk will be increased by three percent on April
1, 2026, April 1, 2027, and April 1, 2028.
      3.   The Village Clerk shall qualify for the same benefits and be subject
to the same general work hour requirements as regular full time employees of
the Village.
   E.   Effective for the terms of office commencing after the election of
April 2025, the compensation of elected officers shall be established as
follows:
      1.   The compensation of the Village President shall be three thousand
thirty-three dollars and thirty-three cents ($3,333.33) per month or forty
thousand dollars ($40,000.00) per annum. The Village President shall also
qualify for the same health insurance benefits as regular full time, nonunion
employees of the Village as approved in the annual budget, except that the
total premium for any health insurance option offered by the Village and
accepted by the Village President shall be paid by the Village President.
      2.   The compensation of Village Trustees shall be one thousand nine
hundred sixteen dollars and sixty-seven cents ($1,916.67) per month or twenty-
three thousand dollars ($23,000.00) per annum. The Village Trustees shall also
qualify for the same health insurance benefits as regular full time, nonunion
employees of the Village as approved in the annual budget, except that the
total premium for any health insurance option offered by the Village and
accepted by the Village Trustee shall be paid by the Village Trustee. (Ord. 16-
123, 10-17-2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 24-158, 10-29-2024; Ord. 24-159, 10-29-
2024; Ord. 24-160, 10-29-2024; Ord. 24-168, 11-4-2024)
2-1-7: DESIGNATION OF VILLAGE OFFICERS:
All elected officials, the Village Manager, the Deputy Village Manager, all
department heads, members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, Zoning
Board of Appeals, Historic Preservation Commission, and members of the boards
of trustees of the police and fire pension funds are designated as officers of
the Village.
The members of all other appointed Village boards and commissions shall not be
deemed to be officers of the Village as said boards and commissions serve
solely in an advisory capacity to the Board of Trustees.
All other salaried personnel of the Village shall be deemed employees and not
officers. (Ord. 2012-0-51, 9-18-2012)
2-1-8: INDEMNIFICATION OF VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND TRUSTEES:
   A.   This Board of Trustees finds that it is the public policy of the state
that members of government bodies shall not be liable in damages for the
exercise of discretion in determining policies. This public policy is set forth
in 745 Illinois Compiled Statutes 10/2-201, which provides:
Except as otherwise provided by statute, a public employee serving in a
position involving the determination of policy or the exercise of discretion is
not liable for any injury resulting from his act or omission in determining
policy when acting in the exercise of such discretion even though abused.
   B.   Therefore, if any claim or action not covered by insurance, including
claims for exemplary or punitive damages, is instituted against any member of
the Board of Trustees, including the Village President, in connection with any
act or omission in determining policy, the Village shall:
      1.   Appear and defend against the claim or action; and
      2.   Pay or indemnify the member of the Board of Trustees for a judgment
and court costs based on such claim or action; and
      3.   Pay or indemnify the member of the Board of Trustees for a
compromise or settlement of such claim or action, providing the settlement is
approved by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 1984-0-69, 11-5-1984)
2-1-9: STAGGERED TERMS OF TRUSTEES:
At the general municipal election in 1989 the terms of three (3) of the Village
Trustees to be elected for the Village shall be for two (2) years. The terms of
the remaining three (3) Trustees shall be for four (4) years. Village elections
for Trustees shall thereafter be held every two (2) years where three (3)
candidates will run for four (4) year terms, as provided in section 3-5-2 of
the Illinois municipal code. Nominating petitions in 1989 shall designate
whether the Trustee is running for a two (2) year or four (4) year term. (Ord.
1987-0-17, 2-17-1987)
2-1-10: TERM LIMITS FOR BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS:
Unless otherwise provided herein or pursuant to applicable law, members and
chairs of any Village boards and commissions established pursuant to this code
or Village ordinance, other than the Board of Trustees, shall be subject to the
following term limits:
   A.   Members shall be limited to two (2) consecutive terms and shall not be
eligible for reappointment beyond two (2) consecutive terms.
   B.   Chairs shall be limited to three (3) consecutive terms, either two (2)
as a member and one as a chair, or one as a member and two (2) as a chair.
   C.   Appointments to a board or commission shall be for full terms. When a
chair or member resigns or otherwise fails to serve a full term, the remaining
period of that term expires and creates a new full term vacancy. A person
subsequently appointed to a board or commission shall be appointed to a full
term pursuant to subsections
2-1-10A and B of this section.
   D.   The President, subject to the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, may extend a chair or member's final term beyond a term limit
provided by this section under one of the following conditions: 1) if the chair
or member's failure to continue to serve on the applicable board or commission
would negatively impact the completion of a special project or other matter; or
2) if the chair or member possesses professional qualifications which are
required for service on the applicable board or commission and another person
with such qualifications has not applied to serve on the board or commission. A
term extension pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed twelve (12) months.
   E.   A chair or member who has completed his or her service on a board or
commission pursuant to an applicable term limit may apply to serve on another
board or commission at any time, or may apply to serve on the same board or
commission on which he or she served upon a twelve (12) month waiting period
after the expiration of that chair or member's term. (Ord. 2013-0-69, 12-2-
2013)
2-1-11:   INAUGURATION:
The date for inauguration of newly elected Village officers is during the first
regular meeting of the Village Board in May following the election at which the
officers were elected. (Ord. 25-142, 5-6-2025)
ARTICLE 2
MEETINGS OF THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
2-2-1: Regular And Special Meetings
2-2-2: Quorum
2-2-3: Voting, Ordinances And Resolutions To Be Reduced To Writing
2-2-4: Powers Of The Village Board
2-2-5: Robert's Rules Of Order To Govern
2-2-1: REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS:
Regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be held at the Village Hall on
the first and third Mondays of each month, at seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M.,
unless otherwise ordered at a regular meeting.
Special meetings may be held at any time, without call, if the President and
all Trustees are present and participate in the meeting and make no objection
to the holding thereof. Special meetings may be held at any time, on call of
the President or any two (2) or more of the Trustees, by written call presented
to the Clerk, who shall immediately prepare notices of the meeting, describing
in brief the nature and objects specified in the call, and shall cause such
notices to be served on the President and the Board of Trustees in the usual
manner; except that no notice need be served on any person who shall have
signed written waiver of notice upon the face of or by endorsement on the call
or by separate writing delivered to the Clerk. At every special meeting held
pursuant to call, the call for the same shall be read and afterward filed by
the Clerk and no business other than that proposed by the call shall be in
order at such meeting, unless the President and all members of the Board of
Trustees shall be present and shall unanimously consent to consideration of an
action upon such other business. (1981 Code)
2-2-2: QUORUM:
A quorum for the transaction of business by the Board of Trustees shall consist
of four (4) Trustees or the President and three (3) Trustees. (1981 Code)
2-2-3: VOTING, ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS TO BE REDUCED TO WRITING:
Every ordinance and resolution shall be reduced to writing and presented to the
Board of Trustees before voting thereon. The names of the President and
Trustees present shall be called and their ayes and nays shall be recorded on
the vote on every ordinance and on any other motion or resolution where a roll
call vote is specifically requested by the President or any Board member. On
all other motions and resolutions, a voice vote without a roll call may be
taken. (Ord. 1981-0-58, 8-17-1981)
2-2-4: POWERS OF THE VILLAGE BOARD:
The powers of the Board shall be purely legislative except as may be otherwise
provided by any other act or by any article of the Illinois Municipal Code
other than articles 3 or 4.
The Board shall approve for payment all expenses and liabilities of the
Municipality. (1981 Code)
2-2-5: ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER TO GOVERN:
The rules of order and parliamentary practice comprised in the current edition
of "Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern the conduct of Village Board meetings
unless they shall have been superseded, in whole or in part, by action of the
Board. (1981 Code)
ARTICLE 3
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
SECTION:
2-3-1: Issuance Of Commission, Permits And Licenses
2-3-2: Powers As To Litigation
2-3-3: Authority To Borrow; Execute Notes
2-3-4: Title Of Office
2-3-5: Order Of Succession
2-3-1: ISSUANCE OF COMMISSION, PERMITS AND LICENSES:
The President of the Board of Trustees shall sign all commissions and permits
granted by the Board of Trustees and grant all licenses, except as otherwise
provided by law or ordinance. (Ord. 15-158, 9-8-2015)
2-3-2: POWERS AS TO LITIGATION:
The President of the Board of Trustees shall sign and is authorized to sign on
behalf of the Village all instruments necessary to the prompt prosecution or
defense of any or all actions brought by or against the Village, including
bonds for injunction. (Ord. 15-158, 9-8-2015)
2-3-3: AUTHORITY TO BORROW; EXECUTE NOTES:
The President, upon authorization of the Board of Trustees, may borrow money
for lawful purposes and in evidence of such borrowing, execute notes pursuant
to the power detailed in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 15-158, 9-8-2015)
2-3-4: TITLE OF OFFICE:
The President of the Board of Trustees may be referred to as Mayor of the
Village. The terms "Village President" or "President of the Board of Trustees"
as used in this code or in any ordinance, resolution, motion or other action of
the corporate authorities shall be construed as meaning the Mayor and the term
"Mayor" wherever so used shall be construed to mean the Village President or
President of the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 15-158, 9-8-2015)
2-3-5: ORDER OF SUCCESSION:
   A.   For the purposes of this section, the term "unavailable" means either
that a vacancy in the office of Village President exists or that the Village
President is absent or otherwise unable to exercise the powers and discharge
the duties of the office.
   B.   In the event the Village President is unavailable to exercise the
powers and duties under this article, the powers of the Village President shall
be exercised and duties shall be discharged by a Village Trustee who shall be
the designated emergency interim successor and shall be known as the President
Pro Tem based upon a Trustee's number of consecutive years in current office.
In the event two (2) or more Trustees have equivalent seniority, the President
Pro Tem shall be the Trustee who received the highest number of votes for the
current office at the most recent election at which such Trustee participated.
(Ord. 20-030, 3-13-2020)
ARTICLE 4
VILLAGE MANAGER
SECTION:
2-4-1: Creation Of Office; Appointment
2-4-2: General Duties
2-4-2.1: Creation Of Office Of Deputy Village Manager; Duties
2-4-3: Direction Of Employees; Authority To Hire And Discharge
2-4-4: Accounts
2-4-5: Inventories; Care And Custody Of Property
2-4-6: Reports To President And Board Of Trustees
2-4-7: Records; Certificates; Provide Personnel To Other Officers
2-4-8: Maps And Plats
2-4-9: Absence From Village
2-4-10: Manager Ex Officio To Serve In Case Of Vacancies
2-4-11: Transfer Of Duties
2-4-12: Offices And Departments
2-4-13: Contracts And Settlements
2-4-14: Purchases; Budget
2-4-15: Appropriation, Tax Levies And Budget
2-4-16: Community Relations
2-4-17: Diversity Assurance
2-4-18: Hearing Officer For The Purpose Of The Public Employee Benefits Act
2-4-1: CREATION OF OFFICE; APPOINTMENT:
Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-3-7, the office of the Village
Manager is hereby established. The Village Manager shall be appointed by the
Board of Trustees for an indefinite term as provided by law. (1981 Code)
2-4-2: GENERAL DUTIES:
The Village Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Village
and exercise all powers and duties assigned to him by statute and such other
authority as may be granted by the Board of Trustees. The Manager shall be
charged with the enforcement of all laws and ordinances within the municipality
insofar as their enforcement is within the powers of the Village. The Manager
shall attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees, shall keep the Board
informed as to the affairs of the Village, and shall recommend to the Board
such actions as may be necessary or expedient for the welfare of the Village.
(1981 Code)
2-4-2.1: CREATION OF OFFICE OF DEPUTY VILLAGE MANAGER; DUTIES:
The office of the Deputy Village Manager is hereby established. The Deputy
Village Manager shall assist the Village Manager in the exercise of the powers
and duties of that office; provided, that the Deputy Village Manager may
periodically be assigned duties and responsibilities by the Village Manager not
normally a function of that office. (Ord. 2012-0-64, 11-5-2012)
2-4-3: DIRECTION OF EMPLOYEES; AUTHORITY TO HIRE AND DISCHARGE:
The Village Manager shall hire and discharge all employees, other than those
under tenure of office laws, authorized by the Board of Trustees to be hired,
at such compensation as may be set or authorized by the Board. All employees
shall perform their duties subject to the direction of the Village Manager or
that of the superior to whom the Manager may assign such employees; provided,
however, that the Manager may delegate to any other official or employee the
authority to hire or discharge any employees so authorized. (1981 Code)
2-4-4: ACCOUNTS:
The Village Manager shall be responsible for the maintenance of current
accounts showing at all times the fiscal condition of the Village, including
the current and anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on hand and
anticipated revenue of all municipal funds and accounts; and the Manager shall
see to the collection and deposit of all money due the municipality. (1981
Code)
2-4-5: INVENTORIES; CARE AND CUSTODY OF PROPERTY:
The Village Manager shall be responsible for the maintenance of a current
inventory showing all real and personal property of the Village and its
location, and shall be responsible for the care and custody of all such
property including equipment, buildings, and all other Village property which
is not by law assigned to some other officer or body for care and control.
(1981 Code)
2-4-6: REPORTS TO PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
The Village Manager shall make such reports as shall be required by the
President and Board of Trustees on the operations of the various Village
departments. Such reports shall include, but not be limited to, a statement of
the revenues, expenditures and general financial conditions of the Village. The
Village Manager shall make reports on the operations of all administrative
departments of the Village utilizing a performance management system. (Ord.
2012-0-71, 12-10-2012)
2-4-7: RECORDS; CERTIFICATES; PROVIDE PERSONNEL TO OTHER OFFICERS:
The Village Manager shall be responsible for the preparation and maintenance of
all municipal records required by law to be kept by the Village and not by a
specific officer. Where the law makes it the duty of a specific officer to keep
or maintain records, the Manager shall make available to such officer all
necessary clerical assistance for the preparation of such records and shall
make available a place for the custody of such records. In compliance herewith
the Village Manager shall make available to the Village Clerk, stenographic or
clerical assistance necessary for the preparation of the journal of proceedings
of the Board of Trustees, and the record of ordinances and all other documents
which by law the Village Clerk is required to keep; and the Manager shall
perform similar service for the Village Treasurer in the maintenance of bond
registers, and all other records or documents which by law the Village
Treasurer is required to keep or prepare. Where the law requires or provides
for certification of any records or documents by any officer of the Village,
the Manager shall cause such records or documents to be properly prepared and
presented to such officer for his signature. (1981 Code)
2-4-8: MAPS AND PLATS:
The Village Manager shall cause to be kept a complete set of maps and plats
showing the location of all Village utilities, and other municipal properties,
all streets and other public places, and all lots or parcels of land subdivided
according to law. (1981 Code)
2-4-9: ABSENCE FROM VILLAGE:
In the event that the Village Manager shall be absent from the Village or
incapacitated from performing the duties of his position, such person as may be
appointed by the Board of Trustees shall act as Manager during such absence or
incapacity. (1981 Code)
2-4-10: MANAGER EX OFFICIO TO SERVE IN CASE OF VACANCIES:
If, at any time, there shall be a vacancy in the office of a director or chief
officer, however termed, of any department, whether by reason of death,
resignation, removal or otherwise, then in each such instance the Village
Manager, ex officio, shall serve as and shall be, such director or chief
officer, so long as the vacancy remains unfilled. The Manager shall receive no
compensation additional to his salary as Village Manager, while so serving
unless additional compensation is specifically provided for by the Board of
Trustees. (1981 Code)
2-4-11: TRANSFER OF DUTIES:
Any appointive officer or employee, assigned to any department or division
thereof, may be required by the Village Manager to perform services in any
other department or division. (1981 Code)
2-4-12: OFFICES AND DEPARTMENTS:
All appointive offices of the Village shall be filled by appointment by the
Village Manager, except where otherwise provided by law; and the Manager shall
report to the Board of Trustees all such appointments, and any removal from
office made by him, as soon as possible after the appointment or removal. The
Village Manager shall be responsible for determining the organizational
structure of all administrative departments of the Village and their
subdivisions, unless specified elsewhere in this code. Every administrative
department of the Village shall be under supervision and control of the
Manager, who shall have the power to remove from office any officer holding an
office which is subject to being filled by appointment by the Manager. The
Village Manager shall implement and utilize a performance management system to
supervise, control, evaluate and report on the performance of all
administrative departments. (Ord. 2012-0-71, 12-10-2012)
2-4-13: CONTRACTS AND SETTLEMENTS:
The Manager shall examine all proposed contracts and grant applications to
which the Village may be a party, and may sign on behalf of the Village any
contract or grant application authorized by the Board of Trustees, except where
the Board directs that some other officer shall do so. It shall be the duty of
the Manager to see to it that all terms of any contract to which the Village is
a party are fully performed by all parties thereto. The Manager shall have the
authority to investigate, negotiate, compromise, settle or pay any and all
claims, suits and actions brought in the name of the Village or against the
Village, its officers, agents or employees for sums which in the aggregate from
any one incident or occurrence, do not exceed fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00). Prior to paying a claim, the Manager shall consult with the
Village Attorney. The Manager shall secure any releases, covenants or other
documentation as may be necessary or appropriate to evidence any such
settlement or payment of a claim and the release of any further actions,
claims, suits or damages against the Village, its officers, agents or employees
arising out of the same occurrence. All settlements shall be promptly reported
to the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2014-0-03, 1-13-2014; amd. Ord. 23-113, 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-123, 6-18-2024)
2-4-14: PURCHASES; BUDGET:
No purchase shall be made or obligation incurred except as provided in section
2-6-10 of this chapter, and no expense shall be incurred if the amount thereof
is not covered by an unexpended amount in the budget, unless no prior
appropriation is required by law. (Ord. 1981-0-79, 10-19-1981)
2-4-15: APPROPRIATION, TAX LEVIES AND BUDGET:
The Village Manager shall be responsible for the preparation of the annual
budget and the annual appropriation ordinance in time for consideration and
enactment by the Board of Trustees during the first quarter of the fiscal year;
and to prepare the tax levy ordinance for passage, and file a certified copy
thereof with the county clerk within the time required by law. (1981 Code)
2-4-16: COMMUNITY RELATIONS:
There is hereby created the office of the Director of Community Relations. The
Director of Community Relations shall be the head of the Community Relations
Division under the supervision of the Village Manager.
The Director of Community Relations shall endeavor to ensure the provision of
equal services and quality of opportunity for employment and advancement in the
Village and in Village government in the following ways: administering the
applicable provisions of chapter 13, "Human Rights", of this code; using
publicity, training, media and personal contact to improve intergroup
relations; enlisting the cooperation of as many beneficial organizations as
possible to aid in achieving these goals; and such other duties as may be
determined by the Village Manager. (1981 Code)
2-4-17: DIVERSITY ASSURANCE:
There is hereby created the Office of Diversity Assurance which shall operate
under the direction of the Village Manager. The Office of Diversity Assurance
shall endeavor to eliminate unlawful racial steering and discrimination 1  and
other forces promoting segregated housing through an outreach and incentive
program which will require the Office of Diversity Assurance to establish
person to person contacts with apartment building owners, custodial personnel,
existing and prospective businesses, property management firms and tenants to
explain and promote the incentive programs. Staff for the Office of Diversity
Assurance shall be appointed by the Village Manager. (Ord. 1984-0-74, 11-19-
1984)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 13 of this code.
2-4-18: HEARING OFFICER FOR THE PURPOSE OF THE PUBLIC EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT:
The Village Manager shall act as a hearing officer under the public safety
employee benefits act 1 . He shall, as hearing officer, hold hearings and make
determinations as to whether or not any employee of the Village subject to the
act is entitled to the benefits provided by the act. The decision of the
Manager shall be a final administrative determination of the Village and may be
appealed to the circuit court under the administrative review act. (Ord. 2003-
0-38, 9-15-2003)
 
Notes
1 2. 820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.
ARTICLE 4A
PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
2-4A-1: Creation; Composition
2-4A-2: Creation; Director
2-4A-3: Director; Certain Responsibilities Enumerated
2-4A-1: CREATION; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created an executive branch of the Municipal government to be
known as the Personnel Department. This Department shall have a director and
such personnel as authorized by the President and Board of Trustees.
2-4A-2: CREATION; DIRECTOR:
The Director of Personnel shall be the head of the Department of Personnel. The
Director of Personnel shall be appointed by the Village Manager and shall have
the management and control of all matters and things pertaining to such
department.
2-4A-3: DIRECTOR; CERTAIN RESPONSIBILITIES ENUMERATED:
The Director of Personnel shall be responsible for:
   A.   Administering a recruitment and selection program for employment in
Village service pursuant to the established policy of the Village as an equal
opportunity employer;
   B.   Maintaining position classification and pay plans;
   C.   Maintaining records of all Village employees reflecting tenure,
qualifications and service, leaves of absence and related matters;
   D.   Assisting departments and offices of Village government in establishing
and conducting in-service training programs;
   E.   Performing necessary duties in the administration of retirement and
insurance plans;
   F.   Maintaining and monitoring the Village's equal employment opportunity
plan; and
   G.   Performing such other functions as may be required by the Village
Manager or other provisions of this Code. (Ord. 1984-0-53, 9-4-84)
ARTICLE 5
LAW DIVISION
SECTION:
2-5-1: Legal Counsel
2-5-1: LEGAL COUNSEL:
The following legal counsel are to be employed by the Village Manager:
   General Counsel whose primary responsibility shall be to serve the Board of
Trustees.
   Assistant General Counsel with primary responsibility for zoning and housing
matters.
   Counsel with primary responsibility for processing and prosecuting
violations of Village ordinances.
   Counsel with primary responsibility for assisting in processing and
prosecuting violations of Village ordinances.
Other duties may be assigned to all employed Counsel as the Village Manager
determines. Employment decisions by the Village Manager in relation to the
General Counsel shall be reviewed with the Board of Trustees before final
action. Salaries shall be as set forth in the annual appropriation ordinance or
as otherwise established by the Board of Trustees.
Attorneys may be engaged from time to time by the Board of Trustees as
independent contractors for the purpose of handling specific legal matters.
(1981 Code)
ARTICLE 6
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
2-6-1: Creation; Composition
2-6-2: Finance Committee; Appointment; Composition; Advisory Committee
2-6-3: Annual Audit
2-6-4: Village Treasurer; Assistant Treasurer; Appointment, Direction
2-6-5: Adoption Of Budget Law, Appointment Of Budget Officer
2-6-6: Director Of Finance; Duties Generally
2-6-7: Director Of Finance; Special Assessment Accounts
2-6-8: All Purchases To Be Made By Purchasing Agent
2-6-9: Requisitions
2-6-10: All Contracts For Supplies, Equipment, Repair Work Or The Making Of Any
Public Improvement Or Grant Application; Requirements For Approval And Bidding
2-6-11: Procedure For Advertising For Bids
2-6-12: Filing Of Bids; Deposit Accompanying Bids, Preservation And Opening Of
Bids
2-6-13: Contracts To Be Executed In Writing
2-6-14: Contractors' Bonds
2-6-15: Director Of Public Works To Approve Public Works Contract Extras
2-6-16: Property, Etc., To Be Surrendered To Successor In Office
2-6-17: Other Duties; Subject To Rules And Regulations
2-6-18: Examination Of Books, Papers, Etc.; Reports Required
2-6-19: NSF Checks; Service Charge
2-6-20: Living Wage
2-6-1: CREATION; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created and established an executive department of the
municipal government of the Village which shall be known as the Finance
Department, and shall include a Director of Finance and such subordinates and
assistants as the Board of Trustees may by ordinance provide. (1981 Code)
2-6-2: FINANCE COMMITTEE; APPOINTMENT; COMPOSITION; ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
A Finance Committee consisting of three (3) members of the Board of Trustees
shall be appointed by the President and confirmed by the Board of Trustees. The
President of the Board of Trustees shall be ex officio a member of such
Committee.
The Board of Trustees may appoint a citizens' advisory committee to assist the
Finance Committee and to consist of not to exceed three (3) members, at least
one of which shall be a former member of the Board of Trustees. The advisory
committee shall participate in meetings of the Finance Committee, but the
members shall not have the right to vote.
The Finance Committee shall review a listing of all payments made on behalf of
the Village each month as supplied by the Finance Director. Said listing shall
contain the name of the party receiving the check, the amount thereof, and a
brief statement of the purpose for the payment.
2-6-3: ANNUAL AUDIT:
As soon as practicable at the close of each fiscal year, and no later than six
(6) months thereafter, there shall be an independent audit of all accounts of
the Village, conducted independently of the Village Manager, made by a
competent person authorized to act as an auditor under the laws of the State to
be selected by the Board of Trustees. Copies of such audit report shall be
filed with the Village Clerk, as a public record of the Village. The power with
respect to such audits shall not be construed to limit the responsibility of
the Village Manager for the proper expenditure of Municipal funds.
2-6-4: VILLAGE TREASURER - ASSISTANT TREASURER; APPOINTMENT, DIRECTION:
The Village Treasurer and Assistant Treasurer shall be appointed by the Village
Manager subject to confirmation by the Board of Trustees, shall be under the
direction of the Director of Finance, and shall perform such duties as
prescribed by law. They shall perform such other duties as shall be prescribed
by the Village Manager and the Director of Finance. (1981 Code)
The Village Treasurer is authorized and directed to invest funds of the Village
in accordance with chapter 85, section 902 of the Illinois Revised Statutes;
provided, however, in addition to the investments provided therein, the
Treasurer may also invest in the following:
Eurodollars (not to exceed ten percent [10%] of investible funds at time of
investment).
Money market funds (maturities not to exceed forty five [45] days).
Investments are to be made only of those funds not immediately needed for
Village purposes and the investments must mature or otherwise be available at
such time as in the judgment of the Treasurer that will be required for
expenditure.
This authorization shall not apply to pension funds or any other funds where
investments are limited by ordinance of the Village. (Ord. 1981-0-54, 8-3-81,
eff. 8-3-81)
2-6-5: ADOPTION OF BUDGET LAW, APPOINTMENT OF BUDGET OFFICER:
The Village adopts paragraph 8-2-9.1 through and including paragraph 8-2-9.10
of chapter 24 of the Illinois Revised Statutes, 1979, providing for an annual
Municipal budget in lieu of the passage of an annual appropriation ordinance,
in accordance with the following provisions:
   A.   Fiscal Year: The fiscal year of the Village shall commence on January 1
of each year and close on the last day of December of each year.
   B.   Passage of Annual Budget: The annual budget shall be adopted by the
Board of Trustees before the beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies.
Passage of the annual budget shall be in lieu of passage of the appropriation
ordinance heretofore annually enacted. The annual budget shall be published in
the manner provided in subsection (G) below.
   C.   Budget Officer: There is hereby created the office of Budget Officer.
The Budget Officer shall be appointed by the Village Manager and shall perform
such duties as are assigned by the Village Manager. (Ord. 1981-0-52, 8-3-81,
eff. 8-3-81)
   D.   Compilation and Contents of Budget: On or before the Village Board of
Trustees' first regular meeting in November of each year, the Village Manager
shall submit to the Board of Trustees an annual Municipal budget, such budget
to contain estimates of revenues available to the Municipality for the fiscal
year for which the budget is drafted, together with recommended expenditures
for the Municipality and all of the Municipality's departments, commissions and
boards. Revenue estimates and expenditure recommendations shall be presented in
a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal management practice. Each
budget shall show the specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure
shall be made. (Ord. 1982-0-62, 11-1-82)
   E.   Funds for Contingency Purposes: The annual budget may contain money set
aside for contingency purposes not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the total
budget. (Ord. 1981-0-52, 8-3-81, eff. 8-3-81)
   F.   Revision of Annual Budget: The Municipal Budget Officer, subject to
approval by the Village Manager, may delete, add to, or change items within
object classes, provided the budget for the object class is not increased. The
Municipal Budget Officer, subject to approval by the Village Manager, may
delete, add to, or change items, up to an amount of three thousand dollars
($3,000.00) between object classes, provided the total fund budget is not
increased and the annual aggregate of such transfers does not exceed one
percent (1%) of the total fund budget. The corporate authorities, by a vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of the members then holding office, shall have the authority
to revise the budget by transferring monies from one fund to another or adding
to any fund. No revision of the annual budget shall be made increasing the
budget in the event monies are not available to do so. (Ord. 1989-0-52, 7-5-89)
   G.   Public Hearing, Notice and Inspection of Budget: At least one public
hearing shall be held by the Board of Trustees on the tentative annual budget
prior to final action by the Board of Trustees. Notice of this hearing shall be
given by publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Village
at least ten (10) days prior to the time of the public hearing. Copies of the
tentative annual budget shall be made available for public inspection in
printed or typewritten form in the office of the Village Clerk for at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing. After said hearing, the tentative budget may be
further revised and passed without further notice, inspection or hearing. (Ord.
1981-0-52, 8-3-81, eff. 8-3-81)
2-6-6: DIRECTOR OF FINANCE; DUTIES GENERALLY:
The Director of Finance shall be head of the Department of Finance and shall be
ex officio Village Comptroller. In addition to the duties required by State law
the Director shall have the following duties, functions and responsibilities:
   A.   Preparation of appropriation and tax levy ordinances, and supervision
of expenditures;
   B.   General accounting;
   C.   Central purchasing covering all purchases by the Village;
   D.   Supervision of Village treasury;
   E.   Preparation of financial reports and statements;
   F.   Administrative analysis; (1981 Code)
   G.   Preparation and maintenance of inventory of real and personal property
of the Village; (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 1984-0-53, 9-4-84)
The Director shall have all other duties, powers, functions and
responsibilities whether similar to or dissimilar from those above specifically
mentioned, which, by existing ordinances are expressed as given to the Village
Comptroller. The Director of Finance, in performance of his duties, shall be
subject to the supervision, control and direction of the Village Manager. The
Director of Finance shall perform such other services, within or without the
Department of Finance, as may be required by the Village Manager or by
direction of the Board of Trustees.
2-6-7: DIRECTOR OF FINANCE; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ACCOUNTS:
The Director of Finance shall keep, in suitable books for that purpose, an
accurate and detailed account of each and every special assessment levied for
any improvement. When it shall appear from the books that all costs and
expenses of any improvement which has been made by special assessment have been
paid and satisfied, and that there has been a sum of money collected over and
above the entire cost of such improvement, he shall report to the Board of
Trustees such fact and state in writing the amount of such excess. The Director
of Finance shall also keep an account of all rebates on special assessments
ordered by the Village Board, issue warrants therefor to the respective parties
entitled thereto and shall keep an account of the same, and whenever the full
amount of any such rebate has been paid out shall report the fact to the Board
of Trustees.
2-6-8: ALL PURCHASES TO BE MADE BY PURCHASING AGENT:
All supplies and building material needed in the construction of public
improvements and repairs, as well as all fuel, materials, equipment and other
supplies, for use in all departments of the Village, shall be purchased by the
Purchasing Agent under the direction of the Finance Director, upon the
requisition of the department head requiring same.
2-6-9: REQUISITIONS:
All requisitions referred to in the preceding section shall be submitted to the
Purchasing Division. Upon approval of the requisition an order shall be issued
by the Purchasing Agent which order shall be numbered. All bills rendered
against the Village for such material ordered by the Purchasing Division shall
be reviewed by the Purchasing Agent for approval of payment by the Finance
Director. (1981 Code)
2-6-10: ALL CONTRACTS FOR SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT, REPAIR WORK OR THE MAKING OF ANY
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT OR GRANT APPLICATION; REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL AND BIDDING:
No contract shall be made for any supplies, equipment, repair work or personal
services when the total cost exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), or
the making of any public improvement when the total cost exceeds fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) or grant application when the total amount to be received
by the Village exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) including any
required Village match, unless such contract or grant application shall have
been authorized by the Board of Trustees. Whenever the total cost of a contract
for supplies, equipment, repair work or personal services shall not exceed, in
any one case, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the Purchasing Agent, without
such previous authorization, shall cause the same to be purchased upon his
written order; and further provided that when the total cost thereof shall
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) but shall not exceed fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00), the Village Manager may cause the same to be purchased
without previous authorization in like manner, but the Purchasing Agent or the
appropriate department head shall first obtain in writing, whenever possible,
at least three (3) informal bids to furnish same, which bids shall be filed in
every case in the Finance Department. All such contracts shall be let to the
lowest responsible bidder provided that any and all informal bids for
equipment, supplies, repair work or personal services may be rejected by the
Purchasing Agent or appropriate department head if the character or quality of
the supplies, equipment or labor does not conform to requirements or if the
public interest may otherwise be served thereby.
It is further provided that when the total cost of a public work or improvement
is expected to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or when the total cost
of any supplies, equipment or repair work is expected to exceed twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00), the Finance Director or his agent shall issue a
call for bids to be formally advertised; bids as described in Section 2-6- 12
of this Article shall require a bond for the faithful performance of contracts
for public improvement and shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder. All
contracts for which bids are required that exceed fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder within the judgment
of the Board of Trustees provided that any and all bids received in response to
an advertisement for equipment, supplies or repair work may be rejected by the
Board of Trustees if the character or quality of the supplies, equipment or
labor does not conform to requirements or if the public interest may otherwise
be served thereby. Bidding in all instances for contracts that exceed fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) may be waived by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the
Board of Trustees.
In cases of urgently needed material or urgent repairs involving labor and
material, such repairs and material may be obtained through negotiated contract
without formal advertising with the approval of the Village Manager, when it is
in the best interest of the Village and when it is impractical to convene a
meeting of the Board of Trustees.
Negotiated purchases without formal advertising may be approved by the Board of
Trustees or the Village Manager as applicable when it is impractical to secure
competition, when it is impossible to draft adequate specifications or any
other adequately detailed description of the required property or services, or
when the contemplated contract involves maintenance, repair, alteration or
inspection and the exact nature or amount of work to be done is not known.
However, the Finance Director or his agent shall first obtain in writing,
whenever possible, at least three (3) informal bids to furnish same. (Ord.
2000-0-7, 2-7-2000; amd. Ord. 23-113, 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-123, 6-18-2024)
2-6-11: PROCEDURE FOR ADVERTISING FOR BIDS:
Whenever any formal bids are required, as stated in Section
2-6-10 of this Article, the Purchasing Agent shall advertise in some newspaper
published in the Village and/or in such other newspapers of general
circulation, as in his judgment may be desirable. A plan or profile of the work
to be done, accompanied by specifications for doing the same and specifications
for material, supplies or equipment to be furnished, shall be first placed on
file in the office of the Purchasing Division before any such advertisement
shall be made, which plan, profile and specifications for material, supplies or
equipment shall at all times be open for public inspection. Such advertisement
shall be published not less than ten (10) days before the day fixed for opening
such proposal, and shall state the work to be done, or material, supplies or
equipment to be furnished, and the time and place for opening bids. (1981 Code)
2-6-12: FILING OF BIDS; DEPOSIT ACCOMPANYING BIDS, PRESERVATION AND OPENING OF
BIDS:
In all cases the formal bids under the preceding Section shall be sealed bids,
directed to the Purchasing Division. A bid deposit may be required, the amount
of which shall be fixed by the Purchasing Agent but which shall not exceed five
percent (5%) of the estimated cost of the work or material to be furnished, nor
be less than the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00). Such bid deposit shall be
in the form of a cashier's check, a certified check, or at the discretion of
the Purchasing Agent, a bid bond. Checks shall be drawn upon a bank in good
standing payable to the order of the Village and shall be forfeited to the
Village in the event the bidder shall neglect or refuse to enter into a
contract and bond when required, with approved sureties, to execute the work or
furnish the material for the price mentioned in his bid and according to the
plans and specifications in case the contract shall be awarded to him. Bids
shall be opened at the hour and place mentioned in the notice. (Ord. 1984-0-16,
5-7-84)
2-6-13: CONTRACTS TO BE EXECUTED IN WRITING:
All contracts, whether for work or materials, to be paid for by special
assessments or otherwise, shall be executed in writing and in duplicate by the
President of the Board of Trustees or the Village Manager and shall be signed
by the Village Clerk on behalf of the municipal corporation and by the
contractor. One original so executed shall be kept and filed in the office of
the Village Clerk and the other shall be given to the contractor. All contracts
and bonds so taken shall be in the name of, and run to, the Village. (Ord.
1992-0-13, 3-2-1992)
2-6-14: CONTRACTORS' BONDS:
Whenever any work or improvement is let by contract to any person, the officers
of the Village letting the same shall, in all cases, take a bond from such
person with good and sufficient sureties, licensed in the state to be approved
by the Board of Trustees, in such amount as shall not only be adequate to
insure the performance of the work in the time and manner required in such
contract, but also to save and indemnify and keep harmless the Village against
all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses which may in any manner accrue
against the Village in consequence of granting such contract or which may in
any manner result from the carelessness or neglect of such person or his
agents, employees or workmen in any respect whatever. (Ord. 1992-0-13, 3-2-
1992)
2-6-15: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS TO APPROVE PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACT EXTRAS:
No payment shall be made on any work or job done by contract for the Public
Works Department, for any extra work not specified in such contract, unless
such extra work shall have been done by a written order of the Director of
Public Works, to be annexed to such contract directing the same and stating
that such work is not included in the original contract; provided that any
order given under this section shall state what the extras are and that such
extras are necessary and proper for the completion of or for the security of
the work previously done and the reasons therefor. (Ord. 1992-0-13, 3-2-1992)
2-6-16: PROPERTY, ETC., TO BE SURRENDERED TO SUCCESSOR IN OFFICE:
Any person having been an officer or employee of the Village, whose term has
expired, or who has resigned, or been removed from office, shall, within ten
(10) days after notification and request, deliver to his immediate supervisor
or successor all property, books and effects of every description in his
possession belonging to the Village or appertaining to his office. (Ord. 1992-
0-13, 3-2-1992)
2-6-17: OTHER DUTIES; SUBJECT TO RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Each Village officer, besides the specific duties which may be required of him
by virtue of his office, shall also perform such other and further duties and
be subject to such rules and regulations as the Village Manager and Board of
Trustees may, from time to time require or by ordinance provide and establish.
(Ord. 1992-0-13, 3-2-1992)
2-6-18: EXAMINATION OF BOOKS, PAPERS, ETC.; REPORTS REQUIRED:
All books, papers, vouchers, warrants, entries, accounts and memoranda of each
and every officer and employee of the Village may be examined at any time by
the President and Board of Trustees or Village Manager, except as limited by
law. (Ord. 1992-0-13, 3-2-1992)
2-6-19: NSF CHECKS; SERVICE CHARGE:
The Finance Director shall charge a service fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) to
the issuer of any check naming the Village as payee when the bank or lending
institution upon which the check is drawn refuses to honor the check because
the account upon which the check is drawn either contains insufficient funds or
has been closed.
This section shall in no way preclude the Village from pursuing any criminal
action or civil remedy which may be available to it as a result of the actions
of the payee. (Ord. 1992-0-13, 3-2-1992)
2-6-20: LIVING WAGE:
   A.   Definitions: The following words and phrases as set forth in this
section shall have the meanings, and are hereby defined, as follows:
   CONTRACT: A written agreement between the Village of Oak Park and an entity
registered to do business in the state of Illinois that exceeds twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) annually and affirmatively includes a living wage
requirement within the agreement pursuant to this section.
   CONTRACTOR: A person or entity that has a contract with the Village
primarily for the furnishing of services where the total amount of the contract
or contracts with the Village exceeds twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
annually. This excludes contracts/services governed by the prevailing wage act,
820 Illinois Compiled Statutes 130/0.01 et seq., the Davis Bacon act, 40 USC
section 3141 et seq., professional services, contracts for the purchase/lease
of goods and property, for profit entities with less than five (5) employees,
not for profit entities with less than ten (10) employees, contractors pursuant
to the special service area tax law, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 200/27-5 et
seq., and any other person or entity the Village elects to exclude.
   LIVING WAGE: A wage equal to the amount established in subsection 2-6-20B of
this section.
   NON-VILLAGE EMPLOYEE: A person that is hired by a contractor and/or
subcontractor to perform services for wages.
   SUBCONTRACTOR: A person or entity hired by a contractor. The exclusions
included under the definition for "contractor" applies to subcontractors.
   VILLAGE EMPLOYEE: A person that is hired by the Village to perform duties
subject to the control and direction of the Village. This excludes student
interns, part time employees who work less than twenty (20) hours per week, and
employees whose wages are governed by a collective bargaining agreement.
   B.   Living Wage; Determination: For the purposes of this section, the
living wage shall be twelve dollars ($12.00) per hour.
   C.   Requirements: A living wage shall be paid if:
      1.   The individual is an employee of the Village as defined herein.
      2.   The individual is a non-Village employee and provides services
exclusively to the Village of Oak Park pursuant to a "contract" authorized by
the Village Board as defined herein.
      3.   Any contract requiring the use of full time non-Village employees to
provide exclusive services or labor under contract shall include a provision
requiring that the contractor shall pay not less than the living wage to such
employees, unless such employee's wages are governed by federal or state law.
The Village, as an employer, shall not pay less than the living wage to a
Village employee, unless such employee's wages are governed by federal or state
law.
   D.   Contracts: The Village Board shall determine contracts to which the
living wage provision established herein are applicable to non-Village
employees of contractors who have employees that exclusively provide services
or labor to the Village. The Village Board shall require applicable contractors
to affirm eligible employees will be paid a living wage pursuant to this
section. The Village Board shall make said determination based upon an
evaluation of the exclusive nature of the services provided to the Village and
shall affirmatively require the Village Manager to include said requirement in
an applicable contract that is subject to Board approval.
   E.   Enforcement: The provisions of this section shall be enforced as
follows:
      1.   If a contractor or any of its subcontractors is found to be in
violation of this section, such contractor shall be required to pay back each
affected employee and may also be fined by the Village up to one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each affected employee for each day paid at less than the
living wage.
      2.   If a contractor or any of its subcontractors is found to have
retaliated against an affected employee, unless such contractor or the
subcontractor appropriately reinstates or compensates such employee, the
contractor may be held to be in breach of the contract by the Village and the
contract is subject to termination.
      3.   A contractor may be disqualified from eligibility to bid on future
Village contracts for a period of time up to five (5) years for a violation of
this section.
   F.   Notification: Every contractor or subcontractor required to pay the
living wage required by this section shall notify its employees of the living
wage requirement and shall notify all of its employees annually of any
adjustment to the living wage. In addition, a contractor or subcontractor shall
notify its employees if an employee of the contractor or subcontractor contends
that the contractor or subcontractor is not paying a living wage or has
otherwise violated this section, and the employee may file a complaint with the
Village Manager. If at the conclusion of the Village Manager's investigation
pursuant to an applicable complaint the Village Manager finds that the
contractor or subcontractor violated this section, the Village Manager shall
exercise such remedies as are in the best interest of the Village, including
termination of the applicable contract. The provisions of this subsection also
shall be applicable to the Village. (Ord. 16-106, 9-6-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
ARTICLE 7
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
2-7-1: Creation; Composition
2-7-2: Creation; Director
2-7-3: Director – Certain Duties Enumerated
2-7-4: Village Engineer
2-7-1: CREATION; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created an executive branch of the Municipal government to be
known as the Public Works Department. This Department shall have a Director and
such personnel as authorized by the Board of Trustees. (1981 Code)
2-7-2: CREATION; DIRECTOR:
The Director of Public Works shall be the head of the Department of Public
Works. The Public Works Director shall be appointed by the Village Manager and
shall have the management and control of all matters and things pertaining to
such department. In all cases where provision is made by ordinance that the
consent of the Director of Public Works shall be obtained to authorize any act
to be done, the Director may grant a permit therefor, subject to the
restriction of the ordinance in relation thereto. (Ord. 1996-0-82, 12-2-96)
2-7-3: DIRECTOR – CERTAIN DUTIES ENUMERATED:
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works:
   A.   To locate and establish lines and grades of any public way within the
Village;
   B.   Subject to the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the
Village, to take special charge and superintendence of all public ways (and
appurtenances thereto, including the street and alley lighting systems, and all
public signage), and Municipal property wherever located. The Director shall
see to the prompt repair of any public way and/or Municipal property being
altered or reconstructed. The Director may also be charged with superintending
the erection of any public building to be constructed by or for the Village;
   C.   To be in charge of all sewers and drains in any of the public ways or
on Municipal property in the Village, and shall keep the same in good order and
condition and clear and free from obstructions and shall cause to be made such
repairs thereof and of the receiving basins, culverts and openings connected
therewith, as may from time to time become necessary.
   D.   To prescribe the mode of piercing or opening any of the sewers or
drains or between sewers and drains and the form, size and material of the
connection therewith, except as otherwise provided, and shall have authority to
issue a permit granting permission to make lateral connections with such sewers
and drains and between sewers and drains; to superintend the laying down of any
and all forms of public utility conduits and determine their location.
   E.   Subject to the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the
Village, to direct the manner of using the public ways and municipal property
of the Village where improvements are being installed or repairs are made,
including the erection of electric light, telephone, street light, traffic
light and other poles or posts, signs, canopies and other overhead structures;
for the laying down of public utility conduits and sewers authorized by law or
the ordinances of the Village and to determine the location thereof when no
other or superior authority of the State shall have such supervision. It shall
also be his duty to see that during the progress of such construction,
alteration, placement or installation the location thereof shall be in a safe
condition so as to prevent an accident by requiring the erection of barriers
and notices where necessary.
   F.   To furnish all necessary lines and grades of streets and alleys, or
portions thereof, to persons desiring to use the same for the purpose of
properly locating and constructing any sidewalk, curbing or building, within
ten (10) days of the date of application for such lines or grades, but upon the
terms and payment of fees referred to in Chapter 22 (Streets and Sidewalks) of
this Code; provided, however, that the Director of Public Works shall have the
right to depart from the established grade of any sidewalk whenever, in the
judgment of the Board of Trustees the surrounding conditions demand it.
   G.   To supervise the removal and disposal of garbage and other household
wastes; provided, however, that the abatement and removal of all nuisances
affecting the health of residents shall be in the special charge and under the
control of the Department of Public Health.
   H.   To be responsible for any and all surveys of public property in and for
the Village that may be ordered by the Village Manager, and enter into the plat
books of the Village all plats and changes of plats approved by the Board of
Trustees.
   I.   To be responsible for the making, preparation and submission of all
necessary plans, maps, plats, profiles, specifications, ordinances and
estimates for any public work or improvement which may be proposed or ordered
by the Board of Trustees or Village Manager.
   J.   To make all estimates for payment on contracts as the work under his
supervision progresses and as may be required under the appropriate ordinances,
specifications and contracts.
   K.   To preserve in his office all engineering field notes, maps, plans,
profiles, papers, books, writings and records made by him or coming to or being
in his office and to arrange and index the same in such a manner that a ready
reference may be had thereto.
   L.   To make and keep in his office a complete atlas of all sewers laid or
constructed in the Village with all junctions, house connections and other
appurtenances distinctly recorded therein.
   M.   To keep a systematic record of all transactions within his department
and to record all grades and bench marks established by the President and Board
of Trustees. (1981 Code)
2-7-4: VILLAGE ENGINEER:
The office of Village Engineer is hereby established. The Village Engineer
shall also serve as Village Traffic Engineer in addition to his other
functions, and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as
provided in this Code. (Ord. 1981-0-72, 10-5-81)
ARTICLE 7A
PARKING AND MOBILITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
2-7A-1: Creation; Composition
2-7A-2: Director; Appointment
2-7A-3: Director Duties
2-7A-1: CREATION; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby established a department within the Village to be known as the
Parking and Mobility Services Department. This department shall have a director
and such personnel as authorized by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 15-050, 2-2-
2015)
2-7A-2: DIRECTOR; APPOINTMENT:
The Director of Parking and Mobility Services shall be the head of the
Department of Parking and Mobility Services. The Parking and Mobility Services
Director shall be appointed by the Village Manager and shall have the
management and control of all matters and things pertaining to such department.
In all cases where provision is made by ordinance that the consent of the
Director of Parking and Mobility Services shall be obtained to authorize any
act to be done, the Director may grant a permit therefor, subject to the
restriction of the ordinance in relation thereto. (Ord. 15-050, 2-2-2015)
2-7A-3: DIRECTOR DUTIES:
The Director of Parking and Mobility Services shall have the following duties:
   A.   Responsibility for the Parking and Mobility Services Department,
including permit, meter and attended parking lots;
   B.   Subject to the provisions of this code and other ordinances of the
Village, take special charge and superintendence of all parking structures and
other parking resources that include surface lots, on street and off street,
metered or pay station, and permit parking;
   C.   The allocation and coordination of parking resources;
   D.   The oversight of parking revenue collection systems;
   E.   The assessment and monitoring of the maintenance and repair of parking
structures, surface lots, parking meters, pay stations and other parking
related equipment;
   F.   The preparation and maintenance of reports, records and related event
histories; develop and monitor information databases; and
   G.   Administration of chapter 15, article 4, "Vehicle Licenses", of this
code. (Ord. 15-050, 2-2-2015)
ARTICLE 8
DEVELOPMENT CUSTOMER SERVICES
SECTION:
2-8-1: Development Customer Services Creation; Composition
2-8-2: Director; Duties Generally
2-8-3: Permit Processing Manager Duties Generally
2-8-4: Building Officers; Definition; Short Title
2-8-5: Building Officers; Identification
2-8-6: Building Officers; Not Personally Liable For Actions If Performed In
Line Of Duty
2-8-1: DEVELOPMENT CUSTOMER SERVICES CREATION; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby established a department of the Village which shall be known as
the Development Customer Services Department, and shall include a director and
such other employees as the Board of Trustees may authorize. The Department
shall consist of four (4) divisions, to be known as the Permit Processing
Division, Business Services Division, Community Planning Division, and Housing
and CDBG Programs Division. (Ord. 15-049, 2-2-2015)
2-8-2: DIRECTOR; DUTIES GENERALLY:
The Development Customer Services Director shall have the following
responsibilities:
   A.   Responsibility for the general charge and supervision of all commercial
and economic development programs, business retention and related research and
activities within the Village;
   B.   Responsibility for the administration of the Planning Division, which
includes community planning, enforcement of the zoning ordinance, general
research, historic preservation, design and graphics, capital improvements
planning, and grant coordination related to these areas;
   C.   Responsibility for the administration of the Neighborhood Services
Division which includes multi-family licenses residential rehabilitation of
single-family and multi-family structures within the Village and CDBG program
administration, and the general charge and supervision of the administration
and enforcement of all housing and nonresidential building inspection programs;
   D.   Responsibility for the oversight and administration of the Permit
Processing Division and permits required to be issued by the Department under
this code or applicable ordinance; and
   E.   Responsibility for the administration of the Business Services
Division, which includes business licensing and commercial building inspection
programs. (Ord. 15-049, 2-2-2015)
2-8-3: PERMIT PROCESSING MANAGER DUTIES GENERALLY:
The Permit Processing Manager ("Manager") shall be the Chief Code Enforcement
Official of the Village, under the supervision of the Development Customer
Services Director and shall have the following duties:
   A.   To have general charge and supervision of the construction, alteration,
repair, raising, lowering, underpinning, moving, wrecking, equipment, use,
occupancy and maintenance of buildings, wall structure or portions thereof and
accessories thereto, within the Village, and enforce all ordinances and codes
relating thereto;
   B.   To have charge and supervision of all electrical construction, boiler
installation and plumbing, heating, ventilation, refrigerating and air
conditioning systems and the inspection thereof;
   C.   To be responsible for the examination of all plans for building permit
purposes. The Manager shall have charge of building inspections on all
buildings, structures or portions thereof in connection with work that has been
authorized by a permit including electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating,
refrigerating and air conditioning equipment, installation, repair and
maintenance; and
   D.   To have general charge and supervision of the enforcement of the
Village's building and property maintenance codes. (Ord. 15-049, 2-2-2015)
2-8-4: BUILDING OFFICERS; DEFINITION; SHORT TITLE:
The title or phrase "building officers" when and where used in this article
shall mean and include the Development Customer Services Director, the Permit
Processing Manager and all deputies and inspectors in the same division as
fully and effectually as if each and all of the officers were specifically
designated and named in lieu of the title or phrase. (Ord. 15-049, 2-2-2015)
2-8-5: BUILDING OFFICERS; IDENTIFICATION:
The building officers shall be provided by the Village with identification of
their respective office indicative of their authority. Building officers, when
performing their respective duties, shall show the identification of their
office on request or necessity. The identification shall be and remain the
property of the Village. (Ord. 15-049, 2-2-2015)
2-8-6: BUILDING OFFICERS; NOT PERSONALLY LIABLE FOR ACTIONS IF PERFORMED IN
LINE OF DUTY:
In all cases where any action is taken by building officers (or any other
officers) of the Village to enforce applicable provisions of this code or to
enforce provisions of any of the laws and codes of the Village, such acts shall
be done in the name of and on behalf of the Village, and the officers in so
acting for the Village, do not thereby render themselves liable personally and
they are hereby relieved from all personal liability for any claim for damages
arising from any such act committed or permitted in good faith in the discharge
of their duty. Any suit brought against the officers, by reason thereof, shall
be defended by the Law Department of the Village until final termination of the
proceedings therein. (Ord. 15-049, 2-2-2015)
ARTICLE 9
INSPECTORS
SECTION:
2-9-1: To Wear Badge and Identification Card Generally - Violation Notices
2-9-2: Employees of Utility Companies to Wear Badge and Identification Card
2-9-3: Badge Prerequisite to Entry Upon Premises; Exhibition of Badge and
Identification Card
2-9-1: TO WEAR BADGE AND IDENTIFICATION CARD GENERALLY - VIOLATION NOTICES:
Every inspector representing any department of the Village, when on duty, shall
wear a badge which shall be worn conspicuously indicating his number and the
department represented by him. In addition, thereto each such inspector shall
carry with him and produce upon the demand of the occupant of any building or
premises such inspector may desire to enter, an identification card giving such
inspector's name and his number, which must correspond with the number of his
badge.
Whenever an authorized employee of the Village of Oak Park observes a violation
of the Ordinances of the Village of Oak Park, he may issue a violation notice
to the person committing the violation. The violation notice shall be signed by
the employee, shall be in writing and shall include the following:
   A.   The name of the person violating the ordinance and his address, if
known;
   B.   The nature of the offense;
   C.   A request that the person appear before an appropriate Branch of the
Circuit Court of Cook County at a certain time and place.
Such notice shall be issued only by employees authorized to do so by the
Village Manager.
If the person so notified fails to appear in court, then a summons or warrant
of arrest shall issue.
2-9-2: EMPLOYEES OF UTILITY COMPANIES TO WEAR BADGE AND IDENTIFICATION CARD:
All persons furnishing gas, heat, light, power, water and other utilities to
the inhabitants of the Village under franchises which have heretofore been
granted by the Village or its predecessor, or which may hereafter be granted by
the Village, shall require that all inspectors, meter readers and repairers in
the employment of such person supplying such utilities, when on duty, shall
wear a badge in a conspicuous place, giving the name of the person employing
such inspector, meter reader or repairer, respectively, and the number assigned
to him by his employer. The employer shall also require that all such employees
shall carry and produce upon demand of the occupant of any building or premises
which they may desire to enter, an identification card which shall contain the
number assigned to such employee, which number shall correspond with the number
upon his badge, together with the name and address of such employee and the
name and address of the employer.
2-9-3: BADGE PREREQUISITE TO ENTRY UPON PREMISES; EXHIBITION OF BADGE AND
IDENTIFICATION CARD:
No inspector meter reader or repairer provided for in this Article, shall have
the right to enter any residence, store or other building without wearing his
badge. Upon the request of the proprietor or tenant or any occupant of any such
building or premises such inspector, reader or repairman shall exhibit his
identification card for inspection.
ARTICLE 10
VILLAGE CLERK
SECTION:
2-10-1: Duties Generally
2-10-2: Corporate Seal
2-10-3: Registrations And Permits
2-10-4: Communications, Ordinances, Etc., Delivered To President And Board Of
Trustees
2-10-5: Resolutions, Communications, Etc., Delivered To Officers And Committees
2-10-6: Notification Of Election Or Appointment
2-10-7: Receipt Of Documents
2-10-8: Record Publication And Proof Of Ordinances And Resolutions
2-10-9: Appointment Of Deputy Clerk
2-10-10: Other Duties
2-10-11: Office Supervision
2-10-12: Vacancy
2-10-13: Domestic Partnership Registration
2-10-1: DUTIES GENERALLY:
The Village Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees and shall
keep a full journal of the proceedings; shall be keeper and custodian of all
books, records, ordinances, resolutions, and papers of the Village except as
otherwise provided; shall receive, mark and properly file all papers belonging
to the Village coming into the Clerk's office and shall grant certified copies
from the records and papers of the Village; shall make preparations for and
supervise all municipal elections; shall administer oaths; and shall execute
such orders as may be received from the Board of Trustees; and the Clerk shall
carry out all duties as imposed by state law. (1981 Code)
2-10-2: CORPORATE SEAL:
The Village Clerk shall be the keeper of the Corporate Seal and shall affix it
to all papers on which it is required. (1981 Code)
2-10-3: REGISTRATIONS AND PERMITS:
The Village Clerk shall sign and issue such registrations and permits as
required by this code or applicable ordinance. (Ord. 15-049, 2-2-2015)
2-10-4: COMMUNICATIONS, ORDINANCES, ETC., DELIVERED TO PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF
TRUSTEES:
All petitions required by law, to be legally effective, shall be filed with the
Village Clerk. Other communications addressed to the President and Board of
Trustees may be received by the Village Clerk. All petitions and communications
so received shall be delivered by the Clerk to the President and Board of
Trustees without delay. The Clerk shall also, without delay, deliver to the
President of the Board of Trustees all ordinances or resolutions under the
Clerk's charge which may require approval or other action by the President,
with all papers on which the same were founded. (1981 Code)
2-10-5: RESOLUTIONS, COMMUNICATIONS, ETC., DELIVERED TO OFFICERS AND
COMMITTEES:
The Village Clerk shall, without delay, deliver to the officers of the Village
and to all committees of the Board of Trustees, all resolutions and
communications referred to such officers or committees by the President and
Board of Trustees. (1981 Code)
2-10-6: NOTIFICATION OF ELECTION OR APPOINTMENT:
Within five (5) days after the result of any election is declared or
appointment made, the Village Clerk shall notify all persons elected or
appointed to any office of their election or appointment. Unless such person
shall respectively qualify in ten (10) days after such notice, the office shall
become vacant, and the Clerk shall notify the appropriate Village officer of
such vacancy. (1981 Code)
2-10-7: RECEIPT OF DOCUMENTS:
The Village Clerk shall receive, time stamp with the hour, date and year, issue
a receipt over his signature, and make a record of all documents including
petitions, injury suits, bids and other such papers as are required to be filed
in the Clerk's office. (1981 Code)
2-10-8: RECORD PUBLICATION AND PROOF OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS:
The Village Clerk shall maintain a list of all ordinances and resolutions
approved by the Board of Trustees.
Each entry shall include the title and number of the ordinance or resolution,
and the date of passage. The Village Clerk shall have published those
ordinances for which publication is required, and shall attach a publisher's
affidavit to the original copy of the ordinance as proof of publication.
Original copies of ordinances and resolutions shall be maintained and indexed
as a permanent record. The Village Clerk shall also publish notices and such
other documents as are required by law. (1981 Code)
2-10-9: APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY CLERK:
The Village Clerk is authorized to appoint one Deputy Clerk who (when so
appointed) may, when directed, assume the responsibilities of the Village Clerk
in the Clerk's absence. (1981 Code)
2-10-10: OTHER DUTIES:
The Village Clerk shall generally do and perform such other duties as may be
required by the Board of Trustees and the provisions of this Code or other
ordinances of the Village. (1981 Code)
2-10-11: OFFICE SUPERVISION:
The Village Clerk shall have management and control of all matters and things
pertaining to the office of the Village Clerk, and shall supervise and direct
the appointment and removal of subordinate employees with the approval and
consent of the Village Manager. (1981 Code)
2-10-12: VACANCY:
A vacancy in the office of the Village Clerk occurring during the term shall be
filled by appointment of an Acting Clerk by the Board of Trustees until the
next Municipal election. (1981 Code)
2-10-13: DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP REGISTRATION:
   A.   Definitions: When used in this Section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
   DECLARATION OF DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP: A form, provided by the Village Clerk,
in which two (2) people declare to be jointly responsible for the necessities
of life incurred during the domestic partnership and to qualify as a domestic
partnership as set forth in this Section when the declaration is signed.
The declaration form shall set forth all the requirements for a domestic
partnership as defined herein. The declaration shall state that the persons
executing such declaration may be held civilly liable for the misstatement of
any information set forth therein and that such declaration may further be
construed by a court of law as creating enforceable, legal obligations between
the persons executing the same.
   DEPENDENT: One who lives with a domestic partner and is a biological,
adopted or stepchild of a domestic partner, a dependent of a domestic partner
as defined by Internal Revenue Service regulations, or a ward of a domestic
partner as determined under the laws of guardianship or agency.
   DOMESTIC PARTNER: Each adult in a domestic partnership.
   DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP: Two (2) unrelated adults of the same sex, who are
residents of the Village of Oak Park, who have chosen to share one another's
lives in an intimate and committed relationship of mutual caring, who also:
      1.   Share the same primary, regular and permanent residence and have
lived together for the previous six (6) months;
      2.   Agree to be jointly obligated and responsible for the necessities of
life for each other;
      3.   Are not married to anyone;
      4.   Are each eighteen (18) years of age or older;
      5.   Are competent to enter into a contract;
      6.   Are and have been each other's sole domestic partner for at least
six (6) months prior to execution of the Declaration of Domestic Partnership
required under this Section;
      7.   Agree to file a Termination of Domestic Partnership within thirty
(30) days of any change in the partnership which causes it not to satisfy any
one of the requirements for a domestic partnership set forth herein;
      8.   Have filed the required notice of termination of any prior domestic
partnership acknowledged under the provision of this Section in the manner
required herein and no less than six (6) months prior to the execution of the
current Declaration of Domestic Partnership; and
      9.   Execute a Declaration of Domestic Partnership, indicating compliance
of the persons executing such declaration with all the requirements for a
domestic partnership set forth in this Section.
   LIVE TOGETHER: Two (2) people claiming domestic partnership status share the
same primary, regular and permanent residence. It is not necessary that both
domestic partners have the legal right to possess the residence. Domestic
partners do not cease to live together if one leaves the shared residence for a
period not to exceed one year, but intends to return.
   NECESSITIES OF LIFE: Basic food, shelter, clothing, medical care and the
costs associated therewith. The domestic partners need not contribute equally
or jointly to the cost of these expenses as long as they agree that both are
responsible and obligated for the cost.
   REGISTERED DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP: A domestic partnership that has been
registered as provided by this Section.
   TERMINATION OF REGISTERED DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP: Any change in the domestic
partnership which causes the partnership not to satisfy any one of the
requirements for a domestic partnership, set forth herein.
   B.   Declaration Of Domestic Partnership; Execution And Accompanying
Documentation: A Declaration of Domestic Partnership must be signed, under
oath, by both parties seeking registration by the Village as a domestic
partnership. The Village Clerk shall, within thirty (30) days of the effective
date hereof, make such forms available.
The persons executing such declaration will also be required to indicate that
they have thoroughly read the declaration and that they understand the content
thereof at the time of execution. The Village Clerk or the Village Clerk's
designee, shall receive executed Declarations of Domestic Partnership and may
require reasonable documentation verifying the ages and the primary, regular
and permanent residence address of the persons seeking registration as a
domestic partnership.
Once the declaration has been properly executed by both individuals seeking
registration of a domestic partnership by the Village and presented to the
Village Clerk, or the Clerk's designee, along with all supporting documentation
requested by the Clerk, or the Clerk's designee, and the Clerk is satisfied
that the individuals seeking registration as a domestic partnership have
properly executed same, are residents of the Village and are at least eighteen
(18) years of age and are not presently, nor has either partner been, in
another registered domestic partnership for at least six (6) months immediately
preceding execution of the declaration, the Clerk, or the Clerk's designee,
shall issue those individuals a certificate under the Village Clerk's
signature, which shall indicate the registration of the domestic partnership
and shall identify the parties to same. The certificate shall further indicate
that the domestic partners must comply with the provisions of subsection 2-10-
13C of this Section, with regard to amendments and subsection 2-10-13D of this
Section, with regard to the termination of the domestic partnership and the
possible consequences for the failure to do so.
   C.   Amendments To Domestic Partnership Registration: Domestic partners may
amend the domestic partnership registration to add or delete dependents or
change, the household address. Amendments to the domestic partnership
registration shall be signed by both domestic partners and shall be delivered
to the Village Clerk and to any person or employer who has been provided with a
copy of the registered Declaration of Domestic Partnership by either domestic
partner.
   D.   Termination Of Domestic Partnership Registration; Notice Required: A
domestic partnership is terminated by the death of a domestic partner or by the
filing of a termination statement with the Village Clerk by a domestic partner.
The death of a domestic partner automatically terminates a domestic
partnership. A domestic partnership may be terminated by a domestic partner who
files with the Village Clerk, by hand or by certified mail, a termination
statement. A domestic partner may terminate a registered domestic partnership
by filing a termination statement with the Village Clerk, executed under oath
by at least one domestic partner, and stating that the domestic partnership has
ended or ceased to meet the criteria for a registered domestic partnership
established hereunder. If the termination statement has not been signed by both
domestic partners, the other domestic partner shall be notified of such
termination by registered mail, return receipt requested, and the termination
statement shall declare that such notification has occurred. A termination
statement shall also be delivered to any third party to whom a domestic partner
has given a Certificate of Domestic Partnership in order to qualify for a right
or benefit. The termination statement shall be delivered to all parties set
forth hereinabove within thirty (30) days of the termination of the domestic
partnership.
If a domestic partnership is terminated by the death of a domestic partner,
there shall be no required waiting period prior to filing another domestic
partnership. If a domestic partnership is terminated by one or both domestic
partners, neither domestic partner may file another domestic partnership
declaration until six (6) months have elapsed from termination.
   E.   Maintenance Of Records:
      1.   The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all registered Declarations
of Domestic Partnership, amendments to declarations and notices of termination
received by the Village Clerk. The records shall be maintained so that
amendments and notices of termination are filed with the registered Declaration
of Domestic Partnership to which they pertain.
      2.   The declarations, and amendments thereto, and termination notices
shall be maintained by the Village Clerk as public records subject to
disclosure pursuant to the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
      3.   The certified copy of the registered declaration may be used as
evidence of the existence of a domestic partnership.
   F.   Fees: The Village Clerk shall charge a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
for the registration or termination of a Declaration of Domestic Partnership
and shall charge a reasonable fee per document for providing certified copies
of registered declarations, amendments of declarations or notices of
termination. There shall be no additional charge for the issuance of the
original certified copies of the registered declaration to each domestic
partner or for the filing of amendments to registered declarations or notices
of termination.
   G.   Enforcement By Civil Action: Any person or employer may bring a civil
action in any court of competent jurisdiction against the appropriate domestic
partner(s) to recover damages when such person or employer has relied upon a
registered Declaration of Domestic Partnership to the person's or employer's
detriment as a result of:
      1.   A false statement in a Declaration of Domestic Partnership or a
false assertion of family membership; or
      2.   A failure to notify the Village Clerk, or any person or employer
previously notified of a domestic partnership of a change in the status of the
domestic partnership or family membership.
There shall not, however, be a cause of action against a domestic partner or
partners under this Section for failure to list a dependent in a registered
Declaration of Domestic Partnership. (Ord. 1997-0-36, 9-2-97)
ARTICLE 11
HEALTH DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
2-11-1: Health Department; Establishment, Composition And Duties
2-11-1: HEALTH DEPARTMENT; ESTABLISHMENT, COMPOSITION AND DUTIES:
There is hereby established a department of the Village which shall be known as
the Department of Public Health. The composition and duties of such department
are set out in Chapter 20 of this Code. (1981 Code)
ARTICLE 12
MADISON STREET COALITION
SECTION:
2-12-1: Establishment And Composition
2-12-2: Duties
2-12-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION:
   A.   There is hereby established in and for the Village an advisory
commission to the President and Board of Trustees to be known as the Madison
Street Coalition (hereinafter referred to as the "Commission"), which will
sunset on December 31, 2018, concurrent with the expiration of the Madison
Street corridor tax increment financing district ("Madison Street TIF").
   B.   The Commission shall consist of a chairperson and eight (8) members to
be appointed by the Village President and confirmed by the Board of Trustees
for terms that will expire on December 31, 2018.
   C.   Membership on the Commission shall consist of representatives of the
following private entities and citizen members as follows:
      1.   Two (2) representatives of the Madison Street Business Association;
      2.   Two (2) property owners from within the Madison Street TIF;
      3.   Three (3) Village residents;
      4.   One representative of the Rush-Oak Park Hospital; and
      5.   One representative of U.S. Bank. (Ord. 16-062, 5-16-2016)
2-12-2: DUTIES:
The Commission shall have the following duties:
   A.   Hold meetings open to the public which shall focus on the design
elements related to the Madison Street TIF pursuant to the Madison Street TIF
redevelopment plan and project, as amended, and the Madison Street Corridor
plan dated June 5, 2006, state of public infrastructure, including roadway,
parking, sidewalks, pavings, lighting, flowers, plants, shrubbery and/or
seasonal plantings and offer comment to the Village Board regarding the same;
   B.   To consult and cooperate with other advisory boards and commissions in
order to provide insights into unique aspects of the corridor and provide a
collective voice for the area that is the subject of the Madison Street TIF;
   C.   To recommend to the Village Board means and methods of communicating
with the Madison Street business district, property owners, residents and
commercial tenants; and
   D.   Keep minutes of its proceedings and official actions. (Ord. 16-038, 4-
18-2016)
ARTICLE 13
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-13-1: Appointments And Composition
2-13-1: APPOINTMENTS AND COMPOSITION:
There shall be a Board of Local Improvements, in accordance with article IX of
the Illinois Municipal Code, to be composed of the Village President as the
presiding officer, and four (4) Trustees appointed by the Village President,
with the consent of the Village Board. (Ord. 1986-0-74, 8-18-86)
ARTICLE 14
RECREATION BOARD
SECTION:
2-14-1: Establishment; Composition
2-14-2: Duties
2-14-1: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a public Recreation Board which Board shall consist of
five (5) members, to be appointed by the President of the Village, with the
consent of the Board of Trustees. The members of the public Recreation Board
shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years, on a staggered basis, with one
appointment made each year. (1981 Code)
2-14-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Recreation Board to make recommendations to the
Village Board in order to advise them of the best methods of maintaining proper
recreational facilities and activities within the Village. (1981 Code; amd.
Ord. 2007-0-15, 2-20-07)
ARTICLE 15
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-15-1: Creation
2-15-2: Duties
2-15-1: CREATION:
There is hereby established a Transportation Commission to serve without
compensation and to consist of a chairperson and six (6) members to be
appointed by the Village President with the consent of the Village Board.
All new appointments to the Commission shall be on a staggered basis for three
(3) year terms (except to fill unexpired terms) with the chairperson and two
(2) members being appointed during one year and two (2) members being appointed
in each of the two (2) succeeding years. (Ord. 2005-0-72, 12-5-05)
2-15-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Transportation Commission to submit recommendations
to the Village Board for official action. Such recommendations shall be aimed
at improving parking and traffic conditions, the administration, and
enforcement of traffic regulations, and educational activities in the field of
traffic safety. The Commission shall also conduct hearings for cul-de-sacs and
other types of street closings in accordance with established guidelines and
shall also submit recommendations to the Village Board with regard to same. The
Village Manager shall provide for such staff assistance as the Commission may
need to carry out these functions. The Commission shall follow the policies
established by the President and Board of Trustees in carrying out the above
prescribed duties and responsibilities. (Ord. 2005-0-72, 12-5-05)
ARTICLE 16
RESERVED
(Ord. 17-205, 4-17-2017)
ARTICLE 17
PLAN COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-17-1: Creation
2-17-2: Membership
2-17-3: Term Of Office
2-17-4: Procedure
2-17-5: Powers And Duties
2-17-6: Land Subdivision Or Resubdivision And The Official Map
2-17-7: Improvements
2-17-8: Expenditures
2-17-1: CREATION:
In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation of a
Comprehensive Village Plan for the guidance, direction and control of the
growth and development or redevelopment of the Village, a Plan Commission is
hereby created under authority of the Illinois Municipal Code. (1981 Code)
2-17-2: MEMBERSHIP:
Said Plan Commission shall consist of a chairperson and eight (8) members,
citizens of the Village, appointed by the President on the basis of their
particular fitness for their duty on said Plan Commission and subject to the
approval of the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 1999-0-2, 2-1-99)
2-17-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
All appointments shall be three (3) year terms on a staggered basis with three
(3) appointments made each year. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for
unexpired terms only. All members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation. (1981 Code)
2-17-4: PROCEDURE:
Immediately following their appointments, the members of the Plan Commission
shall meet, organize, elect such officers as they may deem necessary, and adopt
and later change or alter, rules and regulations of organization and procedure
consistent with Village ordinances and State laws. The Commission shall keep
written records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public
inspection. The Commission shall also file an annual report with the Board of
Trustees setting forth its transactions and recommendations. (1981 Code)
2-17-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Said Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   To prepare and recommend to the Board of Trustees a comprehensive plan
for the present and future development or redevelopment of the Village. Such
plan may be adopted by the Village Board in whole or in separate geographical
or functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the Official
Comprehensive Plan, or part thereof. Such Plan shall be advisory except as to
such part thereof, as has been implemented by ordinances duly enacted by the
Board of Trustees. All requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of
adoption with the County Recorder of Deeds, and filing of said Plan and
ordinances with the Village Clerk shall be complied with as provided by law. To
provide for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the inhabitants of
the Village, such Plan or Plans shall establish reasonable standards of design
for subdivisions and for resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject
to redevelopment in respect to public improvements as herein defined and shall
establish reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course, and
surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, public service facilities,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds,
size of lots to be used for residential purposes, storm water drainage, water
supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and treatment.
The requirements specified herein shall become regulatory only when adopted by
ordinance.
   B.   To recommend to the Board of Trustees from time to time such changes in
the Comprehensive Plan, or any part thereof, as may be deemed necessary.
   C.   To prepare and recommend to the Board of Trustees, from time to time,
plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of the
Official Comprehensive Plan.
   D.   To give aid to the officials of the Village charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the Official Plan, or parts
thereof, to further the making of such improvements and generally to promote
the realization of the Official Comprehensive Plan.
   E.   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities
for the general purpose of public understanding.
   F.   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other
agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
   G.   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted under
authority of the Illinois Municipal Code as may be conferred by the Board of
Trustees. (1981 Code)
2-17-6: LAND SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION AND THE OFFICIAL MAP:
At any time or times, before or after the formal adoption of the Official
Comprehensive Plan by the corporate authorities, an official map may be
designated by ordinance, which map may consist of the whole area included
within the Official Comprehensive Plan, or one or more separate geographical or
functional parts. All requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of
adoption with the County Recorder of Deeds, and filing of said Plan and
ordinances, including the Official Map, with the Village Clerk shall be
complied with as provided for by law.
No map or plat of any subdivision or resubdivision presented for record
affecting land within the corporate limits of the Village of Oak Park shall be
entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision shown thereon
provides for standards of design, and standards governing streets, alleys,
public ways, ways for public service facilities, streetlights, public grounds,
size of lots to be used for residential purposes, storm and flood water runoff
channels and basins, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage
collection and treatment in conformity with the applicable requirements of the
ordinances, including the Official Map. (1981 Code)
2-17-7: IMPROVEMENTS:
The Village Clerk shall furnish the Plan Commission, for its consideration, a
copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any
nature. The Plan Commission may report in relation thereto if it deems a report
necessary or advisable, for the consideration of the Board of Trustees. (1981
Code)
2-17-8: EXPENDITURES:
The Commission may, at the discretion of the Board of Trustees, employ a paid
secretary or staff, or both, whose salaries, wages and other necessary expenses
shall be provided for by the Board of Trustees from public funds.
If said Plan Commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical advice or
services, it may be done upon authority from the Board of Trustees and
appropriations by the Board of Trustees of adequate funds therefor. (1981 Code)
ARTICLE 18
RESERVED
 
ARTICLE 19
COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-19-1: Establishment; Composition
2-19-2: Duties And Functions
2-19-1: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby established a commission to be known as the Village of Oak Park
Community Relations Commission. The Commission shall consist of a chairperson
and eight (8) members appointed by the President and subject to the approval of
the Board of Trustees for three (3) year terms on a staggered basis with the
chairperson and four (4) commissioners appointed during one year and five (5)
commissioners appointed in each of the next two (2) years. One member of the
Commission shall be an attorney with experience in housing law, employment law,
housing or employment discrimination, civil rights or other related areas of
the law. One member may be a high school student. (Ord. 2011-0-8, 2-7-2011)
2-19-2: DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS:
The Community Relations Commission shall, in addition to performing the duties
delineated in
chapter 13 of this code, work with the Community Relations Department to secure
the furnishing of equal services to all residents; and to develop improved
intergroup relations; to encourage and foster fair and equal treatment under
the law to all; and to maintain equality of opportunity for employment and
advancement in the Village government. (1981 Code)
ARTICLE 20
BUILDING CODES ADVISORY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-20-1: Creation
2-20-2: Membership
2-20-3: Terms Of Office
2-20-4: Duties
2-20-5: Advisory Recommendations
2-20-6: Limitations Of Authority
2-20-1: CREATION:
There is hereby created and established in and for the Village of Oak Park a
commission to be hereafter known as the Building Codes Advisory Commission.
(Ord. 1999-0-8, 3-15-1999)
2-20-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The Commission shall consist of a chairperson and eight (8) members appointed
by the President with the consent of the Village Board. All Commission members
shall be qualified electors of Oak Park and shall not be employees of the
Village. The Commission shall include:
   A.   A registered design professional who is a registered architect;
   B.   A licensed Illinois plumber or registered design professional with
plumbing engineering experience;
   C.   A licensed electrician or registered design professional with
electrical engineering experience;
   D.   An HVAC contractor or registered design professional with mechanical
engineering experience;
   E.   A fire protection contractor or a design professional with fire
protection engineering experience;
   F.   A building code professional who is a Certified Building Official or
Master Code Professional;
   G.   Three (3) contractors in any construction trade who currently are
licensed to do business in the Village of Oak Park;
   H.   A former member of the Building Codes Advisory Commission as an
"emeritus" nonvoting member to serve for one term only. This position would not
count toward a quorum. (Ord. 2011-0-8, 2-7-2011)
2-20-3: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The chairperson and one Commission member shall be appointed to three (3) year
terms. Two (2) members shall be appointed to two (2) year terms and the
remaining one member to a one year term. Thereafter, each new member shall
serve for five (5) years or until a successor has been appointed. (Ord. 1999-0-
8, 3-15-1999; Ord. 23-106, 11-6-2023)
2-20-4: DUTIES:
The Commission shall have the following duties:
   A.   Review each new edition of the model codes and recommend local
amendments to the Director of Code Administration. The Director will formulate
final code amendment recommendations for presentation to, and adoption by the
President and Board of Trustees, based upon Commission recommendations, staff
and community input and other information available to the Director.
   B.   Review and recommend to the Director of Code Administration the
approval or denial of the use of alternate materials or methods of construction
to those prescribed by the codes. Prior to recommending approval of any
alternative method or material, the Commission must first find that, for the
purpose intended, the method or material complies with the intent of the code
and is at least the equivalent of that prescribed by the code in quality,
strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
   C.   Advise the Director of Code Administration, at the Village Manager's or
Director's request, with regard to requests for modifications of specific code
requirements. Prior to recommending a modification, the Commission must first
find that a special reason exists which makes compliance with the strict letter
of the code impractical in a given case, that the modification is in conformity
with the intent and purpose of the code, and that such modification does not
reduce the level of fire protection or structural integrity of any structure to
which it is applied.
   D.   Provide code interpretations to the Department of Code Administration,
upon request, which address the intent and applicability of code provisions and
acceptable alternative materials or methods of construction. (Ord. 1999-0-8, 3-
15-1999)
2-20-5: ADVISORY RECOMMENDATIONS:
Commission recommendations are advisory only and are intended to provide the
Director of Code Administration with preliminary technical and professional
information and guidance which, when considered in conjunction with other
information available to the Director, will assist him or her in formulating
final decisions and policies which are appropriate for the Village. As
preliminary information used in the formulation of final policies and
decisions, Commission recommendations are not binding on the Director and are
exempt from disclosure to the public under the freedom of information act.
(Ord. 1999-0-8, 3-15-1999)
2-20-6: LIMITATIONS OF AUTHORITY:
The Commission shall have no authority relative to the administrative
provisions of the codes nor shall the Commission be empowered to waive the
requirements of any code. (Ord. 1999-0-8, 3-15-1999)
ARTICLE 21
ENVIRONMENT AND ENERGY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-21-1: Establishment; Composition
2-21-2: Duties
2-21-1: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby established in and for the Village of Oak Park a commission to
be known as the Environment and Energy Commission. The Commission shall consist
of nine (9) members to be appointed by the Village President and Board of
Trustees for three (3) year terms on a staggered basis with three (3)
appointments made each year. One member of said Commission shall serve as the
chairperson and one member may be a high school student. (Ord. 2011-0-27, 6-6-
2011)
2-21-2: DUTIES:
The Commission shall advise the Board of Trustees with regard to the following:
the best methods of maintaining an environment beneficial to the Village and as
free from pollution as is practical and is reasonable; methods to promote
energy conservation, environmental sustainability, recycling, waste reduction,
water conservation and reduction of air emissions in the Village and for
Village residents. (Ord. 2011-0-27, 6-6-2011)
ARTICLE 22
RESERVED
(Ord. 16-132, 12-5-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
ARTICLE 23
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-23-1: Establishment; Composition
2-23-2: Duties
2-23-1: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION:
   A.   There is hereby established in and for the Village a commission to be
known as the Historic Preservation Commission.
   B.   The Commission shall consist of a chairperson and ten (10) members, to
be appointed by the Village President with the consent of the Board of
Trustees. Appointments shall be on a staggered basis for terms of three (3)
years, with the chairperson and three (3) members appointed during one year and
no more than four (4) members and no fewer than three (3) members appointed in
each of the two (2) succeeding years.
   C.   At least eight (8) members of the Commission shall have demonstrated
expertise in the discipline of history, architectural history, art history,
architecture, engineering, planning, law, real estate, historic preservation or
related field. One member of the Commission shall be a homeowner or business
owner or representative located in a designated Oak Park Historic District.
Citizens without such demonstrated expertise or residence shall have a priority
with regard to the appointment of members to the two (2) remaining slots on the
Commission, except that all commissioners shall have a demonstrated interest,
competence or knowledge in historic preservation. (Ord. 2011-0-8, 2-7-2011)
2-23-2: DUTIES:
The Commission shall have the following duties:
   A.   To conduct an ongoing survey and inventory for the purpose of
identifying those historic landmarks within the Village that exemplify the
architectural, social, cultural, economic and political history of the Village,
state or nation;
   B.   To receive or make nominations for designation of historic landmarks;
to review and recommend designation criteria to the Village Board; to hold
hearings; and to recommend to the Board of Trustees such designations;
   C.   To recommend to the Village Board the adoption of specific guidelines,
based upon the secretary of the interior's standards, to be used in the
application of the Village's historic preservation ordinance to the alteration,
construction, relocation, removal or demolition of historic landmarks or of
properties and/or improvements within historic districts;
   D.   To review permit applications for alteration, construction, relocation,
removal or demolition affecting historic landmarks, and properties and/or
improvements in historic districts and to request the presentation of such
drawings (floor plans, elevations and details), specifications and other
information as may be necessary to review those applications;
   E.   To approve, modify or deny applications for certificates of
appropriateness and certificates of economic hardship for historic landmarks,
in accordance with chapter 7, article 9 of this code, and to respond to appeals
of such decisions to the Village Board; (Ord. 1993-0-60, 6-7-1993)
   F.   To review proposed zoning amendments, applications for special use
permits including planned use developments, subdivisions and applications for
zoning variances that affect nominated, proposed or designated historic
landmarks and historic districts, and may present evidence at public hearings
in support or opposition or make recommendations thereon to the Zoning Board of
Appeals, Plan Commission, and Board of Trustees; (Ord. 1999-0-8, 3-15-1999)
   G.   To recommend to the Board of Trustees the adoption of an appropriate
system of historically and architecturally compatible streetscape elements,
including, but not limited to, paving materials, curbs, sidewalks,
streetlights, street and historic district signage, and to make recommendations
for the design and implementation of such streetscape elements;
   H.   To advise the Village Board, Village Manager, any commission, or other
agency on matters affecting nominated, proposed or designated historic
landmarks or historic districts;
   I.   To provide general guidance to interested parties on technical and
financial aspects of historic preservation and to indicate to such parties that
they may only rely upon independent professional advice and consultation as a
basis for final decisions with regard to these matters;
   J.   To advise and assist interested parties on procedures for inclusion in
the national and state registers of historic places;
   K.   To nominate properties and/or structures, improvements or areas to the
Illinois and national registers of historic places;
   L.   To maintain a library of preservation related documents and to keep
such materials available for public use;
   M.   To inform and educate the citizens of Oak Park concerning the historic
and architectural heritage of the Village by publishing, with Village Board
authorization and Village staff assistance, appropriate maps, newsletters,
brochures, books and pamphlets, and by holding programs and seminars;
   N.   To call upon assigned Village staff members as well as other expert
volunteers for technical advice and assistance;
   O.   To request the Village Board to retain such specialists or consultants
and to request the Village Board to appoint such citizen advisory committees as
may be required from time to time;
   P.   To investigate, review and recommend to the Village Board the
acceptance of any gifts of property, transferred to the Village by an entity
for the purpose of preserving or enhancing the historically significant aspects
of properties, improvements or areas;
   Q.   To conduct annual inspections on behalf of the Village and to prepare
condition reports to the Village Manager and Village Board on all properties,
easements or development rights transferred to the Village for the purpose of
preservation;
   R.   To recommend and assist in the application for funds on behalf of the
Village from federal, state and private sources with the Village Manager's
prior approval, to further the goals of historic preservation herein set forth;
   S.   To confer recognition, from time to time, as appropriate, upon owners
of historic landmarks or property or structures within historic districts by
means of award certificates, plaques or markers;
   T.   To assume whatever responsibilities and duties may be delegated to it
by the Village Board with regard to the certified local government provisions
of the national historic preservation act of 1966, as amended;
   U.   To perform, in a timely and thorough manner, all of the duties
delegated to the Commission under the historic preservation ordinance set forth
in chapter 7, article 9 of this code.
   V.   To recommend to the Board adoption of the Commission's rules and
procedures, or amendments thereto. (Ord. 1993-0-60, 6-7-1993; amd. Ord. 25-112,
3-4-2025)
ARTICLE 24
CROSS REFERENCES TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS ESTABLISHED IN OTHER CHAPTERS OF THE
VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
2-24-1: Boards And Commissions Listed Elsewhere
2-24-1: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS LISTED ELSEWHERE:
The boards and commissions listed below are established in the following
chapters of this code:
 
Board of Health             Chapter 20, "Public Health"
Farmers' Market Commission  Chapter 18, article 2, "Farmers' Market"
Fire and Police Commission  Chapter 19, "Police Department"
Firemen's Pension Board     Chapter 9, "Fire Department"
Liquor Control Review Board Chapter 3, "Alcoholic Liquor Dealers"
Police Pension Board        Chapter 19, "Police Department"
Zoning Board of Appeals     Zoning code (available as a separate document from
                            Village Clerk)
 
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2011-0-21, 5-16-2011)
ARTICLE 25
CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND ETHICS
SECTION:
2-25-1: Statement Of Policy
2-25-2: Ethics Committee Of The Village Board
2-25-3: Persons Affected
2-25-4: Disclosure Of Real Estate
2-25-5: Disclosure Of Business Interests
2-25-6: Disclosure Of Other Employment
2-25-7: Filing And Disclosure
2-25-8: New Ownership Of Real Property
2-25-9: Conflicts Of Interest And Standards Of Conduct
2-25-10: Protection Of Employees Against Retaliation For Reporting Fraud, Waste
Or Misuse Of Office
2-25-11: Contracts With Other Governmental And Quasi-Governmental Entities
2-25-12: Advisory Opinions
2-25-13: Enforcement
2-25-14: Penalties; Forfeited Position; Exemptions; Injunction
2-25-1: STATEMENT OF POLICY:
It is the policy of the Village that its employees and elected and appointed
officers should, in all cases, exercise their judgment and perform their duties
for the sole benefit of the citizens of the Village. To this end all such
persons should avoid accepting or retaining any economic benefits or
opportunities which could impair or present an actual threat to the exercise of
independent judgment. It is further the policy of the Village that all
appearances of impropriety shall be avoided. The Board of Trustees hereby
determines that a policy setting forth ethical principles and regulations
applicable to public officials and employees is in the best interests of the
Village and will contribute to the public confidence in the integrity, ability
and performance of said persons. (Ord. 1993-0-24, 4-7-1993)
2-25-2: ETHICS COMMITTEE OF THE VILLAGE BOARD:
   A.   Creation; Terms: There shall be created an Ethics Committee of the
Village Board which shall have the duties and powers, unless otherwise
provided, to hear complaints and rule upon the appropriate disposition of the
ethics ordinance. The Committee shall consist of the Village President and all
of the Village's Trustees then holding office. The Village President shall
serve as Chairperson and shall preside over all Committee meetings and may call
special Committee meetings as needed, but otherwise shall have power equal to
that of other Committee members. In the event that the Committee is considering
ethical issues involving one or more Trustees or the Village President, the
officers involved shall recuse themselves from participation on the Ethics
Committee with regard to such issues and the remaining Trustees or President
and Trustees shall comprise the entire Ethics Committee with regard to the
consideration of such issues. In the event that the President must recuse him
or herself, the remaining Committee members shall appoint a new, temporary
Chairperson for this purpose.
   B.   Duties: The Ethics Committee shall enforce the provisions of this
article, including prosecuting and hearing complaints on violations of this
article by elected or appointed officers and employees. The Committee shall
also, upon request, advise the Village Attorney or other elected or appointed
officers and employees on ethical questions. This includes rendering advisory
opinions as described in section
2-25-12 of this article. (Ord. 1993-0-24, 4-7-1993)
2-25-3: PERSONS AFFECTED:
   A.   All of the provisions of this article, except as otherwise indicated,
shall apply to all elected Village officials, to the Village Manager, Deputy
Village Manager, Village Attorney and department and division heads. Other
employees shall be governed by the personnel manual and the provisions of this
article which specifically state that they are applicable to all employees.
(Ord. 2012-0-64, 11-5-2012)
   B.   Sections
2-25-8 through
2-25-12 of this article shall apply to all elected and appointed officers of
the Village and to all employees of the Village.
   C.   In addition to the provisions of this article, but consistent
therewith, the Village Manager is hereby directed and authorized to promulgate
such rules and regulations relating to outside employment, conflict of
interest, or other ethical matters as he may deem necessary, which rules and
regulations shall be applicable to all Village employees. The Village Manager
shall prepare all forms for statements required by this Article, which forms
shall be distributed to persons subject to this Article not later than thirty
(30) days prior to the date set for filing. (Ord. 1993-0-24, 4-7-93)
2-25-4: DISCLOSURE OF REAL ESTATE:
Each person subject to the provisions of this Article shall file, with the
Village Clerk, a statement disclosing direct or indirect ownership for any real
property located within the corporate limits of the Village, owned by the
person required to file or by the spouse or minor children of such person. Such
statement shall include the legal description and common address of the real
estate and shall indicate the ownership interest held in such real estate.
For the purpose of this Section, the ownership of a beneficial interest in real
estate held in land trust, real property being purchased by contract or real
property held by a corporation, an investment group or partnership in which the
person filing, or the spouse or minor children of such person, shall own more
than a five percent (5%) interest, shall be considered real property.
The property in which the person resides shall be exempt from the provisions of
this Section, unless said property contains more than three (3) residential
units. (Ord. 1993-0-24, 4-7-93)
2-25-5: DISCLOSURE OF BUSINESS INTERESTS:
Each person subject to the provisions of this Article shall file, with the
Village Clerk, a statement disclosing employment of the person required to
file, or of the spouse or minor child of such person by a business, firm or
corporation doing business with the Village when compensation for such
employment shall exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per calendar year or an
ownership of greater than five percent (5%), either direct or indirect by the
person required to file, or by the spouse or minor child of such person, of a
business, firm or corporation doing business with the Village. (Ord. 1993-0-24,
4-7-93)
2-25-6: DISCLOSURE OF OTHER EMPLOYMENT:
Each person subject to the provisions of this Article shall file, with the
Village Clerk, a statement indicating all employment, for the previous calendar
year, of the person filing the statement, and of the spouse and minor children
of such person. Said statement shall include the name of the employing entity
and the nature of the service rendered in the course of such employment.
The statement shall further disclose whether the person, spouse or minor child
of such person performed any service for compensation for the Village other
than that performed in the person's official capacity with the Village or was
associated with or employed by a business, corporation or partnership which
received compensation from the Village for services performed for the Village.
(Ord. 1993-0-24, 4-7-93)
2-25-7: FILING AND DISCLOSURE:
All disclosure statements described in Sections
2-25-4 through
2-25-6 of this Article shall be filed with the Village Clerk on or before May 1
of each calendar year, except as hereinafter set forth.
Persons already obligated to file disclosure statements pursuant to the laws of
the State may file copies of said statements with the Village Clerk in
satisfaction of the requirements of this Article, except that any information
required by this Article and not contained on other filed statements, must be
separately filed herein.
The disclosure statements described herein shall be kept for five (5) years,
from the date of filing, by the Village Clerk. Except for employment
information with regard to the spouses and minor children of persons required
to file, said records shall be considered public records and accessible to
citizens of Oak Park for the purpose of viewing and copying. Records containing
employment information with regard to the spouse and minor children of persons
required to file disclosure statements shall not be available for public
inspection. A request to view records shall be made in writing, with a copy of
said request given to the individual whose records are to be viewed. Nothing
herein shall prevent the Village Clerk from establishing reasonable rules and
regulations governing when the records may be viewed and from requiring a
reasonable charge for copying any of said records. (Ord. 1993-0-24, 4-7-93)
2-25-8: NEW OWNERSHIP OF REAL PROPERTY:
   A.   Policy Statement: The Village government licenses and regulates
multiple-family dwellings in Oak Park so as to insure proper maintenance and
also regulates in connection with the enforcement of fair housing regulations.
The Village government is also involved as the mortgagee in loans to owners of
real property and purchases single-family and multiple-family residences for
rehabilitation and repair. Therefore, a potential conflict of interest exists
where a person is in a decision making or regulatory position with the Village
and owns or has an interest in local real estate, or is employed by someone who
owns or has an interest in local real estate.
   B.   Restrictions on Ownership of Real Property: The Village Manager, any
attorney employed on a permanent basis by the Village, department heads and
other Village employees as designated by the Village Manager as being involved
in regulation of housing and building on behalf of the Village, including the
spouses of such persons, shall not be employed by or otherwise receive a direct
benefit from an association with the owner of any licensed multiple-family
dwelling within the Village and shall not purchase or contribute financially to
the purchase of real property within the corporate limits of the Village,
unless said person shall use the property as his place of residence and the
property contains no more than three (3) residential units, or shall use it as
a residence for the employee's parents, parents-in-law or children and the
property contains no more than one family unit. It is further the policy of the
Village to encourage said persons to divest themselves of presently owned real
property within the corporate limits of the Village except insofar as it is
used as said person's or family's place of residence. Persons seeking
employment in any position to which this restriction applies must be in
compliance with this restriction prior to employment in said position.
Exceptions may be made to the restrictions of this Section by the Board of
Trustees where the Board finds that the purchase of real property or an
interest therein will not involve the purchaser in any possibility of a
substantial conflict of interest. (Ord. 1993-0-24, 4-7-93)
2-25-9: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND STANDARDS OF CONDUCT:
   A.   Impartiality: Every elected and appointed officer and employee shall
perform his or her duties with impartiality and without prejudice or bias for
the benefit of all citizens of the Village. No officer or employee shall grant
or make available to any citizen, including other officers or employees of the
Village, any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which is
available to every other citizen.
   B.   Prohibition Against Interests in Village Contracts and Business:
      1.   No elected officer of the Village, whether paid or unpaid, shall
have any interest directly or indirectly in any contract, work or business of
the Village, except as permitted by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-14-4 of
the Illinois Municipal Code.
      2.   No employee of the Village shall have any interest directly or
indirectly in any contract, work or business of the Village, except that any
employee who is otherwise eligible under applicable Federal, State and/or local
laws and program guidelines may participate in the Village's rehabilitation and
diversity programs, including but not limited to the multiple- family and
single-family residential rehabilitation programs, the Diversity Assurance
Program, the Retail Rehabilitation Grant Program and the First Time Home Buyer
Mortgage Assistance Program.
      3.   Any financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which
tend to affect the independence of judgment of said officer or employee shall
be publicly disclosed.
   C.   Prohibition Against Interests Which Are Incompatible With Official
Duties: No elected or appointed officer or employee shall engage in any
business or transaction or shall have a financial or other personal interest,
direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his
official duties in the public interest or which may tend to impair his
independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties.
For purposes of this Section, personal interest shall include the financial
interest of the spouse or minor children of the elected or appointed officer or
employee.
   D.   Interest in Contract, Legislative or Administrative Action,
Transaction, Zoning Decision, Permit or Licensing Decision, or Other Matter: No
elected or appointed officer or employee having the power or duty to perform an
official act or action, related to a contract, legislative or administrative
action, transaction, zoning decision, permit or licensing decision, or other
matter which is, may be or has been the subject of an official act or action of
the Village during the prior twelve (12) months shall:
      1.   Have or thereafter acquire an interest in such contract, legislative
or administrative action, transaction, zoning decision, permit or licensing
decision, or other matter, except as otherwise stated in this Section; or
      2.   Have an interest in any business entity representing, advising or
appearing on behalf of, whether paid or unpaid, any person involved in such
contract, legislative or administrative action, transaction, zoning decision,
permit or licensing decision, or other matter, except as otherwise stated in
this Section; or
      3.   Have solicited or accepted present or future employment with a
person or business entity involved in such contract, legislative or
administrative action, transaction, zoning decision, permit or licensing
decision, or other matter for a period of twelve (12) months following the
Village's action on such matter; or
      4.   Have solicited, accepted or granted a present or future gift, favor,
service or thing of value from or to a person involved in such contract,
legislative or administrative action, transaction, zoning decision, permit or
licensing decision, or other matter, or from a person who would receive a
material benefit, direct or indirect, from same except:
         a.   An occasional consumable gift or an occasional nonpecuniary gift,
with a value of less than fifty dollars ($50.00);
         b.   A nonpecuniary award publicly presented in recognition of public
service; or
         c.   Gifts from family members. No family member, however, may be used
as a conduit for a gift which would not otherwise be permitted.
      5.   Have encouraged, made or accepted any ex parte or unilateral
application or communication where a determination is to be made after a public
hearing and such person fails to make the contents of the communication a part
of the record.
   E.   Preacquisition of Interest: No elected or appointed officer or employee
shall acquire an interest in, or an interest affected by, any contract,
transaction, zoning decision, or other matter at a time when such officer or
employee knew, or reasonably should have known, the interest will be directly
or indirectly affected by an official act or action of such elected or
appointed officer or employee.
   F.   Appearances: No elected or appointed officer or employee shall appear
on behalf of or against any private person, other than himself or herself, his
or her spouse, or minor children, before any Village agency or municipal court,
except for members of the Village Board, who may appear before Village agencies
on behalf of Board member's constituents in the course of his or her duties as
a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic
obligations and in accordance with applicable provisions of Robert's Rules of
Order. Such Board members shall not receive compensation for such appearances,
other than compensation from the Village.
   G.   Disclosure of Interest in Legislative Action:
      1.   Any member of the Village Board who has a financial interest or
personal interest in any proposed legislation before the Village Board shall
disclose on the record of the Village Board the nature and extent of such
interest. For purposes of this Section, personal interest shall include an
interest arising from blood or marriage relationships, or close business or
political association.
      2.   Any other officer or employee who has a financial or personal
interest in any proposed legislative action of the Village Board and who
participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion or recommendation
to the Village Board shall disclose on the record of the Village Board the
nature and extent of such interest.
   H.   Disclosure and/or Use of Confidential Information: No elected or
appointed officer or employee shall, without proper legal authorization,
disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or
affairs of the Village or use such information to advance the financial or
other private interest of the officer or employee or others.
   I.   Public Property: No elected or appointed officer or employee shall
request, permit or engage in the unauthorized use of Village-owned funds,
vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit.
   J.   Future Employment of Village Officers and Employees:
      1.   No elected or appointed officer or employee of the Village shall,
directly or indirectly knowingly or wilfully negotiate the possibility of
future employment with any person who has any matter pending before that
officer or employee or before any body of which that officer or employee is a
member.
      2.   No person who has a matter pending before an officer or employee of
the Village, or before a body of which such officer or employee is a member,
shall, directly or indirectly, knowingly or wilfully, negotiate the possibility
of future employment of that officer or employee.
      3.   No officer or employee of the Village shall knowingly make,
participate in making or attempt to use his or her official position to
influence a decision involving the interests of a person with whom he or she
has an agreement regarding future employment.
   K.   Attorney Restriction On Representation: No attorney representing the
Village in any legal capacity may represent any interest against the Village.
   L.   Employee Purchase Of Village Owned Residential Property: Policemen,
firemen and other employees shall be permitted to bid for and purchase
residential property of three (3) units or less being sold by the Village,
provided said property is to be used as the principal residence of said
employees.
   M.   Employee Participation In Single-Family Rehab Loan Program: Police
officers, firefighters and other employees, as defined in section 2-1-7 of this
chapter, with the exception of the rehab supervisor, will be permitted to
participate in the Village Single-Family Rehab Loan Program, fully funded by
Community Development Block Grant funds and regulated, generally, by Federal
regulations set forth in 24 CFR part 570 and, specifically, by loan policy
guidelines approved by the Housing Programs Advisory Committee of the Village
Board. (Ord. 1993-0-24, 4-7-93)
   N.   Adoption Of The State Officials And Employees Ethics Act: The
regulations of section 5-15 1  and article 10 2  of the State Officials and
Employees Ethics Act (hereinafter "the Act") is hereby adopted as required by
reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the Village to
the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
      1.   Solicitation Or Acceptance Of Gifts Prohibited: The solicitation or
the acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the Act,
by an elected or appointed official or any employee of the Village, is hereby
prohibited.
      2.   Gift Ban: The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered
or made to an officer or employee of the Village under the Act, is hereby
prohibited.
      3.   Political Activities Prohibited: The participation in political
activities prohibited under the Act, by any officer or employee of the Village,
is hereby prohibited.
      4.   Definitions: For purposes of this subsection
2-25-9N, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be defined as set forth in 5
Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
      5.   More Restrictive Provisions Prevail: This subsection
2-25-9N does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any other provision of
this article. To the extent that any other provision of this article relating
to the solicitation and acceptance of gifts is less restrictive than any
provision contained in section 5-15 and article 10 of the Act, as adopted in
this subsection
2-25-9N, then the provisions of section 5-15 and article 10 of the Act, as
adopted in this subsection 2-25-9N, shall prevail in accordance with the
provision of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a). The penalty provisions
set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 shall prevail over other
penalty provisions set forth in this article only with regard to the
enforcement of this subsection
2-25-9N.
      6.   Future Amendments: Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective
after the effective date of this subsection
2-25-9N shall be incorporated into this subsection
2-25-9N by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance,
offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activity. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this subsection
2-25-9N by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the
Village.
      7.   Future Declaration Of Unconstitutionality:
         a.   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional
in its entirety, then this subsection
2-25-9N shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois Supreme Court's
decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings.
This subsection
2-25-9N shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate
authorities of the Village if the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois
Supreme Court.
         b.   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act,
or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as
adopted by this subsection
2-25-9N shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
subsection
2-25-9N relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the Village.
(Ord. 2004-0-31, 6-21-04)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10-10 – 10-40.
2-25-10: PROTECTION OF EMPLOYEES AGAINST RETALIATION FOR REPORTING FRAUD, WASTE
OR MISUSE OF OFFICE:
   A.   No elected or appointed officer or employee of the Village shall use or
threaten to use any official authority or influence to discourage, restrain or
interfere with any other person for the purpose of preventing such person from
acting in good faith to carry out the person's official duties, to exercise the
person's clearly defined rights or to report or otherwise bring to the
attention of the Village any information which, if true, would constitute a
work related violation by a Village elected or appointed officer or employee of
any law or regulation, gross waste of Village funds, gross abuse of authority,
a specified and substantial danger to public health or safety due to an act or
omission of a Village officer or employee, use of a Village office or position
or of Village resources for personal gain, or a conflict of interest of a
Village officer or employee.
   B.   No elected or appointed officer or employee of the Village shall use or
threaten to use any official authority or influence to effect any action as a
reprisal against an elected or appointed officer or employee who reports or
otherwise brings to the attention of the Village any information regarding the
subjects described in subsection
2-25-10A of this section. (Ord. 1993-0-24, 4-7-93)
2-25-11: CONTRACTS WITH OTHER GOVERNMENTAL AND QUASI-GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES:
The Village shall, by agreement, require that all governmental and quasi-
governmental entities which receive funding from the Village adhere to the
provisions of this article and that all such entities agree to be subject to
the enforcement and penalty provisions contained herein as administered by the
Village's Ethics Committee.
For purposes of this section, the phrase "elected and appointed officers and
employees" shall include the elected and appointed officers and employees of
those governmental and quasi- governmental entities which receive funding from
the Village and which agree to adhere to the provisions of this article. (Ord.
1993-0-24, 4-7-93)
2-25-12: ADVISORY OPINIONS:
   A.   Where an elected or appointed officer or employee of the Village has a
doubt as to the applicability of any provision of this article to a particular
situation or as to the definition of terms used herein, the elected or
appointed officer or employee may apply to the Village Attorney for an advisory
opinion. The elected or appointed officer or employee shall have the
opportunity to present his or her interpretation of the facts at issue and of
the applicability of provisions of the article before such advisory opinion is
made. The Village Attorney may seek the advice and assistance of the Ethics
Committee of the Village Board (hereinafter known as the "Ethics Committee"),
if necessary.
   B.   Such opinion, until amended or revoked, shall be binding on the
Village, the Village Board and the Village Attorney in any subsequent actions
concerning the elected or appointed officer or employee who sought the opinion
and acted on it in good faith, unless material facts were omitted or misstated
in the request for the advisory opinion. Such opinion shall not be binding in
any action initiated by any private citizen.
   C.   Any advisory opinion prepared by the Village Attorney shall be made
public. However, the name of the person requesting the opinion and the names of
all persons or business entities mentioned in the opinion shall be deemed
confidential information and shall not be disclosed by the Village Attorney
unless the elected or appointed officer or employee waives such confidentiality
or where the Village Attorney deems the elected or appointed officer or
employee to have failed to act in good faith in requesting the opinion or in
conforming with the opinion or to have failed to act in conformance with the
opinion. In seeking advice from the Ethics Committee, the Village Attorney
shall not disclose the name of the person seeking the opinion nor the names of
persons or entities mentioned in the opinion. (Ord. 1993-0-24, 4-7-93)
2-25-13: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The Ethics Committee shall have the primary responsibility for the
enforcement of this article. It shall have the power to investigate any
complaint, to initiate any suit, and to prosecute any criminal or civil action
on behalf of the Village where it believes such action is appropriate.
   B.   The Ethics Committee may investigate or prosecute any apparent
violation of this article or may employ or appoint any qualified attorney to
investigate or prosecute any violation or series of violations of this article
by one or more persons.
   C.   Any person who believes that a violation of any portion of this article
has occurred may file a complaint with the Ethics Committee. However, nothing
in this article shall be construed to prevent complainants from instituting
direct legal action through the appropriate judicial authority. (Ord. 1993-0-
24, 4-7-93)
2-25-14: PENALTIES; FORFEITED POSITION; EXEMPTIONS; INJUNCTION:
   A.   Any elected or appointed officer or employee who wilfully and knowingly
violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a monetary fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or incarceration for a period of time not to exceed one year.
   B.   Upon conviction for any violation of this article of any elected or
appointed officer or employee, such officer or employee shall immediately
forfeit his or her office or position.
   C.   The Ethics Committee, with the consent of the Village Board, may exempt
from the provisions of this article any conduct found to constitute a violation
by an elected or appointed officer or employee if the Committee finds that the
enforcement of this article with respect to such conduct is not in the public
interest.
   D.   Any contract, transaction, zoning decision or other matter which was
the subject of an official act or action of the Village in which there is an
interest prohibited by this article, or which involves the violation of a
provision of this article, shall be voidable at the option of the Village.
   E.   The Ethics Committee shall have the power, where a violation of the
provisions of this article is threatened or has occurred, to bring civil action
or proceeding at law or in equity for a judgment enjoining any violation of the
provisions of this article or requiring the relinquishment of any prohibited
interest or the voiding of any such contract, transaction, zoning decision or
other matter, taking into account the interests of the Village and any third
persons who may be injured thereby. Where the Committee determines that the
public interest may best be served by not voiding a contract, transaction,
zoning decision or other matter entered into in violation of this article, such
contract, transaction, zoning decision or other matter may be enforced and an
action or proceeding may be brought against any elected or appointed officer or
employee found in violation of provisions of this article for damages not to
exceed twice the damages suffered by the Village or twice the profit or gain
realized by the elected or appointed officer or employee, whichever is greater.
(Ord. 1993-0-24, 4-7-93)
ARTICLE 26
CIVIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-26-1: Establishment; Composition
2-26-2: Duties
2-26-1: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby established in and for the Village of Oak Park, a Civic
Information Systems Commission to advise the Village Board on technology,
information management/resources and policy issues within Village government
and in the Village and on issues related to cable and telecommunications
providers who use or are seeking to use the Village right of way. The
Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, including a chairperson to be
appointed by the Village President by and with the consent of the Board of
Trustees. Terms shall be for a three (3) year period on a staggered basis with
approximately one-third (1/3) of the Commission being appointed each year.
Members of the Commission shall have a demonstrated interest in and knowledge
of information technology and policy issues. As this Commission advises the
Village Board on strategic policy issues, it shall include at least three (3)
members with appropriate experience, training or professional knowledge about
information technology design, delivery, and management, geographic information
systems, as well as user interface techniques to access public information
resources. (Ord. 2011-0-46, 8-1-2011)
2-26-2: DUTIES:
The Civic Information Systems Commission shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
   A.   The Civic Information Systems Commission, in order to enhance civic
engagement, communication, transparency, efficiency and sustainability between
the Village government and the community it serves, shall advise the Board of
Trustees with regard to the development, oversight and annual review of
important information resources and services through a master plan for
municipal and civic information management and policy. The master plan shall be
developed by the Commission and submitted to the Village Board for review and
approval. The Commission shall review and update the plan on an ongoing basis.
   B.   The Civic Information Systems Commission shall have the following
duties with regard to cable and telecommunications providers who use or are
seeking to use the Village right of way.
      1.   The Civic Information Systems Commission shall act in an advisory
capacity to the Village Board on cable and telecommunications issues.
      2.   The Commission shall also act as liaison between the citizens and
any cable or telecommunications operator authorized by franchise to do business
in the Village.
      3.   The Commission shall act on behalf of the Village in the monitoring
of franchisee performance relating to system performance and compliance with
the provisions of the franchise.
      4.   The Commission shall encourage the development of programming for
public, educational and government (PEG) access channels as may be available
from a cable or telecommunications operator. (Ord. 2011-0-46, 8-1-2011)
ARTICLE 27
OAK PARK EMERGENCY SERVICE DISASTER AGENCY
SECTION:
2-27-1: Establishment
2-27-2: Coordinator
2-27-3: Functions
2-27-4: Mobile Support Team
2-27-5: Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
2-27-6: Emergency Action
2-27-7: Compensation
2-27-8: Reimbursement By State
2-27-9: Purchases And Expenditures
2-27-10: Oath
2-27-11: Office
2-27-12: Budgeting
2-27-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Oak Park Emergency Service Disaster Agency (ESDA)
to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or damage resulting from
natural or manmade disaster, in accordance with "The Illinois Emergency
Services and Disaster Act of 1975".
The Oak Park ESDA shall consist of the Coordinator and such additional members
as may be selected by the Coordinator. (Ord. 1983-0-59, 9-6-83; amd. Ord. 1997-
0-32, 8-4-97)
2-27-2: COORDINATOR:
The Coordinator of the Oak Park ESDA shall be appointed by the Village Manager
and shall serve until removed by same.
The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training and operation of the Oak Park ESDA, subject to the
direction and control of the Village Manager as provided by statute.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the
Coordinator, the Village Manager, or any person designated by him, shall be and
act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided herein. (Ord.
1983-0-59, 9-6-83; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
2-27-3: FUNCTIONS:
The Oak Park ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the Village as shall
be prescribed in and by the State ESDA plan and program prepared by the
Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the
Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate
limits of the Village as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement
with any other political subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality
entered into as provided in "The Illinois Emergency Service and Disaster Act of
1975". (Ord. 1983-0-59, 9-6-83; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
2-27-4: MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All members of the Oak Park ESDA organization may be designated as members of a
mobile support team created by the Director of the State ESDA as provided by
law.
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the Coordinator
of the Village ESDA organization.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a Village employee or officer while
serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director, shall receive
the compensation as provided by law. (Ord. 1983-0-59, 9-6-83; amd. Ord. 1997-0-
32, 8-4-97)
2-27-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The Coordinator of the Oak Park ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with
other villages or political subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement
shall be effective until it has been approved by the Village Manager and by the
State Director of ESDA. (Ord. 1983-0-59, 9-6-83; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
2-27-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists, from manmade or
natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the Oak Park ESDA to cooperate fully
with the State ESDA and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers
as provided by law. (Ord. 1983-0-59, 9-6-83; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
2-27-7: COMPENSATION:
Members of the Oak Park ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the Village,
if called for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall receive for the
time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position
held; members who are not such Village employees or officers shall receive for
such training time such compensation as may be established by the Village
Manager. (Ord. 1983-0-59, 9-6-83; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
2-27-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the State to the Village for expenses incident to training
members of the Oak Park ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of ESDA,
compensation for services and expenses of members, members of a mobile support
team while serving outside the Village in response to a call by the Governor or
State Director of ESDA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement by the
State incident to ESDA activities as provided by law. (Ord. 1983-0-59, 9-6-83;
amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
2-27-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The Village Manager may, with the approval of the Village Board of Trustees, on
recommendation of the Coordinator of the Oak Park ESDA, authorize any purchase
or contracts necessary to place the Village in a position to combat effectively
any disaster, and to protect the public health and safety, protect property,
and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of any manmade or
natural disaster.
In the event a major disaster occurs, the Coordinator of the Oak Park ESDA is
authorized, on behalf of the Village, to procure such services, supplies,
equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the
exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to Village contracts or obligations, as authorized
by "The Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1975", provided that if
the Village Board of Trustees meets at such time, the Coordinator of the Oak
Park ESDA and the Village Manager shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by that body. (Ord. 1983-0-59, 9-6-83; amd. Ord. 1997-0-
32, 8-4-97)
2-27-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Oak Park ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to the
following oath, which shall be filed with the coordinator:
I,                      do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate nor have I been a member of any political party
or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am
affiliated with the Oak Park ESDA organization, I will not advocate or become a
member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence.
(Ord. 1983-0-59, 9-6-83; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
2-27-11: OFFICE:
The Village Manager is authorized to designate space in a Village building, or
elsewhere, for the office of the Oak Park ESDA. (Ord. 1983-0-59, 9-6-83; amd.
Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
2-27-12: BUDGETING:
The Village may budget funds, not to exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per
capita for ESDA purposes in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 1983-0-59, 9-6-
83; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
ARTICLE 28
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
2-28-1: Adoption Of State Act; Exceptions
2-28-2: Qualification; Oath
2-28-3: Removal
2-28-4: Annual Reports; Budget Request
2-28-5: Human Resources Director And Board As Members Of The Entry Level
Appointment Committee And Human Resources Director As Secretary Of The Board;
Duties; Seal Of The Board
2-28-1: ADOPTION OF STATE ACT; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Except as set forth in this code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-
2.1-1, entitled board of fire and police commissioners (state act), is adopted
by reference, provided that sections 5/10-2.1-3, 5/10-2.1-4, 5/10-2.1-5, 5/10-
2.1-6, 5/10-2.1-6.1, 5/10-2.1-6.2, 5/10-2.1-8, 5/10-2.1-9, 5/10-2.1-10, 5/10-
2.1-11 and 5/10-2.1-12 of said state act are not adopted; and further provided
the provisions of this article and article 29 of this chapter and sections 9-1-
2 and 19-1-8 of this code shall supersede the provisions of said state act; and
further provided that except as provided in subsection
2-28-1A4 of this section, all examinations for promotion shall be competitive
among such members of the next lower rank as desire to submit themselves to
examination, provided that:
      1.   Only police officers with three (3) years of service from the date
of their original appointment are eligible to compete in the Sergeant's
promotional examination;
      2.   Only Firefighters certified as Firefighter III by the state, and who
have three (3) years of service from the date of their original appointment and
are licensed as an Emergency Medical Technician/Paramedic (EMT-P) with the
state of Illinois department of public health and with the Emergency Medical
System (EMS) under which the Oak Park Fire Department operates its advanced
life support (ALS) service, are eligible to compete in the Fire Department's
Lieutenant's promotional examination; and
      3.   Only Lieutenants who are certified as Fire Officer I by the state
are eligible to compete in the Fire Department's Captain's promotional
examination.
      4.   External candidates and candidates who are not members of the next
lower rank are eligible to be appointed to the position of Civilian Commander-
Administration.
   B.   No military credits shall be allowed in connection with any promotional
eligibility list. The eligibility list for promotional appointments shall be in
force for a period of three (3) years from the date of posting, provided that
the eligibility list for Fire Department Lieutenants, which was posted on May
18, 1992, shall be in force for a period of four (4) years and seven (7) months
from the date of posting. (Ord. 2013-0-05, 1-7-2013)
   C.   In addition to the powers to discharge or suspend granted to the Board
of Fire and Police Commissioners, pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
10-2.1-17, as limited by any applicable collective bargaining agreement, the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may, in case an officer or member is
found guilty after the hearing provided in said section, demote said officer or
member one rank and/or remove said officer's or member's name from the
promotional eligibility list, except for the removal of a police officer from
the promotional eligibility list. (Ord. 2014-0-85, 10-6-2014)
   D.   The Entry Level Appointment Committee, comprised of the Fire or Police
Chief, as the case may be, the Director of Human Resources or such other
administrative or human resources employee of the Village as the Village
Manager may designate, and the members of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners, shall appoint all entry level members of the Fire and Police
Departments.
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall publish and/or post notices of
examinations for entry level positions in the Fire and Police Departments,
conduct such portions of the selection process as the Committee may direct and
participate in the oral interview process, verify the accuracy of interview and
test scores, verify qualifications of candidates, and certify to the Entry
Level Appointment Committee a list in rank order of all persons eligible for
appointment to the entry level positions in the Fire and Police Departments.
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall issue, at the direction of the
Committee, certificates of appointment for all appointments made to entry level
positions in the Fire and Police Departments. The certificate of appointment
shall be signed by the chairperson and secretary, respectively, of the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners.
No less than one member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall
participate in the oral interview process as members of the Entry Level
Appointment Committee which shall be comprised of either the Fire or Police
Chief, as the case may be; the Director of Human Resources or such other
administrative or human resources employee as the Village Manager may
designate; and the members of the Fire and Police Commission. The Committee
shall orally interview entry level recruits in accordance with the rules of the
Entry Level Appointment Committee. The Committee shall score the oral interview
of each entry level recruit in accordance with the following formula: the oral
interview scores given by the Fire Chief or Chief of Police, as the case may
be, the Director of Human Resources or other designees of the Village Manager,
and each member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners participating in
the oral interview process shall be added together and divided by the number of
Committee members participating in the oral interview process to form the final
composite score of the Entry Level Appointment Committee. (Ord. 2013-0-05, 1-7-
2013)
2-28-2: QUALIFICATION; OATH:
The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners must be residents of
the Village and will be considered officers of the Village. The members of the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall file an oath of office with the
Village Clerk.
No person may serve on the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners who is an
officer or precinct captain of any "established party" as defined in the
election code, or who is an elected official of any governmental body. No
person shall be appointed as a member of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners who is related, either by blood or marriage, up to the degree of
first cousin to any elected official of the Village.
This section shall supersede section 5/10-2.1-3 of said state act. (Ord. 1993-
0-89, 10-18-1993; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-1997)
2-28-3: REMOVAL:
Members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall not be subject to
removal except for cause upon written charges and after an opportunity to be
heard in their own defense before a public meeting of the Board of Trustees of
the Village. A majority vote of the President and Board of Trustees shall be
required to remove any such member from office. (Ord. 1993-0-89, 10-18-1993;
amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-1997)
2-28-4: ANNUAL REPORTS; BUDGET REQUEST:
Annually, at any time the corporate authorities may provide, the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners shall submit to the President a report of its
activities, and of the rules in force and the practical effect thereof. In this
report, the Board may make suggestions which the Board believes would result in
greater efficiency in the Fire or Police Department. The annual report shall
also contain detailed information, including statistical information indicating
Fire and Police Department progress toward compliance with the Village equal
employment opportunity/affirmative recruitment plan. The Board shall also
submit an annual budget request to the Municipal governing body prior to the
end of each fiscal year. The President shall transmit all reports to the Board
of Trustees.
This section shall supersede section 5/10-2.1-19 of said state act. (Ord. 1993-
0-89, 10-18-1993; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-1997)
2-28-5: HUMAN RESOURCES DIRECTOR AND BOARD AS MEMBERS OF THE ENTRY LEVEL
APPOINTMENT COMMITTEE AND HUMAN RESOURCES DIRECTOR AS SECRETARY OF THE BOARD;
DUTIES; SEAL OF THE BOARD:
The Human Resources Director for the Village of Oak Park shall perform the
following functions in relation to the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners:
   A.   Solicit proposals, interview vendors and recommend the award of
contracts to the President and Board of Trustees with regard to any and all
contractual services required by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners in
the performance of their duties.
   B.   Conduct all recruiting on behalf of the Village for entry level
positions in the Fire and Police Departments, and to perform all services and
take all actions incidental thereto. (Ord. 1993-0-89, 10-18-1993; amd. Ord.
1997-0-32, 8-4-1997)
   C.   Participate in the Police and Fire Department entry level appointment
process as a member of the Entry Level Appointment Committee, comprised of the
Human Resources Director, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners and either
the Fire Chief or the Chief of Police, as the case may be, which shall include
conducting the oral interview of entry level recruits in accordance with the
rules of the Entry Level Appointment Committee and the scoring of each recruit
orally interviewed in such a manner as to create a final composite score, based
upon the combined equally weighted scores of the participating Committee
members, for each orally interviewed recruit. The Human Resources Director
shall serve in this capacity at the discretion of the Village Manager, who may
designate himself or herself or some other administrative or human resources
employee of the Village to serve in this capacity. (Ord. 2006-0-48, 7-17-2006)
   D.   Be the secretary to the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. The
secretary: 1) shall be responsible for providing clerical support to the Board
for the taking and transcribing of minutes for all of the Board's proceedings
and for performing all other duties which the Board prescribes, 2) shall keep
the minutes of the Board's proceedings, 3) shall be the custodian of all
records pertaining to the business of the Board, 4) shall keep a record of all
examinations held, and 5) shall be custodian of the seal of the Board, if one
is adopted, and the Board is hereby authorized to adopt an official seal and to
prescribe the form thereof by resolution of the Board. (Ord. 1993-0-89, 10-18-
1993; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-1997)
ARTICLE 29
ENTRY LEVEL APPOINTMENT COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-29-1: Creation
2-29-2: Duties
2-29-3: Promulgation Of Rules
2-29-4: Examination Of Applicants
2-29-5: Criminal History; Applicants
2-29-6: Fingerprints To Be Furnished
2-29-7: Criminal History Record Information
2-29-8: Persons Exempt From Examination
2-29-9: Register Of Eligibles
2-29-10: Military Credits
2-29-11: Duties Of Human Resources Director
2-29-1: CREATION:
There is hereby established the Entry Level Appointment Committee which shall
consist of five (5) members, including the three (3) members of the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners; the Fire Chief or Chief of Police, depending
upon whether fire or police entry level positions are being considered; and the
Director of Human Resources or such other administrative or human resources
employee as the Village Manager may designate. The chairperson of the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners shall serve as the chairperson of the Committee;
and the Director of Human Resources, or the Village Manager's designee, shall
serve as the secretary to the Committee. In matters which require the Committee
members to vote, each member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, the
Fire Chief or Chief of Police, as the case may be, and the Director of Human
Resources, or other designee of the Village Manager, shall each have a vote
equal to one full vote. In matters which require the Committee members to vote
and which impact both the Fire and Police Departments, either the Fire Chief or
the Chief of Police, or both, may participate as members of the Committee. If
only the Fire Chief or Chief of Police votes on such matters, then the vote of
either the Fire Chief or Chief of Police shall be equal to one full vote. If,
however, both the Fire Chief and Chief of Police vote on a matter impacting
both the Fire and Police Departments and requiring the Committee members to
vote, the vote of the Fire Chief and Chief of Police shall each be equal to
one-half (1/2) of one full vote. (Ord. 2006-0-48, 7-17-06)
2-29-2: DUTIES:
The Entry Level Appointment Committee shall appoint all entry level members of
the Fire and Police Departments. The Committee shall establish an entry level
eligibility list for the Police and Fire Departments. Each list shall require
certification by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners that each list has
been established in accordance with the ordinances, rules and policies of the
Village prior to posting by the Committee.
The establishment of an entry level eligibility list shall include, but not be
limited to, a written examination, a psychological examination, a background
check and an oral interview process and shall conform with all other provisions
set forth hereinbelow.
The Entry Level Appointment Committee shall authorize the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners to issue and the Board shall issue, at the direction of
the Committee, certificates of appointment for all appointments made to entry
level positions in the Fire and Police Departments. The certificate of
appointment shall be signed by the chairperson and secretary, respectively, of
the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. (Ord. 1993-0-89, 10-18-93; amd.
Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
2-29-3: PROMULGATION OF RULES:
The Committee shall promulgate rules consistent with the provisions of this
article for the appointment of members to the entry level positions within the
Fire and Police Departments. All rules shall require the approval of the
Village Manager prior to becoming effective. The Committee, from time to time,
may make changes in these rules with the approval of the Village Manager.
All rules and changes therein, adopted in accordance with the procedures set
forth in this section, shall be printed immediately for distribution. The
Committee shall give notice: a) of the places where the printed rules may be
obtained and b) of the date, not less than ten (10) days subsequent to the time
of publication, when the rules or changes therein shall go into operation. This
notice shall be published in one or more newspapers published in the
Municipality, or, if no newspaper is published therein, then in one or more
newspapers with a general circulation within the Municipality.
The rules of the Committee shall apply only to the conduct of examinations for
original appointments. No such rule shall be made by the Committee to govern
the operation of the Police or Fire Department or the conduct of its members.
The Committee shall not make or enforce any rule which will in any way inhibit
or prohibit any employee from exercising the employee's full political rights
to engage in political activities, including the right to petition, make
speeches, campaign door to door, and to run for public office, so long as the
employee does not use the employee's official position to coerce or influence
others and does not engage in these activities while the employee is at work on
duty. (Ord. 1994-0-11, 2-22-94; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
2-29-4: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANTS:
All applicants for an entry level position in either the Fire Department or the
Police Department shall be subject to an examination and shall be at least
twenty one (21) years of age at the time of such examination. The examination
shall be public, competitive and open to all applicants, and shall be subject
to reasonable limitations as to health, habits and moral character. The Village
may charge and collect fee from applicants to offset Village costs associated
with the examination process. The examinations shall be practical in character
and relate to those matters which will fairly test the capacity of the persons
examined to discharge the duties of the position to which they seek
appointments.
No person shall be eligible to take the Fire Department entry level examination
unless such person possesses a high school diploma or an equivalent high school
education. Only persons possessing sixty (60) or more semester hours of college
credit at a fully accredited college or university, which hours are consistent
with a valid degree plan at such college or university, and also possessing a
minimum grade average of "C", are eligible to take the Police Department
appointment examination. (Ord. 1994-0-11, 2-22-94; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
2-29-5: CRIMINAL HISTORY; APPLICANTS:
All applicants for the Police and/or Fire Department shall be subject to any
investigation determined by the Entry Level Appointment Committee to be
necessary to establish their good character. The Committee may require all
applicants to be fingerprinted and/or sign consents for the release of personal
information. Any applicant for firefighter who has a record of any felony
conviction or has a record of misdemeanor conviction(s) including, but not
limited to, the following areas:
   A.   Hate crime
   B.   Indecent solicitation of a child
   C.   Public indecency
   D.   Prostitution
   E.   Soliciting for a prostitute
   F.   Keeping a place of prostitution
   G.   Keeping a place of juvenile prostitution
   H.   Patronizing a prostitute
   I.   Pimping
   J.   Aggravated assault
   K.   Criminal sexual abuse
   L.   Violation of an order of protection
   M.   Theft
   N.   Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition
   O.   Defacing identification marks on firearms
   P.   Mob action
   Q.   Keeping a gambling place
   R.   Resisting or obstructing a police officer
   S.   Escape
   T.   Aiding escape
   U.   Compounding a crime
   V.   Unlawful use of weapons
   W.   Battery
   X.   Domestic battery
may be disqualified on grounds of failure to have good character, and the
conviction may be considered by the Committee in assessing the applicant's
character.
Any applicant for police officer who has been convicted of a felony shall be
disqualified from appointment to the Police Department. Any applicant for
police officer who has a record of misdemeanor conviction(s), including, but
not limited to, the above listed areas, may be disqualified on grounds of
failure to have good character, and the conviction may be considered by the
Committee in assessing the applicant's character. (Ord. 1993-0-89, 10-18-93;
amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
2-29-6: FINGERPRINTS TO BE FURNISHED:
The Committee shall cause a classified set of fingerprints of every person who
is now employed, or who hereafter becomes employed, as a full time member of a
regular Fire or Police Department of the Village to be furnished to the
Illinois Department of State Police and to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
(Ord. 1993-0-89, 10-18-93; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
2-29-7: CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION:
The Committee shall obtain criminal history record information on all
applicants for entry level positions in the Fire and Police Departments by
requesting such information from the Department of State Police, paying fees in
conformance with the requirements of subsection 22 of section 55a of "The Civil
Administration Code of Illinois" and by producing positive identification.
(Ord. 1993-0-89, 10-18-93; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
2-29-8: PERSONS EXEMPT FROM EXAMINATION:
Persons exempted from examination under either 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
10-2.1-7 or 5/10-2.1-7.1 shall not fall within the jurisdiction of the Entry
Level Appointment Committee but shall rather fall within the jurisdiction of
the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners with regard to appointment. (Ord.
1993-0-89, 10-18-93; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
2-29-9: REGISTER OF ELIGIBLES:
The Committee shall prepare and keep a register of persons whose general
average standing, upon examination, is not less than the minimum fixed by the
rules of the Committee and who are otherwise eligible. These persons shall take
rank upon the register as candidates in the order of their relative excellence
as determined by examination, without reference to priority of time of
examination.
Within sixty (60) days after each examination and after certification of the
list by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, an eligibility list shall
be posted by the Committee which shall show the final grades of the candidates
without reference to priority of time of examination.
The eligibility list for original appointment shall be in force for a period of
two (2) years from the date of posting, provided that the eligibility list for
entry level firefighters/paramedics, which was posted on August 1, 2002, shall
be in force for a period of forty eight (48) months from the date of posting.
(Ord. 2005-0-33, 8-1-05)
2-29-10: MILITARY CREDITS:
No military credits shall be allowed in connection with any original
appointment eligibility list. (Ord. 1993-0-89, 10-18-93; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32,
8-4-97)
2-29-11: DUTIES OF HUMAN RESOURCES DIRECTOR:
The Human Resources Director for the Village of Oak Park shall perform the
following functions in relation to the Entry Level Appointment Committee:
   A.   Solicit proposals, interview vendors and recommend the award of
contracts to the President and Board of Trustees with regard to any and all
contractual services required by the Entry Level Appointment Committee in the
performance of their duties.
   B.   Conduct all recruiting on behalf of the Village for entry level
positions in the Fire and Police Departments, and perform all services and take
all actions incidental thereto. (Ord. 1993-0-89, 10-18-93; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32,
8-4-97)
   C.   Participate in the Police and Fire Department entry level appointment
process as a member of the Entry Level Appointment Committee, comprised of the
Human Resources Director, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners and either
the Fire Chief or the Chief of Police, as the case may be, which shall include
conducting the oral interview of entry level recruits in accordance with the
rules of the Entry Level Appointment Committee and the scoring of each recruit
orally interviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection 2-
28-1D of this Chapter. (Ord. 1994-0-11, 2-22-94; amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
   D.   Be the secretary to the Entry Level Appointment Committee. The
secretary: 1) shall be responsible for providing clerical support to the
Committee for the taking and transcribing of minutes for all of the Committee's
proceedings and for performing all other duties which the Committee prescribes;
2) shall keep the minutes of the Committee's proceedings; 3) shall be the
custodian of all records pertaining to the business of the Committee; and 4)
shall keep a record of all examinations held. (Ord. 1993-0-89, 10-18-93; amd.
Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
ARTICLE 30
CITIZENS POLICE OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-30-1: Creation; Terms
2-30-2: Duties
2-30-3: Establishment Of Operating Procedures
2-30-4: Duty To Abide By This Article And Operating Procedures
2-30-5: Failure To Abide By This Article And/Or Operating Procedures; Removal
2-30-1: CREATION; TERMS:
There is hereby established the Citizens Police Oversight Committee, to consist
of seven (7) Oak Park citizens to be appointed by the Village President with
the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, with one of the citizens to be
designated by the Village President as chairperson. In appointing the members
of the Citizens Police Oversight Committee, the Village President shall
consider the diversity and varied backgrounds of all citizens of Oak Park.
Terms on the Citizens Police Oversight Committee shall be three (3) years,
except that the initial term of two (2) members shall be one year and the
initial term of an additional two (2) members shall be two (2) years. (Ord. 16-
073, 6-6-2016)
2-30-2: DUTIES:
The Citizens Police Oversight Committee shall be an advisory committee to the
President and Board of Trustees and is hereby authorized as follows:
   A.   To receive and to then refer complaints from citizens in accordance
with the procedures to be promulgated pursuant to section 2-30-3 of this
article, and thereafter to monitor and evaluate the processing of all citizen
complaints in regard to police misconduct, including, but not limited to,
allegations of discriminatory conduct and/or treatment and the use of excessive
force.
   B.   To monitor and evaluate Village efforts in the Police Department in
regard to racial and cultural diversity in such areas as training, recruitment,
promotions and interpersonal relations.
   C.   To meet with and provide written reports to the Village Board or such
standing or ad hoc committee of the Village Board as the Village Board may
designate, on a semiannual basis, concerning the Committee's activities and any
information and analysis of such information which the Committee may have
compiled as a result of its activities during the preceding six (6) months. In
addition to the required semiannual meetings and reports, the Committee may
report to the Village Board on special items of concern within its purview at
any time or with any degree of frequency which the Committee deems appropriate
or necessary. (Ord. 16-073, 6-6-2016)
2-30-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF OPERATING PROCEDURES:
Within forty five (45) days of the enactment of this article, the Village
Manager shall submit to the President and Board of Trustees, for their
concurrence by resolution, as submitted or as the Village Board may amend, a
set of operating procedures to be followed by the Village and Police Department
staffs and the members of the Citizens Police Oversight Committee in regard to
the intake, referral and processing of citizen and Department member
complaints, and the reporting of information from the Police Department to the
Citizens Police Oversight Committee and, then, from the Citizens Police
Oversight Committee to the Village Board in such a manner and to such a degree
as to enable the President and Board of Trustees to have a complete, accurate
and current picture of Department member internal relations, Department/
community relations and the functioning of the Department complaint processing
system on a semiannual basis.
The operating procedures shall include, but shall not be limited to, procedures
which provide for: a) a variety of citizen access points to the Village
complaint filing process, b) a sufficient breadth and frequency of Police
Department information reporting to the Committee to ensure thorough and
comprehensive reporting by the Committee to the Village Board on at least a
semiannual basis, c) a regularized departmental complaint investigation process
which establishes time frames within which specified procedures must be
accomplished, thereby assuring timely responses to complaints, d) a mechanism
for initiating an outside complaint investigation process under extraordinary
circumstances, e) a process for the Committee's receipt and review of any
citizen's expressed dissatisfaction with the Police Department's processing of
the citizen's complaint and for the referral of the citizen's expressed
dissatisfaction to the Village Board, along with the recommendation of the
Committee based upon its review of same, f) clear standards requiring the
safeguarding of the anonymity of police officers and complainants under certain
circumstances, and the full disclosure of the identities of police officers and
complainants under other circumstances, and g) a system capable of maintaining
anonymity while alerting the Committee to multiple complaints against
individual officers. (Ord. 16-073, 6-6-2016)
2-30-4: DUTY TO ABIDE BY THIS ARTICLE AND OPERATING PROCEDURES:
Members of the Citizens Police Oversight Committee shall abide by the terms and
provisions of this article and the operating procedures established hereunder.
In particular, the members of the Committee are bound to protect the
confidentiality of Village and Police Department records and the anonymity of
the members of the Police Department, complainants and witnesses in strict
conformity with this article and the operating procedures established
hereunder. (Ord. 16-073, 6-6-2016)
2-30-5: FAILURE TO ABIDE BY THIS ARTICLE AND/OR OPERATING PROCEDURES; REMOVAL:
The failure to abide by the provisions of this article and/or the operating
procedures established hereunder shall subject members of the Citizens Police
Oversight Committee to removal from the Committee for cause upon the filing of
written charges and after an opportunity to be heard in their own defense
before a public meeting of the President and Board of Trustees. A majority vote
of the President and Board of Trustees shall be required to remove any such
member from office. (Ord. 16-073, 6-6-2016)
ARTICLE 31
HOUSING PROGRAMS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-31-1: Creation; Terms
2-31-2: Duties
2-31-1: CREATION; TERMS:
There is hereby established a Housing Programs Advisory Committee to consist of
a Chairperson and six (6) members, all citizens who work, own a business or
live in Oak Park, to be appointed by the Village President, with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees. Terms on the Housing Programs Advisory
Committee shall be three (3) years for the Chairperson and all other members of
the Committee, except that the initial term of three (3) members of the
Committee shall be for one year, and the initial term of two (2) other members
shall be for two (2) years. (Ord. 2003-0-45, 10-20-03)
2-31-2: DUTIES:
The Committee shall advise the President and Board of Trustees on programs and
methods to accomplish the following goals within the Village: a) enhance the
quality of residential properties; b) attract an economically and racially
diverse population; c) develop and maintain affordable housing options; and d)
increase the value of residential properties.
To accomplish these goals, the Committee and Village staff shall work together
to target housing needs within the Village, evaluate present programs in
addressing these needs and propose the creation of new programs and the
enhancement of existing programs to meet these needs. The Committee shall also
evaluate loan packages prepared by staff as a part of any established Village
housing rehabilitation loan program and shall advise the President and Board of
Trustees with regard to same. The Village Planning and Zoning staff shall keep
the Committee informed on planning and zoning issues which may impact upon the
housing goals set forth hereinabove and the Committee shall advise the
President and Board of Trustees with regard to same. (Ord. 1991-0-49, 8-19-91;
amd. Ord. 1997-0-32, 8-4-97)
ARTICLE 32
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD
SECTION:
2-32-1: Creation And Mission Of The Foreign Fire Insurance Board
2-32-2: Election Of Officers
2-32-3: Treasurer; Fund Established; Expenditures
2-32-4: Board Meetings; Chairperson And Secretary; Rules And Procedures
2-32-5: Annual Audit Of Fund
2-32-1: CREATION AND MISSION OF THE FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD:
There is hereby established a board known as the Foreign Fire Insurance Board
("board"). This board shall be comprised of officers elected as set forth
below, and shall exercise only the powers as designated herein consistent with
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-10-1 et seq., of the Illinois Municipal
Code. It shall be the mission of the board to receive and account for revenue
from the tax on fire insurance policies sold by foreign (out of State)
insurance companies for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department
as set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-10-1 and 5/11-10-2. (Ord.
17-261, 9-18-2017)
2-32-2: ELECTION OF OFFICERS:
   A.   The board shall consist of seven (7) Trustees, which shall include the
Fire Chief, who shall hold office by virtue of rank, and six (6) members, who
shall be members of the Fire Department and shall be elected at large by the
members of the department. If there is an insufficient number of candidates to
fill all these positions, the number of board members may be reduced, but not
to fewer than three (3) Trustees.
   B.   For purposes of this article, member of the Fire Department shall mean
any non-probationary full-time sworn firefighter or officer of the Fire
Department, including the Fire Chief and all promoted positions.
   C.   The election of the Trustees and officers of the board shall be held in
accordance with the rules and regulations established by the board as required
by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-10-2.
   D.   The members of the board shall annually elect officers. These officers
shall be a Chairperson, a Treasurer and a Secretary. (Ord. 17-261, 9-18-2017)
2-32-3: TREASURER; FUND ESTABLISHED; EXPENDITURES:
   A.   The Treasurer shall give bond to the Village in a sufficient amount as
determined by the Village President; and the Village President shall approve
such bond, conditioned upon the faithful performance by the Treasurer of the
Treasurer's duties under this article and under the rules and regulations
promulgated in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-10-2.
   B.   The Treasurer shall establish a fund in which shall be deposited sums
received from the Village Treasurer pursuant to the annual appropriation of the
Village Board to the department's Foreign Fire Insurance Board. The fund shall
be maintained in a manner consistent with procedures established by the Village
for its other funds.
   C.   All expenditures from the fund must be approved by the Foreign Fire
Insurance Board. The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall develop and maintain a
list of those items that the board feels are appropriate expenditures under
this article. Expenditures shall be made by warrant, processed and issued in
the manner established by the Village for the general expenditure of monies.
Expenditures shall be subject to all Village ordinances, rules and policies
governing the expenditure of Village funds.
   D.   Expenditures from the fund may be made only for the maintenance, use
and benefit of the Village's Fire Department. The Village Manager shall review
all expenditures approved by the board for the sole purpose of determining that
such expenditures and approvals thereof are consistent with the requirements of
this article. (Ord. 17-261, 9-18-2017)
2-32-4: BOARD MEETINGS; CHAIRPERSON AND SECRETARY; RULES AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   The board shall establish a regular time and place for its meetings and
publish notice of same. The board Chairperson may call special meetings at any
time subject to the requirements of the Open Meetings Act.
   B.   The board Chairperson shall preside at board meetings. The Secretary
shall keep records of the proceedings and actions of the board, and may certify
same. The board may establish rules of procedure not inconsistent with this
article which include provisions governing conduct of meetings, the duties of
the board and other matters necessary to administer the fund. (Ord. 17-261, 9-
18-2017)
2-32-5: ANNUAL AUDIT OF FUND:
The Foreign Fire Insurance Fund shall be audited as a part of the annual
Village audit to verify that expenditures from the fund are for the
maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department. (Ord. 17-261, 9-18-2017)
ARTICLE 33
DISABILITY ACCESS COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-33-1: Creation
2-33-2: Objectives
2-33-3: Duties
2-33-4: Powers
2-33-1: CREATION:
There is hereby created and established in and for the Village of Oak Park a
commission to be hereafter known as the Disability Access Commission, which
shall consist of the following members:
   A.   Chairperson;
   B.   Six (6) members;
   C.   The Chief Building Inspector/Access Advisor for the Village of Oak
Park, as an ex officio member.
The members and chairperson shall be appointed by the President with the
consent of the Village Board. Members shall serve without compensation and
shall initially be appointed as follows: a chairperson and two (2) members for
one year, two (2) members for two (2) years, and two (2) members for three (3)
years. Thereafter, the chairperson and all members shall be appointed for three
(3) year terms. (Ord. 2012-0-07, 2-6-2012)
2-33-2: OBJECTIVES:
The purpose of the Disability Access Commission is to advise the Village in its
efforts to facilitate full participation in community activities by its
disabled residents, to bring disabled persons into the mainstream of Oak Park
life by recognizing that disabled persons can lead proud and productive lives,
to promote universal access throughout the Village, and to heighten public
awareness. (Ord. 2012-0-07, 2-6-2012)
2-33-3: DUTIES:
   A.   Recommend to the Village Board the removal of barriers to the
participation of disabled in Village programs and activities.
   B.   Recommend to the Village Board the removal of physical barriers to
disabled access to Village owned property and buildings and provide advisory
assistance to the Department of Code Enforcement in the removal of such
barriers.
   C.   Cooperate with and provide support to other Village commissions,
committees, task forces, and departments in their efforts to facilitate and
promote universal access.
   D.   Provide advice to any entity within the Village which seeks assistance
from the Commission on how to better serve the needs of the disabled beyond
minimal requirements of the law.
   E.   Identify appropriate respite care agencies in Oak Park and, with prior
Village approval, make this information available to the public.
   F.   Develop and present to the Village a plan to increase awareness in both
the public and private sector, regarding the rights and abilities of disabled
persons.
   G.   Work with the Manager's office to establish seminars and workshops that
promote public awareness of accessibility issues.
   H.   Establish and carry out a program to recognize excellence in providing
access to disabled persons within the Village which will make the public aware
of businesses and institutions which are accessible.
   I.   Create a guidebook to accessible facilities, programs and activities in
Oak Park, which guidebook may be made available to the public with the approval
of the Village Board.
   J.   Work with Public Works Department to develop and maintain a safe route
map showing the location of all accessible public paths of travel in Oak Park,
which map may be made available to the public with the approval of the Village
Board.
   K.   Advise appropriate Village staff on accessibility requirements, as
requested.
   L.   Evaluate the accessibility of buildings and services within the Village
and encourage appropriate Village Code Department staff to initiate staff
communication with building owners and/or managers regarding the insufficiency
of accessibility in their buildings.
   M.   Promote additional participation on the Commission by disabled persons
and disability service providers in Oak Park. (Ord. 1999-0-2, 2-1-99)
2-33-4: POWERS:
   A.   The Commission shall serve as an advisory body to the Village Board of
Trustees on matters of accessibility for the disabled and shall hold such
public hearings on the issues of accessibility as the Board, from time to time,
shall assign to the Commission.
   B.   The Commission shall advise Village staff, as requested, on issues
involving the interpretation of the Federal, State and/or Municipal codes on
accessibility with respect to building accessibility issues.
   C.   The Commission shall assist Village staff, as requested, in mediation
of disputes originating from interpretation of this Code with respect to
building accessibility issues.
   D.   The Commission shall conduct, with Village approval, public awareness,
public education and public service programs with regard to accessibility for
the disabled. (Ord. 1999-0-2, 2-1-99)
ARTICLE 34
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-34-1: Creation
2-34-2: Objectives
2-34-3: Duties
2-34-4: Powers
2-34-1: CREATION:
There is hereby created and established in and for the Village of Oak Park a
committee to be hereafter known as the Community Development Citizens Advisory
Committee ("CDCAC"), which shall consist of the following members:
   A.   Chairperson;
   B.   Eight (8) members;
   C.   A liaison from the Village Board of Trustees, as an ex officio member;
   D.   A liaison from the Citizen Involvement Committee, as an ex officio
member.
The members and chairperson shall be appointed on a staggered basis by the
President with the consent of the Village Board. Members shall serve without
compensation and shall be appointed for three (3) year terms. (Ord. 1999-0-2,
2-1-99)
2-34-2: OBJECTIVES:
The purpose of the CDCAC is to make recommendations to the Village Board on the
use of community development funds and/or issues. (Ord. 1999-0-2, 2-1-99)
2-34-3: DUTIES:
   A.   Review applications for the Community Development Block Grant Program
and the Emergency Shelter Grants Program and advise the Village Board of their
recommendations.
   B.   Review the Consolidated Plan and its annual update, the Action Plan,
for submittal to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   C.   Cooperate with and provide support to other Village commissions,
committees, task forces and departments when community development issues
impact their responsibilities.
   D.   Work with the Community Services Department to inform the public of how
community development dollars are spent. (Ord. 1999-0-2, 2-1-99)
2-34-4: POWERS:
   A.   The Committee shall serve as an advisory body to the Village Board of
Trustees on matters pertaining to community development. This shall be
construed to mean matters including, but not limited to, economic development,
housing, public services and public improvements as defined under the Community
Development Block Grant Program and/or the Emergency Shelter Grants Program.
   B.   The Committee shall advise Village staff, as requested, on community
development issues.
   C.   The Committee shall meet as often as deemed necessary by the Committee
chair to review application proposals and advise the Village Board on the
Community Development Block Grant Program and/or Emergency Shelter Grants
Program. (Ord. 1999-0-2, 2-1-99)
ARTICLE 35
CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-35-1: Establishment; Duties; Staffing
2-35-2: Composition
2-35-1: ESTABLISHMENT; DUTIES; STAFFING:
   A.   There is hereby established in and for the Village of Oak Park a
Citizen Involvement Commission in order to foster citizen participation in the
various boards, commissions and committees of the Village, and also to
encourage volunteer participation in Village government and its activities. The
duties of the Commission shall include the following: to be responsible for the
recruitment of volunteers for the boards, commissions and committees of the
Village, including holding prospects' meetings for said boards, commissions and
committees in conjunction with the office of the Village Clerk; to act as
liaisons to and provide support for said various boards, commissions and
committees; and to provide education about and recognition for the activities
of the Citizen Involvement Commission and said various boards, commissions and
committees, including the sponsorship of the annual Volunteer Recognition
Reception.
   B.   The Citizen Involvement Commission shall work closely with the office
of the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall maintain all records and
documentation pertaining to volunteer participation in Village government and
its activities, including all records of the Citizen Involvement Commission,
and shall maintain all records of the Commission's business, including all
regular and special meetings. (Ord. 1999-0-8, 3-15-1999)
2-35-2: COMPOSITION:
The Citizen Involvement Commission shall consist of a chairperson and eight (8)
members, including a chairperson to be appointed by the Village President, by
and with the consent of the Village Board of Trustees. All terms shall be for a
three (3) year period on a staggered basis, with the chairperson and four (4)
members or five (5) members appointed each year. (Ord. 2011-0-8, 2-7-2011)
ARTICLE 36
AGING IN COMMUNITIES COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-36-1: Establishment; Composition; Definition
2-36-2: Duties
2-36-1: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION; DEFINITION:
   A.   Establishment: There is hereby established an Aging in Communities
Commission to consist of a Chairperson and six (6) members.
   B.   Composition: The members and Chairperson shall be appointed by the
President with the consent of the Village Board. Members shall initially be
appointed as follows: two (2) members for one year, two (2) members for two (2)
years, and a Chairperson and two (2) members for three (3) years. Thereafter,
the Chairperson and all members shall be appointed for three (3) year terms.
Commission members shall be residents of the Village, a majority of which shall
be fifty-five (55) years of age or older.
   C.   Definition: For purposes of this article, an "older person" shall be
defined as any person who is fifty-five (55) years of age or over. (Ord. 18-
346, 2-20-2018; amd. Ord. 23-81, 9-5-2023)
2-36-2: DUTIES:
   A.   The commission shall have the following duties:
      1.   Advise the Village Board in its efforts to foster a respectful,
supportive, and livable community for all Village residents.
      2.   Recommend to the Village Board policies, programs, and activities
that promote positive age beliefs and raise awareness of ageism.
      3.   Cooperate with and provide support to other Village commissions,
committees, task forces, and departments in their efforts to facilitate and
promote aging in communities.
      4.   Provide advice to any resident or entity within the Village which or
who seeks assistance from the commission on how to promote aging in
communities.
      5.   Work with the Village Manager or the Manager's designee to establish
seminars and workshops that promote public awareness of aging in communities,
raise awareness of ageism, and promote positive age beliefs.
      6.   Establish and carry out a program to recognize excellence in
promoting aging in communities and performing advocacy for older persons within
the Village.
   B.   The Village Manager or the Manager's designee shall provide for such
staff assistance as the commission may need to carry out its duties.
(Ord. 18-346, 2-20-2018; amd. Ord. 23-81, 9-5-2023)
CHAPTER 3
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
General Provisions   1
Liquor License Required   2
Restriction on Liquor Licenses   3
Term and Classification   4
Miscellaneous   5
Sales on Credit   6
Issuance and Renewal of Liquor Licenses; Enforcement   7
List of Licenses for Each License Class   8
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified
or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl
alcohol, but not including denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol
produced in accordance with acts of Congress and regulations promulgated
thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent
(0.5%), or less, of alcohol by volume.
APPLICANT: An individual, copartnership or corporation which seeks to be
licensed under the provisions of this chapter. In the case of a "club", defined
herein, applicant shall mean the officers, directors and person operating as
manager, and in the case of a corporation, it shall mean the officers,
directors, all persons owning directly or beneficially more than five percent
(5%) of the stock of such corporation and the person operating as manager of
the premises.
ARTISANAL DISTILLED ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any alcoholic liquor produced by craft or
artisanal distillers in small batches using traditional ingredients. The
maximum production for a craft or artisanal distiller shall not exceed fifty
thousand (50,000) proof gallons per year. Distillers who start with grain
neutral spirits and through redistillation, substantially alter the original
character of the original spirit, shall be considered craft or artisanal
distillers for purposes of this definition.
ARTS AND CRAFTS ESTABLISHMENT: A licensed business kept, used, maintained,
advertised or held out to the public as a place in which the public may
participate in activities, including painting, pottery, ceramics, candle
making, jewelry making, woodworking and craft design/construction projects
utilizing fibers, metals, wood and/or glass.
BAKESHOP: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where cakes, cookies, pies, tarts, brownies, pastries,
breads and other baked goods are produced on-site and sold for both on-site and
off-site consumption, where the service of beer or wine is complementary and
subsidiary to the sale and service of baked goods. Establishments that do not
produce on-site all of the baked-goods which are sold on-site shall not qualify
as a bakeshop.
BAR: A counter upon or over which alcoholic liquor is the principal commodity
served for consumption by persons at such a counter.
BAR BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: A business establishment which has as its primary
business, the sale of alcoholic beverages by the poured drink. Such a business
within the Village would be limited to the hotel A-1 liquor license
classification and its requirements as set forth in subsection 3-4-2A of this
chapter.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager, porter and the like.
BREWPUB: A restaurant based establishment where beer is manufactured and stored
on the licensed premises and sold at retail from storage tanks to nonlicensees,
and sold in packages to importing distributors, distributors and nonlicensees
in accordance with the brewpub license requirements contained in subsection 3-
4-2D14 of this chapter and other alcoholic liquors which are sold at retail.
BUSINESS AREAS: The following geographic areas within Oak Park: Central
Business Area (between Forest and Harlem Avenues, from North Boulevard to
Ontario Street; on Oak Park Avenue from Ontario Street to Pleasant Street; on
Lake Street from Euclid Avenue to Forest Avenue; between Home and Harlem
Avenues, from Pleasant Street to South Boulevard); Chicago Avenue (Chicago
Avenue from Austin Boulevard to Harlem Avenue); Harrison Street (Harrison
Street from Austin Boulevard to Elmwood Avenue); Lake Street (Lake Street from
Austin Boulevard to East Avenue; on Austin, south to South Boulevard; and on
South Boulevard from Austin Boulevard to S. Scoville Avenue); Madison Street
(from Austin Boulevard to Harlem Avenue, including Washington Boulevard to
Adams Street on Oak Park Avenue); North Avenue (North Avenue from Austin
Boulevard to Harlem Avenue); Roosevelt Road (Roosevelt Road from Austin
Boulevard to Harlem Avenue); South Town Oak Park (Oak Park Avenue from Van
Buren Street to Lexington Street; Garfield Street from Euclid Avenue to Harlem
Avenue; and Harrison Street from East Avenue to Grove Avenue).
CATER: To provide a supply of prepared food and service through prearrangement
for group meetings, entertainment or special events, either on or off the
business premises.
CATERING HALL: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public as a place where by prearrangement, events which involve the
service of food may be catered.
CLUB: A not for profit corporation organized under the laws of this state,
which shall have been in operation as a club for the three (3) years prior to
applying for a liquor license and which shall have been organized solely for
the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of
alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment
of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space in a
building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the
reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their
guests.
COFFEE HOUSE AND TEASHOP: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised
or held out to the public as a place where one of the primary business is the
service of coffees, teas, and a limited selection of food items incidental
thereto.
CRAFT BEER: Beer from a craft brewery that: a) produces less than fifteen
thousand (15,000) barrels of beer annually (or 465,000 gallons); and b)
produces a significant volume of either malt beers or beers that use adjuncts
to enhance, rather than to lighten, flavor.
CRAFT BREWERY: An establishment that produces and serves craft beer where beer
is manufactured on-site and stored on the licensed premises and sold at retail
for both on-premises and off-premises consumption and other alcoholic liquors
sold for on-premises consumption in accordance with the requirements set forth
in subsection
3-4-2 D.15. of this chapter. Beer manufactured on-site may also be sold at
wholesale to licensed entities as authorized by the Illinois liquor control
act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., as amended.
ENTERTAINMENT: The playing of live music by a person or persons using string,
brass, reed, woodwind, percussion, electronic and digital instruments at a
volume which does not create a public nuisance and/or performances by
individuals and/or groups which may involve acting, singing, dancing, comedy
and the reading and/or recital of poetry.
ENTERTAINMENT CLUB: A facility in which "entertainment", as defined herein, is
provided to patrons of the establishment at all times when liquor is served,
except during brief intermissions.
GOURMET FOOD: Food products which appeal primarily to connoisseurs of the
delicacies of the table, i.e., fancy and party type food and drink.
HARD LIQUOR: Alcoholic liquor of thirty (30) proof or more and containing
fifteen percent (15%) or more of alcohol by weight.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public to be a place where a restaurant is located and sleeping
accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether
transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty five (25) or more rooms
are used for the sleeping accommodations for transients.
LIQUEURS: A usually sweetened spirituous liquor (as brandy) flavored with
fruit, spices, nuts, herbs or seeds.
LIVE PERFORMANCE VENUE: A facility for the presentation of live performances,
including musical acts, theatrical plays or acts, stand-up comedy, magic, dance
clubs, and disc jockey performances using vinyl records, compact discs,
computers, digital music players or similar media. A live performance venue
does not include an adult entertainment venue or adult use as defined in the
Village's Zoning Ordinance.
LOUNGE AREA: That portion of a restaurant possessing a Class B-4 liquor license
which contains a bar, tables and chairs and is set aside primarily for the
service of alcoholic beverages by the poured drink without food, and which is
operated in compliance with the B-4 liquor license requirements for such an
area as set forth in subsection
3-4-2B4 of this chapter.
MOVIE THEATRE: A facility kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the
public as a place within the Central Business Area as a place for the
presentation of regularly scheduled motion pictures and films.
PACKAGE LIQUOR SALES: The sale or offering for sale at retail of alcoholic
liquor, in the original package, and not to be consumed in whole or in part on
the premises where sold.
PREMISES: Premises licensed under this chapter shall refer to that area for
which a license has been issued to sell alcoholic beverages. Where more than
one area for the sale of alcoholic beverages is under the same roof or at one
street address, each area shall be considered to be a separate premises for
licensing purposes.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: A group care facility licensed by the state for
twenty-four (24)-hour medical or non-medical care of persons in need of
personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the
activities of daily living, or for the protection of an individual. For
purposes of this chapter, a residential care facility includes an independent
living facility, assisted living facility and nursing home.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where meals are served, which offers patrons complete
meals, including dinner and/or luncheon menu at which the service of alcoholic
beverages is incidental, complementary and subsidiary to the service of such
meals. Limited food service, such as provided by lounges, luncheonettes,
diners, coffee shops, drive-ins, pizza parlors and similar uses, does not
satisfy the requirements of this definition.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of "alcohol", as defined herein.
WORK LOUNGE: A shared office establishment that includes a first floor use for
the presentation of non-amplified music, theatrical plays, stand-up comedy,
magic shows, and spoken word poetry performances, as well as events and group
activities, such as salon-style discussions with authors, scholars and
community members, trivia nights, murder-mystery events, birthday parties,
holiday parties, anniversary parties, corporate off-site meetings and book club
meetings and shall also include the sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption
on the premises.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 1981-0-68, 10-5-1981; Ord. 1986-0-44, 5-5-1986; Ord.
1994-0-43, 8-1-1994; Ord. 1994-0-55, 9-19-1994; Ord. 1996-0-63, 9-16-1996; Ord.
2011-0-43, 7-18-2011; Ord. 2011-0-66, 11-7-2011; Ord. 2013-0-64, 11-4-2013;
Ord. 2014-0-04, 2-3-2014; Ord. 18-459, 12-10-2018; Ord. 22-44, 5-2-2022; Ord.
2022-61, 9-6-2022; Ord. 2022-62, 9-6-2022; Ord. 2022-82, 11-7-2022; Ord. 24-
120, 4-30-2024; Ord. 24-140, 7-9-2024; Ord. 24-152, 9-16-2024)
ARTICLE 2
LIQUOR LICENSE REQUIRED
SECTION:
3-2-1: Liquor Dealer's License Required
3-2-2: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
3-2-3: Applications
3-2-4: Mandatory Alcohol Awareness Training
3-2-1: LIQUOR DEALER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale in the Village any alcoholic
liquor without having a liquor dealer's license, or in violation of the terms
of such liquor license. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-2-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The President of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Oak Park, or a
designee appointed in accordance with this section, shall be the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner and shall be charged with the administration within the
Village of the appropriate provisions of this chapter; and whenever the term
"Commissioner" is used herein, such term shall refer to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner.
If the President has an interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of
alcoholic liquor, the President must direct the Village Board to appoint, by
majority vote, a person other than him or her to serve as the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner. The appointment must be made within thirty (30) days from
the day on which the President takes office and the President cannot make
nominations or serve any other role in the appointment. To prevent any conflict
of interest, the President with the interest in the manufacture, sale or
distribution of alcoholic liquor shall not participate in any meetings,
hearings, or decisions on matters impacting the manufacture, sale, or
distribution of alcoholic liquor. Further, the appointee: a) shall be an
attorney with an active license to practice law in the State of Illinois; b)
shall not legally represent liquor license applicants or holders before the
Village Board or before the Liquor Control Review Board, or before an adjacent
jurisdiction; c) shall not have an interest in the manufacture, sale, or
distribution of alcoholic liquor; and d) shall not be appointed to a term to
exceed the term of the Village President, or members of the Village Board.
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner, with the consent of the Village Board of
Trustees, shall appoint a Liquor Control Review Board of five (5) Oak Park
residents to investigate and review all applications, renewals and complaints;
to investigate the operation of all licensed establishments, conduct hearings,
receive evidence and sworn testimony and make recommendations to the
Commissioner. Members of the Liquor Control Review Board shall serve, without
compensation, for a term of three (3) years. The Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall appoint a chairperson, with the consent of the Board of
Trustees, from among the members of the Liquor Control Review Board to serve as
chairperson for a term of one year. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall
also serve as a nonvoting ex officio member of the Liquor Control Review Board.
The Commissioner shall notify the Board of Trustees of the Commissioner's
activities and shall have the following powers, functions and duties with
respect to licenses:
   A.   To grant and, subject to article 7 of this chapter, to suspend for not
more than thirty (30) days, revoke for cause or to deny renewal of, all local
liquor licenses issued to persons for premises within the Commissioner's
jurisdiction;
   B.   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time
upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions
of this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by the Commissioner and
Liquor Control Review Board or by the State Liquor Commission have been or are
being violated, and at such time to examine said premises of said licensee in
connection therewith;
   C.   To receive complaints from any citizen within the Commissioner's
jurisdiction that any of the provisions of this chapter, or any rules or
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, have been or are being violated and to
act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided;
   D.   To receive local liquor license fees and pay the same forthwith to the
Village Collector;
   E.   In the event that an application is rejected by the Commissioner, the
Board of Trustees may overrule the Commissioner if a motion to do so is made
within forty five (45) days of the rejection. If the Commissioner is overruled
and the Board of Trustees, by ordinance, has created a liquor license of the
class applied for, the Commissioner shall issue such liquor license to the
applicant. (Ord. 2013-0-52, 7-22-2013)
3-2-3: APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Applications for a liquor license, other than a special event class E-
2 liquor license, shall be made to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner in
writing, signed by the applicant (if an individual, or if a club, association,
limited liability company, partnership or corporation, by a duly authorized
agent thereof, verified by oath or affidavit). The application shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable check or money order payable to the Village of
Oak Park in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to defray a
portion of the expense incurred by the Village in processing the application.
The application shall contain the following statements and information:
      1.   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a partnership, the same information from the persons
entitled to share in the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation or
limited liability company, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it
was organized, a summary of its activities during the past year, and the names
and addresses of the officers, directors, all persons owning directly or
beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation or
limited liability company, and the person operating as manager of the premises;
and in the case of a club or association, the date of its incorporation, the
objects for which it was organized, a summary of its activities during the past
year, the names and addresses of the officers, directors, and the person
operating as manager. A club or association applying for a liquor license or
renewal must file with the Commissioner at the time of its application two (2)
copies of a list of names and residences of its current members, and officers,
and similarly file within ten (10) days of the election of any additional
member, his or her name and address;
      2.   The citizenship of the applicant, the place of the applicant's
birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of the applicant's
naturalization;
      3.   The character of business of the applicant; and in case of a
corporation, limited liability company, club, association or partnership, the
objects for which it was formed;
      4.   The length of time said applicant has been in business of that
character, or in the case of a corporation, limited liability company, club,
association or partnership, the date when its charter was issued;
      5.   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made;
      6.   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such liquor license, including a description of
any present or proposed signs advertising alcoholic beverages and the general
location(s) for their placement;
      7.   A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or
other liquor license on premises other than described in the application, and
the disposition of such application;
      8.   A statement that applicant is not disqualified to receive a liquor
license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter, laws of
this state, or the ordinances of the Village, and a statement as to whether
applicant has ever been convicted of a felony;
      9.   Whether a previous liquor license by any state or subdivision
thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons
thereof;
      10.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of
the state of Illinois, or of the United States, including, but not limited to,
the Americans with disabilities act, or any ordinances of the Village in the
conduct of the applicant's place of business; and
      11.   A criminal background check shall be required of applicants,
including fingerprinting of the applicant pursuant to section 4-7 of the liquor
control act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-7, as amended. At the
discretion of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, background checks and
fingerprinting of the manager(s) of an applicant may also be required. At the
discretion of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, fingerprints of an
applicant for renewal of a license may also be required. Should the applicant
be a club, association, corporation, or a limited liability company, the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner may require the following individuals to be
fingerprinted: the officer(s), manager(s) or director(s) thereof, or any member
(s) or stockholder(s) owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of
the capital stock of said corporation or limited liability company. All such
fingerprinting and background checks shall be performed by the Village Police
Department. Fingerprints shall be processed by the Illinois state police in
conjunction with the federal bureau of investigation. The cost of
fingerprinting shall be paid by the applicant and any applicable background
check shall be without charge.
   B.   Applications for a special event class E-2 liquor license shall be made
to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner in writing, signed by the applicant at
least forty five (45) days prior to the special event for which such license is
sought. The application shall be accompanied by an application fee in the
amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) payable by a nonrefundable check or money
order to the Village of Oak Park to defray a portion of the expense incurred by
the Village in processing the application. The application shall contain the
following statements and information:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant, and whether the applicant is
an individual, association, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, club or exists by some other form of ownership;
      2.   The date(s) and name of the special event, and the hours of
operation of the event;
      3.   Unless the special event is sponsored or cosponsored by the Village,
a copy of the special event permit issued by the Village in accordance with
chapter 30 of this code for the event at which the license is requested;
      4.   A copy of the applicant's valid state of Illinois retail liquor
license;
      5.   The location and description of the premises where alcoholic liquor
will be sold under such liquor license, including the name of the property
owner on whose property the special event will take place, and a written
statement of consent from the property owner, or in the case the property is
owned by the Village, a copy of the Village issued special event permit;
      6.   The names, phone numbers and addresses of those persons who are
responsible for liquor sales on behalf of the applicant at the special event,
which persons shall remain on the special event's premises for the duration of
the special event;
      7.   A statement that the applicant is not disqualified from receiving a
liquor license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter, laws
of this state, or the ordinances of the Village, and a statement as to whether
the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony; and
      8.   Proof of the insurance coverage required by section 3-4-6 of this
chapter including proof that the insurance covers the dates and location of the
proposed special event. (Ord. 2014-0-12, 3-17-2014)
3-2-4: MANDATORY ALCOHOL AWARENESS TRAINING:
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of each liquor licensee of any licensed
establishment within the Village which sells alcoholic liquors for consumption
on the authorized premises, to have present on the premises at all times when
alcoholic liquor may legally be sold, a manager or other employee in charge of
such establishment who shall have successfully completed a state certified
beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training (BASSET) program
approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. In addition to the penalties
otherwise provided in this chapter, any failure to comply with this section
shall be cause for suspension, revocation or denial of a liquor license.
   B.   The initial application and all subsequent renewal applications for all
classes of alcoholic liquor dealer's licenses, except classes C-1 through C-6,
D-5, E-1, and E-2, shall be accompanied by proof of completion of such state
certified beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training (BASSET)
program by all facility managers and any number of other current employees
necessary to comply with the provisions of subsection
3-2-4A of this section.
   C.   Effective December 1, 2013, all managers, supervisors, sellers and
servers of alcoholic liquor employed by any licensed establishment, except
establishments with a class C-1 through C-6, D-5, E-1 or E-2 license, shall
have successfully completed BASSET training by a state certified program
approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. From and after January 1,
2014, all managers, supervisors, sellers and servers shall maintain current
BASSET training certifications and all new employees shall have ninety (90)
days from the date of hire to become BASSET certified.
   D.   BASSET certifications shall only be valid for a three (3) year period
from the date of issuance. All BASSET certifications shall be renewed prior to
expiration. (Ord. 2013-0-24, 3-18-2013)
ARTICLE 3
RESTRICTION ON LIQUOR LICENSES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Restriction On Licenses
3-3-2: Applicant Convictions
3-3-1: RESTRICTION ON LICENSES:
No such liquor license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community;
   B.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State
law if the Local Liquor Control Commissioner determines after investigation,
that such person will not be impaired by the conviction in engaging in the
licensed practice after considering matters set forth in such person's
application;
   C.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of, or is keeping,
a house of ill fame;
   D.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to public decency and morality;
   E.   A person whose liquor license under this chapter has been revoked for
cause;
   F.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any liquor
license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such liquor license under a
first application;
   G.   A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license;
   H.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning directly or beneficially in the aggregate
more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, would not be
eligible to receive a liquor license hereunder for any reason;
   I.   A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois or unless it is a
foreign corporation which is qualified under the Business Corporation Act to
transact business in Illinois;
   J.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee;
   K.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who
shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for
any such violation;
   L.   A person who does not own the premises for which a liquor license is
sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
liquor license is issued;
   M.   Any elected public official, Oak Park Village employee, or member of
the Oak Park Liquor Control Review Board, and no such official shall be
interested in any way, either directly or indirectly in any business holding an
Oak Park liquor license. Indirect interests shall include, but not be limited
to, any business relationship or contractual relationship of any elected public
official, Oak Park Village employee or member of the Oak Park Liquor Control
Review Board ("LCRB") with any Oak Park liquor license holder or Oak Park
liquor license applicant or anyone who such elected public official, Oak Park
employee or LCRB member knew or reasonably should have known would be an
applicant for an Oak Park liquor license within one year of such business or
contractual relationship; except that, a liquor license may be granted to
either the Village President, or other member of the Village Board of Trustees,
or to any entity in which such President or member of the Board of Trustees has
an interest if: 1) the sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license is
incidental to the selling of food; 2) the issuance of the license is approved
by the state of Illinois Liquor Control Commission; 3) the issuance of the
license is in accordance with all applicable provisions of the Village Code and
state law; and 4) the official granted a license does not vote on alcoholic
liquor issues pending before the Village Board.
Notwithstanding any provision of this paragraph to the contrary, a member of
the Village Board of Trustees, other than the President may have a direct or
indirect interest in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor
as long as he or she is not a law enforcing public official or the Village
President.
To prevent any conflict of interest, any elected official with a direct or
indirect interest in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor
shall not participate in any meetings, hearings or decisions on matters
impacting the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
Furthermore, the Village President may have an interest in the manufacture,
sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor as long as the Village Board has made
a local liquor control commissioner appointment that complies with the
requirements of section 4-2 of the alcoholic liquor control act of 1934 and
section
3-2-2 of this chapter.
   N.   Any applicant who fails to obtain a State liquor license shall not be
able to operate in the Village of Oak Park;
   O.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee;
   P.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by
any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of section 28-1, or as prescribed by
section 28-3 of the "Criminal Code of 1961" approved July 28, 1961, as set
forth in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1 and 5/28-3, 1992, as heretofore
or hereafter amended, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the
aforesaid statutory provisions;
   Q.   A person to whom a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal wagering
stamp has been issued by the Federal Government for the current tax period;
   R.   A copartnership to which a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal Government for the current tax
period, or if any of the partners have been issued a Federal gaming device
stamp or Federal wagering stamp by the Federal Government for the current tax
period;
   S.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of
such corporation has been issued a Federal gaming stamp or a Federal wagering
stamp for the current tax period;
   T.   Any premises for which a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal Government for the current tax
period;
   U.   A club which in its membership policies and practices or in its
services to guests, discriminates on the basis of race, religion, national
origin, sex, creed, ancestry, sexual orientation, matriculation, familial
status or disability. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-1994; amd. Ord. 2008-0-046, 10-20-
2008; Ord. 2013-0-38, 5-6-2013; Ord. 21-86, 10-18-2021)
3-3-2: APPLICANT CONVICTIONS:
   A.   Applicants shall not be required to report the following information
and the following criminal history records shall not be considered in
connection with an application for a license under this chapter:
      1.   Juvenile adjudications of delinquent minors as defined in Section 5-
105 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, 705 Illinois Compiled Statutes 405/5-
105, subject to the restrictions set forth in Section 5-130 of the Juvenile
Court Act of 1987, 705 Illinois Compiled Statutes 405/5-130;
      2.   Law enforcement records, court records, and conviction records of an
individual who was seventeen (17) years old at the time of the offense and
before January 1, 2014, unless the nature of the offense required the
individual to be tried as an adult;
      3.   Records of arrest not followed by a conviction;
      4.   Convictions overturned by a higher court; and
      5.   Convictions or arrests that have been sealed or expunged.
   B.   The local liquor control commissioner, upon a finding that an applicant
for a license was convicted of a felony or a violation of any Federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, shall
consider as evidence of rehabilitation and mitigating factors contained in the
applicant's record, including any of the following factors and evidence, to
determine if the conviction will impair the ability of the applicant to engage
in the position for which a license is sought:
      1.   The lack of direct relation of the offense for which the applicant
was previously convicted to the duties, functions, and responsibilities of the
position for which a license is sought;
      2.   Whether five (5) years since a felony conviction or three (3) years
since release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is later, have
passed without a subsequent conviction;
      3.   If the applicant was previously licensed or employed in the State of
Illinois or other states or jurisdictions, then the lack of prior misconduct
arising from or related to the licensed position or position of employment;
      4.   The age of the person at the time of the criminal offense;
      5.   Successful completion of sentence and, for applicants serving a term
of parole or probation, a progress report provided by the applicant's probation
or parole officer that documents the applicant's compliance with conditions of
supervision;
      6.   Evidence of the applicant's present fitness and professional
character;
      7.   Evidence of rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort during or after
incarceration, or during or after a term of supervision, including, but not
limited to, a certificate of good conduct under Section 5-5.5-25 of the Unified
Code of Corrections, 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-5.5-25, or a
certificate of relief from disabilities under Section 5-5.5-10 of the Unified
Code of Corrections, 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes, 5/5-5.5-10; and
      8.   Any other mitigating factors that contribute to the person's
potential and current ability to perform the duties and responsibilities of the
position for which a license or employment is sought.
   C.   For purposes of this chapter, a criminal conviction of a corporation is
not grounds for the denial, suspension, or revocation of a license applied for
or held by the corporation if the criminal conviction was not the result of a
violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or
sale of alcoholic liquor, the offense that led to the conviction did not result
in any financial gain to the corporation and the corporation has terminated its
relationship with each director, officer, employee, or controlling shareholder
whose actions directly contributed to the conviction of the corporation. The
local liquor control commissioner shall determine if all provisions of this
subsection have been met before any action on the corporation's license is
initiated. (Ord. 21-86, 10-18-2021)
ARTICLE 4
TERM AND CLASSIFICATION
SECTION:
3-4-1: Term
3-4-2: Classification And Number Of Liquor Licenses And Fees
3-4-3: Disposition Of Fees
3-4-4: Number Of Liquor Licenses
3-4-5: Fees For Multiple Liquor Licenses
3-4-6: Insurance Requirements
3-4-1: TERM:
Each liquor license, other than a special event Class E-2 liquor license, shall
terminate one year from date of issuance. Special event Class E-2 liquor
licenses shall be for a fixed period of time as set forth in section
3-4-2 of this article. (Ord. 2013-0-24, 3-18-2013)
3-4-2: CLASSIFICATION AND NUMBER OF LIQUOR LICENSES AND FEES:
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may only issue liquor licenses in
accordance with the classifications set forth hereinbelow and only as
specifically authorized in article 8 of this chapter.
   A.   Hotel And Catering Liquor Licenses:
      1.   Hotel Class A-1 Liquor License: Hotel Class A-1 liquor licenses
shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises
only in hotels as follows:
         a.   A Class A-1 liquor license may be issued to any hotel in which
alcoholic liquor is sold to hotel guests or to customers of independent hotel
establishments.
         b.   Alcoholic liquor may be sold in restaurants:
            (1)   In hotels with less than fifty (50) rooms, but only at tables
and to those patrons who order a meal.
            (2)   In hotels with fifty (50) rooms or more, one bar may be
provided in conjunction with each full service restaurant in such hotels; in
either said bar or in said restaurant alcoholic liquor may be served without
food at any time subject to closing hour requirements as established in section
3-5-7 of this chapter.
         c.   Alcoholic liquor may be served to hotel guests in the guests'
hotel rooms.
         d.   Alcoholic liquor may be served in meeting rooms and reception
rooms, but only during scheduled meetings or receptions.
         e.   The annual fee for a Class A-1 liquor license shall be three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00).
      2.   Hotel Class A-2 Subsidiary Liquor License:
         a.   Hotel Class A-2 subsidiary liquor licenses shall be required for
any hotel lessee or contractor in a hotel with a Class A-1 liquor license who
provides alcoholic liquor service or for any separate bar business
establishment selling liquor within the hotel, other than a business operated
by the hotel itself, in every case as allowed for Class A-1 liquor license.
Each A-2 subsidiary liquor license shall be independent of the Class A-1 liquor
license for purposes of enforcement. No A-2 subsidiary liquor license shall be
issued unless a Class A-1 liquor license has been applied for and granted. If
the Class A-1 liquor license is canceled, no A-2 subsidiary liquor license
within that hotel shall be renewed.
         b.   The annual fee for an A-2 subsidiary liquor license shall be
twenty five dollars ($25.00).
      3.   Catering Class A-3 Liquor License: Catering Class A-3 liquor
licenses shall authorize the sale, in catering halls only, of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on the premises where sold. Alcoholic liquor may be sold in
catering halls holding Class A-3 liquor licenses only during prearranged events
which involve the service of food. The annual fee for such liquor license shall
be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00); provided, however, that if
the holder of a Class A-3 liquor license also holds a Class B-4 liquor license
for either: a) the same premises; or b) a premises located within fifty feet
(50') of the licensee's Class A-3 licensed premises and such B-4 licensed
premises serves as the food preparation location for all of the food served by
the licensee at the catered events at the Class A-3 licensed premises, then the
fee for the Class A-3 liquor license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      4.   Catering Class A-4 Liquor License: Catering Class A-4 liquor
licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor in conjunction with the
service of food by caterers for catered events conducted off the premises of
the licensee. The sale of alcoholic liquor shall be made in bulk to the person
holding the event. The liquor license does not permit the licensee to sell
alcoholic liquor by the drink to individuals attending the event. The annual
fee for such liquor license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) unless
fewer than thirty five (35) events are catered within the licensing year, in
which case the annual fee shall be six hundred dollars ($600.00). If the
licensee has a liquor license in another category, the Class A-4 liquor license
shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   B.   Restaurant Liquor Licenses:
      1.   Restaurant Class B-1 Liquor License: Restaurant Class B-1 liquor
licenses shall authorize the sale, in restaurants only, of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises where sold. No such liquor license shall be granted
to or retained by any establishment in which the facilities for food
preparation and service are not primarily those of a "restaurant", as defined
in section
3-1-1 of this chapter. Alcoholic liquor may be sold in restaurants holding
Class B-1 liquor licenses to patrons who order a complete meal. Service of
alcoholic liquor shall be provided at tables only. Service of alcoholic liquor
at bars is not permitted; however, alcoholic liquor may be served at "specialty
food bars" where:
         a.   The service of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the service of
specialty foods. Specialty foods shall include foods served in small portions
which would otherwise qualify as entrees or foods which could be served as
appetizers, but shall not include snack foods such as crackers, chips, nuts,
pretzels, vegetables, finger sandwiches, dips and spreads; and
         b.   Service of alcoholic liquor is not made directly from behind the
service counter but is made by waiters or waitresses in the same manner as
service is made to tables in the restaurant; and
         c.   Said "specialty food bar" is incidental to a complete restaurant
food service at tables in the restaurant;
         d.   There is no display of alcoholic liquor, in bottles or signage,
above, behind or on the food bar;
         e.   The annual fee for such liquor license for a restaurant with a
seating capacity of one hundred (100) or more persons shall be two thousand
five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). For a restaurant with a seating capacity of
between ninety nine (99) and fifty (50) persons, the annual fee for such
license shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). For a restaurant with a
seating capacity of less than fifty (50) persons, the annual fee for such
license shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
      2.   Restaurant Class B-2 Liquor License: The regulations governing
restaurant Class B-1 liquor licenses shall also apply to restaurant Class B-
2 liquor licenses, except that beer and/or wine only may be served. The annual
fee for such liquor license for a restaurant with a seating capacity of one
hundred (100) or more persons shall be one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00). For a restaurant with a seating capacity of between ninety nine
(99) and fifty (50) persons, the annual fee for such license shall be one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). For a restaurant with a seating capacity of less
than fifty (50) persons, the annual fee for such license shall be seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00).
      3.   Restaurant Class B-3 Liquor License: The regulations governing Class
B-2 liquor licenses shall also apply to restaurant Class B-3 liquor licenses,
except that in ethnic restaurants, one additional alcoholic liquor
traditionally associated with the food of that nationality may be served. The
annual fee for such liquor license for a restaurant with a seating capacity of
one hundred (100) or more persons shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
For a restaurant with a seating capacity of between ninety nine (99) and fifty
(50) persons, the annual fee for such license shall be one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00). For a restaurant with a seating capacity of less
than fifty (50) persons, the annual fee for such license shall be one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).
      4.   Restaurant Class B-4 Liquor License: Restaurant Class B-4 liquor
licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor in restaurants with a
seating capacity, including all lounge area seating, of not less than fifty
(50) persons for food service, pursuant to the terms of a Class B-1 liquor
license and in addition shall allow the sale of alcoholic liquor in a lounge to
patrons who do not order food, subject to the following:
         a.   That the lounge area shall be placed in such a manner as to be
consistent with the subsidiary role of the lounge as an adjunct to the primary
restaurant business.
         b.   That alcoholic liquor sales in the lounge and at restaurant
tables be restricted to those hours when food service is available in the
restaurant, provided that after the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. during
the week and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on Fridays and Saturdays, the service of
food from a late night menu shall be considered adequate food service. A "late
night" menu shall be defined as foods served in small portions which would
otherwise qualify as entrees, or foods which could be served as salads or
appetizers, but shall not include prepackaged snack foods such as crackers,
chips, nuts, or pretzels.
         c.   That the floor area of the lounge may constitute no more than
thirty percent (30%) of the floor space of the public dining area, except that
the floor area of any physically separate pool playing area adjacent to and
only accessible through the lounge area shall not be included as lounge area
floor space in calculating the ratio of floor space in the lounge to floor
space in the public dining area.
         d.   The sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises
where sold shall be subsidiary and incidental to the sale and service of food.
            (1)   The test to determine whether the sale of alcoholic liquor is
subsidiary and incidental to the restaurant main business of the sale and
service of food shall be a comparison of the gross revenue derived by the
licensee from the sale of alcoholic liquor to the gross revenue obtained by the
licensee from the sale and service of both alcoholic liquor and food for the
annual period during which the liquor license is in effect.
            (2)   For purposes of this chapter, "gross revenue" is defined to
mean the total amount of cash or other consideration (including all taxes
collected by the seller) received by the licensee as the result of the transfer
of food and/or alcoholic liquor, to another.
            (3)   It shall be a condition for the renewal of a Class B-4 liquor
license that, for the prior license period during which the applicant for
license renewal was a licensee in such class, the licensee's gross revenue from
the sale of alcoholic liquor authorized by the licensee's liquor license did
not exceed forty percent (40%) of the licensee's gross revenue from the sale
and service of all food and alcoholic liquor in the ordinary course of business
by the licensee on the licensed premises.
            (4)   If the Commissioner determines that the licensee is not
attempting in good faith to comply with the provisions of the licensee's liquor
license concerning the sale of alcoholic liquor as a subsidiary and incidental
part of the licensee's business, and with the limitations imposed upon the
gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic liquor as provided herein, the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner shall reject the renewal of the liquor license as
provided in section
3-7-5 of this chapter.
            (5)   The licensee shall maintain adequate books and records in
accordance with generally accepted accounting standards, which shall clearly
indicate gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic liquor separately from gross
revenue for the sale of food.
            (6)   The licensee shall make such books and records available for
inspection by the Commissioner, or the Commissioner's designee. Such inspection
may be conducted during normal business hours on the licensed premises, or at
such other location in the Village as directed by the Commissioner. The
Commissioner shall determine, as a result of such inspection, whether, in the
Commissioner's opinion, the books and records maintained by the licensee meet
the requirements of this chapter, and whether there is cause for the
Commissioner to conduct additional proceedings as provided in section
3-7-5 of this chapter.
         e.   The lounge area may include an area designated for the playing of
pool, with the following limitations:
            (1)   The holder of the Class B-4 liquor license shall also possess
a current license for the operation of a pool and/or billiard hall.
            (2)   The pool playing area shall be adjacent to and shall only be
accessible through the lounge area.
            (3)   The pool playing area shall be physically separated from the
lounge and dining areas by a solid floor to ceiling wall containing a doorway
for passage between the lounge and pool playing area.
            (4)   The pool playing area shall only be accessible to persons
twenty one (21) years of age or older or persons accompanied by a parent or
guardian twenty one (21) years of age or older.
            (5)   Food service shall be available in the pool playing area.
            (6)   The number of pool tables shall be limited to one table per
ten (10) seats available in the main dining area and in no case shall the total
number of pool tables exceed ten (10) tables.
            (7)   One table per pool table, with a minimum of two (2) seats per
table shall be available in the pool playing area for the service of food.
            (8)   The hours of operation for the pool playing area shall be no
greater than the hours established for the operation of the restaurant which
owns and operates the pool playing area.
         f.   The annual fee for such liquor license for a restaurant with a
seating capacity of one hundred (100) or more persons shall be three thousand
dollars ($3,000.00). For a restaurant with a seating capacity of between ninety
nine (99) and fifty (50) persons, the annual fee for such license shall be two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
      5.   Restaurant With Retail Alcoholic Liquor Sales Class B-5 Liquor
License: A restaurant with retail alcoholic liquor sales Class B-5 liquor
license shall be subject to the regulations and conditions governing Class B-
4 liquor licenses above. The following additional regulations and conditions
shall also apply:
         a.   The retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption off the
premises in the original package shall be permitted except in the area of
premises where food is sold for immediate consumption.
         b.   The tasting of alcoholic liquors or food shall be permitted if
the tasting or sampling is part of a promotion or sales device and no charge of
any kind is made for such sampling or tasting.
         c.   The retail sales area shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
total square footage of the premises.
         d.   Authorized hours of business shall be as set forth in section
3-5-7 of this chapter for Class B-4 liquor licenses.
         e.   All staff who participates in the retail sales of alcoholic
liquors must be BASSET trained and certified.
         f.   The annual fee for such liquor license is five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).
      6.   Restaurant Class B-6 Liquor License: A bring-your-own ("BYO")
restaurant Class B-6 liquor license authorizes a licensee to allow customers to
carry their own beer and wine into the BYO establishment as defined in
subsection
3-4-2B6a of this section for consumption within that establishment, subject to
the conditions set forth in subsection
3-4-2B6b of this section.
         a.   BYO Establishments; Conditions: BYO establishments are authorized
to allow BYO beer and wine and consumption of BYO beer and wine within the
licensed premises provided that the establishment does not otherwise hold
another Class B restaurant license. A restaurant that holds another Class B
restaurant license is not eligible for a Class B-6 license, and no
establishment that sells alcoholic liquor may provide BYO services.
         b.   BYO Establishment Requirements:
            (1)   BYO is limited to beer and wine only.
            (2)   No BYO establishment may sell alcoholic liquors to any
customer at any time.
            (3)   A BYO establishment must secure, maintain and provide
evidence to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner that it has required
insurance coverage set forth in section
3-4-6 of this article.
            (4)   A BYO establishment shall be responsible for ensuring that no
persons under twenty one (21) years of age are in possession of BYO beer and
wine or consume BYO beer and wine at any time.
            (5)   BYO beer and wine may be consumed only between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., and only when food
is available for purchase.
            (6)   A BYO establishment may impose any fee or charge on its
customers related to the consumption of BYO beer or wine within the
establishment, including without limitation any corkage fee or fee for
supplies, disposal, storage or other services.
            (7)   A BYO establishment may provide corkscrews, bottle openers,
glassware, ice, disposal services and similar items to customers.
            (8)   No employee of a BYO establishment shall serve, pour or
otherwise handle a customer's BYO beer and wine.
            (9)   A BYO establishment shall be responsible for ensuring that no
customer is intoxicated. The establishment shall refuse BYO consumption for any
intoxicated customers.
            (10)   No BYO establishment may permit any customer to enter or
leave the establishment with any open beer or wine container except for an
unsealed and partially consumed bottle of wine that is sealed pursuant to the
requirements of section
3-5-10 .
            (11)   Unless otherwise provided for by law, BYO establishments are
subject to all State of Illinois and Village requirements, regulations, and
penalties as any other Class B licensee.
            (12)   Any employee of a BYO establishment that serves customers
shall complete the BASSET education and training requirement set forth in
section
3-2-4  of this chapter.
            (13)   A BYO establishment must have a BASSET certified manager or
employee twenty one (21) years of age or older at the licensed premises at all
times while BYO consumption is permitted.
            (14)   The annual fee for a restaurant Class B-6 license with a
seating capacity of one hundred (100) or more persons shall be four-hundred
fifty dollars ($450.00). For a restaurant with a seating capacity of between
ninety-nine (99) and fifty (50) persons, the annual fee shall be three-hundred
thirty dollars ($350.00). For a restaurant with a seating capacity of below
forty-nine (49) persons, the annual fee shall be two-hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
      7.   Residential Care Facility. A residential care facility with a retail
alcoholic liquor sales B-7 liquor license shall be subject to the following
requirements:
         a.   Alcoholic liquor beverages shall be sold and made available only
to a facility's residents or their guests and only for consumption on the
licensed premises at tables in dining areas or at a bar in a dining area where
food is available and served;
         b.   The availability of alcoholic liquor beverages shall be
subsidiary and incidental to the provision and service of food;
         c.   A licensee shall comply with Section 3-2-3 (Mandatory Alcohol
Awareness Training) of this chapter regarding the required BASSET training of
all managers, supervisors, sellers and servers of alcoholic liquors;
         d.   No exterior signage advertising by brand a specific alcoholic
liquor, beer or wine is permitted;
         e.   The annual fee for such a liquor license shall be shown as
follows:
         (1)   Not-for-profit establishment, beer and wine only - five hundred
dollars ($500.00);
         (2)   Not-for-profit establishment, all alcoholic liquors - seven
hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00);
         (3)   For-profit establishment, beer and wine only;
            (A)   Facility of less than fifty (50) beds - seven hundred and
fifty dollars ($750.00);
            (B)   Facility of between fifty-one (51) and ninety (99) beds - one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
            (C)   Facility of between one hundred (100) and one hundred and
ninety-nine (199) beds - one thousand and five hundred dollars ($1,500.00); and
            (D)   Facility over two hundred (200) beds - two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
         (4)   For-profit establishment, all alcoholic liquors;
            (A)   Facility of less than fifty (50) beds - one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00);
            (B)   Facility of between fifty-one (51) and ninety-nine (99) beds
- two thousand dollars ($2,000.00);
            (C)   Facility of between one hundred (100) and one hundred ninety-
nine (199) beds - two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00); and
            (D)   Facility over two hundred (200) beds - three thousand dollars
($3,000.00).
   C.   Package Liquor Licenses:
      1.   Package Liquor Class C Licenses: A package liquor Class C license
authorizes the sale of alcoholic liquor, beer and wine, in the original package
not for consumption on the premises where sold, as hereinafter provided. All
package liquor Class C licenses are subject to the following restrictions:
         a.   Class C liquor licenses are permitted only in a district zoned
for business or commercial uses.
         b.   The sale of packaged liquor is permitted only from seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., Monday through Sunday.
         c.   No alcoholic liquor may be sold in containers of less than
twenty-four (24) ounces. Class C licensees who are permitted to sell wine are
authorized to sell demi or half-bottles of wine no smaller than twelve (12)
ounces in size.
         d.   No exterior signage advertising by brand a specific alcoholic
liquor, beer or wine, is permitted.
         e.   Window signage must conform to the regulations contained in
chapter 7, article 7 of this Code.
         f.   Any delivery of package liquor must be made by agents or
employees of the licensee who shall confirm that the recipients are over twenty
one (21) years of age prior to delivering any package liquor to the recipient
and shall require signature of the recipient to confirm the same.
         g.   Prior to issuing or renewing a package liquor Class C license,
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall cause an inspection of the premises
proposed to be licensed to determine if such premises conform to all provisions
of the law, including regulations adopted in accordance with this chapter.
         h.   The Commissioner may inspect licensed premises at any reasonable
hour to determine if such premises and the licensee conform to all provisions
of the law, including regulations adopted in accordance with this chapter.
         i.   Failure of the premises, or the licensee, to conform to all
provisions of law and the regulations of the Commissioner shall be cause for
the Commissioner either to refuse to renew the liquor license on its
expiration, or to proceed in accordance with section
3-7-5 of this chapter.
      2.   Package Liquor Class C-1 License: A package liquor Class C-1 license
authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the original package not for
consumption on the premises where sold and authorizes the tasting or sampling
of alcoholic liquors on the premises if the tasting or sampling is part of a
promotion or a sales device for the sale of alcoholic liquors and no charge of
any kind is made for such tasting or sampling.
In addition to the restrictions contained in subsection
3-4-2C1 of this section, Class C-1 liquor licenses are subject to the
following:
         a.   Class C-1 liquor licenses shall only be issued to a premises
located in a retail store building containing five thousand (5,000) or more
square feet of retail space.
         b.   The package liquor business must be subject to an adequate
control system. An "adequate control system", for purposes of this section
shall be a means of controlling access to and the security of the package
liquor business and may include one or more of the following (without
limitation):
            (1)   Enclosing the package liquor business on at least two (2)
sides, so as to physically separate it from other types of businesses on the
premises;
            (2)   Inventory controls specific to the package liquor business;
and/or
            (3)   Other effective control methods proposed by the licensee as
may be specifically approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and/or
the Liquor Control Review Board; such as inventory location in constant
employee view, inventory under constant surveillance and/or subject to separate
register and checkout.
It shall be a condition of renewal of a Class C-1 liquor license that an
adequate control system remains in place.
         c.   The sale of alcoholic liquor in the original package and not for
consumption on the premises where sold, as authorized by a Class C-1 liquor
license, shall be incidental to the sale of products other than alcoholic
liquor, such as food, drugs, gift items, sundries and similar products. Such
products shall not include gasoline and/or diesel fuel.
            (1)   The test to determine whether the sale of alcoholic liquor is
incidental to the main business of the establishment containing the licensed
premises shall be a comparison of the gross revenue derived by the licensee
from the sale of alcoholic liquor to the gross revenue obtained by the licensee
from the sale of all products other than alcoholic liquor, during the period in
which the liquor license is granted.
            (2)   For purposes of this chapter, "gross revenue" is defined to
mean the total amount of cash or other consideration (including all taxes
collected by the seller) received by the licensee as the result of the transfer
of goods, or the provision of services, to another.
            (3)   It shall be a condition for the renewal of a Class C-1 liquor
license that, for the period during which the applicant for renewal was a
licensee in such class, the licensee's gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic
liquor authorized by the licensee's liquor license did not exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of the licensee's revenue from the sale of all other products
made, and the provision of services, in the ordinary course of business by the
licensee, both on the licensed premises and in the business conducted by the
licensee to which the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental.
            (4)   If the Commissioner determines that the licensee is not
attempting in good faith to comply with the provisions of the licensee's liquor
license concerning the sale of alcoholic liquor as an incidental part of the
licensee's business, and with the limitations imposed upon the gross revenue
from the sale of alcoholic liquor as provided herein, the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner may proceed as provided in section
3-7-5 of this chapter.
         d.   The licensee shall maintain adequate books and records in
accordance with generally accepted accounting standards, which shall clearly
indicate gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic liquor separately from gross
revenue for the sale of all other products in the business operated by the
licensee to which the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental.
The licensee shall make such books and records available for inspection by the
Commissioner, or the Commissioner's designee. Such inspection may be conducted
during normal business hours on the licensed premises, or at such other
location in the Village as directed by the Commissioner. The Commissioner shall
determine, as a result of such inspection, whether, in the Commissioner's
opinion, the books and records maintained by the licensee meet the requirements
of this chapter, and whether there is cause for the Commissioner to conduct
proceedings as provided in section
3-7-5 of this chapter.
         e.   The premises where packaged liquor is to be sold shall be
equipped with an alarm system, both for holdups and burglaries. Also, all
employees of the licensee shall be fingerprinted and photographed by the Oak
Park Police Department. The Commissioner may adopt regulations, pursuant to
section
3-7-2 of this chapter, requiring additional security measures to be taken by
the holders of Class C-1 liquor licenses for the protection of the licensed
premises and the surrounding neighborhood. The regulations shall provide the
Commissioner with the discretion to modify security requirements to address
safety issues which may be unique to a particular application or set of
circumstances. The Commissioner may not issue a liquor license to a premises
which does not so comply. If the premises do not so comply with the
requirements imposed by the Commissioner under such regulations, the
Commissioner shall not issue or renew the liquor license.
         f.   The annual fee for such liquor license is three thousand dollars
($3,000.00).
      3.   Package Liquor Class C-2 License: A package liquor Class C-2 license
authorizes the retail sale of beer and wine only, in the original package, not
for consumption on the premises where sold, except that the tasting or sampling
of wine on the premises shall be permitted if the tasting or sampling is a part
of a promotion or a sales device to encourage the sale of wine and no charge of
any kind or character is made for such sampling or tasting. In addition to the
restrictions imposed in subsection
3-4-2C1 of this section, Class C-2 liquor licenses are subject to the
following:
         a.   Class C-2 liquor licenses may be created by the President and
Board of Trustees and issued by the Commissioner to a premises located only in
the "Central Business Area", as such term is defined in section
3-1-1 of this chapter.
         b.   If the sale of beer and wine in the original package, not for
consumption on the premises where sold, except as set forth hereinabove, is not
the principal business of the licensee conducted on the premises, then the
package liquor business must be subject to an adequate control system as
defined in subsection
3-4-2C2b of this section. It shall be a condition of renewal of a class C-
2 liquor license that an adequate control system remains in place.
         c.   The annual fee for such liquor license is one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
      4.   Package Liquor Class C-3 License: A package liquor class C-3 license
authorizes the sale of beer, wine and other alcoholic liquor (except that
commonly known as "hard liquor", such as whiskey, rum, vodka and gin) in the
original package and not for consumption on the premises where sold. In
addition to the restrictions imposed in subsection
3-4-2C1 of this section, class C-3 liquor licenses are subject to the
following:
         a.   The primary business of the licensee must be the sale of gourmet
food products, beer and wine.
         b.   Such business must be located in the "Central Business Area", as
such a term is defined in section
3-1-1 of this chapter.
         c.   The alcoholic liquor authorized to be sold by the package liquor
class C-3 license, other than beer and wine, may occupy no more than ten
percent (10%) of the shelf space in the public portion of the licensed premises
and may not be visible from the outside of the premises or be within sight of
the public entryway on the inside of the business premises.
         d.   The sale of alcoholic liquor authorized to be sold by the package
liquor class C-3 license, other than beer and wine, may not be promoted or
advertised in any way.
         e.   The package liquor business must be operated and maintained in a
physically separate manner from other types of businesses on the premises. In
such case, the sale of package liquor is permitted only at separate register
locations devoted only to package liquor sales.
         f.   The annual fee for such liquor license is two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
      5.   Package Liquor Class C-4 License: A package liquor class C-4 license
authorizes the retail sale of wine only, in the original package, not for
consumption on the premises where sold. In addition to the restrictions imposed
in subsection
3-4-2C1 of this section, class C-4 liquor licenses are subject to the
following:
         a.   The primary business of the licensee must be the sale of gourmet
foods.
         b.   Class C-4 liquor licenses may be created by the President and
Board of Trustees and issued by the Commissioner to a premises located only in
the "Central Business Area", as such term is defined in section
3-1-1 of this chapter.
         c.   The wine, authorized to be sold by the package liquor class C-
4 license, may occupy no more than thirty percent (30%) of the shelf space in
the public portion of the licensed premises.
         d.   The annual fee for such liquor license is one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
      6.   Package Liquor Class C-5 License: A package liquor class C-5 license
authorizes the retail sale of one alcoholic liquor, in the original package,
for consumption off the premises. In addition to the restrictions imposed in
subsection
3-4-2C1 of this section, class C-5 liquor licenses are subject to the
following:
         a.   The premises must be located in a restaurant which possesses a
current Village liquor license.
         b.   The licensee of the class C-5 liquor license must be the same
person as the licensee for the restaurant liquor license.
         c.   The alcoholic liquor must be certified by the restaurant owner to
be a unique formula created by the restaurant.
         d.   The alcoholic liquor must be manufactured in accordance with the
restaurant owner's formula and bottled by a major, nationally recognized liquor
manufacturer in a sealed container bearing the label designating, in primary
position, the name of the restaurant.
         e.   The alcoholic liquor in package form must be made available and
promoted at a minimum by the manufacturer for general distribution to retail
liquor outlets throughout Oak Park and over an area comprising not less than
the state.
         f.   The annual fee for such a liquor license is four hundred dollars
($400.00).
      7.   Package Liquor Class C-6 License: Class C-6 liquor licenses, which
shall authorize the retail sale of wine only, in the original package, in no
less than one-half (1/2) case lots, from office premises which excludes walk-in
trade and is used for the processing of business documents and for the storage
and distribution off site of preordered wine, subject to the following
restrictions:
         a.   No more than forty percent (40%) of the premises may be used for
storage purposes, except that when the office premises is operated as home
occupation, the storage of wine for sale shall not be permitted on such
premises.
         b.   No packaged wine or representations thereof shall be displayed or
advertised on the premises.
         c.   The retail business shall be conducted entirely by mail or
telephone or by orders placed during winetasting events held on private
property at the invitation of the owners or occupants, away from the business
premises.
         d.   Class C-6 licenses shall be subject to the same restrictions as
class C-1 licenses except that C-1 license restrictions set forth in subsection
3-4-2C2 of this section and identified therein as subsections
3-4-2C2a and C2b of this section shall not apply and subsection
3-4-2C1a of this section shall also not apply.
         e.   The annual fee for such a license shall be four hundred dollars
($400.00). No such license is issued at this time except as otherwise indicated
in article 8 of this chapter.
      8.   Specialty Gourmet Foods Shop Class C-7 License:
         a.   The primary business of the licensee must be the sale of gourmet
foods, table top gift items, and gift baskets.
         b.   A class C-7 liquor license authorizes the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor in the original package for consumption off premises.
         c.   The alcoholic liquors authorized for retail sale by the class C-
7 liquor license shall only occupy ten percent (10%) of the shelf space of the
public portion of the licensed premises.
         d.   The tasting or sampling of alcoholic liquors on the premises
shall be permitted if the tasting or sampling is a part of a promotion or a
sales device to encourage the sale of alcoholic liquors and no charge of any
kind or character is made for such tasting or sampling four (4) times during an
applicable license year.
         e.   A class C-7 liquor licensee shall be permitted to sell for on
site consumption individual servings of wine of no more than six (6) ounces per
glass.
         f.   In addition to the sale of wine for on-site consumption, non-
alcoholic beverages must be available for purchase.
         g.   There shall be no signage outside the licensed premises to
indicate the sale of alcoholic liquors and licensees are prohibited from
displaying signage visible from outside the licensed premises advertising the
sale of alcoholic liquors.
         h.   All staff must be BASSET trained and certified.
         i.   Licensees shall be permitted to provide prepackaged snacks as
part of any tasting or sampling activities or on-site consumption of wine on
the premises.
         j.   The annual fee for a class C-7 liquor license shall be four
hundred dollars ($400.00).
      9.   Package C-8 Boutique Liquor License: A package liquor class C-
8 boutique license authorizes the sale of wine in the original package and not
for consumption on the premises where sold other than as set forth below and
other alcoholic liquors provided that the sale of alcoholic liquors other than
wine shall be limited to no more than five percent (5%) of the licensee's total
sales volume. In addition to the restrictions imposed in subsection
3-4-2C1 of this section, class C-8 liquor licenses are subject to the
following:
         a.   Such business must be located in the "Central Business Area," as
such a term is defined in section
3-1-1 of this chapter.
         b.   The tasting or sampling of wine only shall be permitted on the
premises if the tasting or sampling is part of a promotion or sales device to
encourage the sale of wine or as part of a wine education class and no charge
of any kind or character shall be made for such tasting or sampling other than
a charge for a wine education class.
         c.   A class C-8 liquor licensee shall be permitted to sell for on
site consumption individual servings of wine of no more than six (6) ounces per
glass. The hours for on site consumption of wine on the premises shall be from
eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
         d.    A lounge area which seats no more than twenty (20) persons for
on site consumption shall be permitted.
         e.   Customers shall be permitted to provide and consume their own
food on the premises as part of any tasting or sampling activity at the
premises or as part of on site consumption of wine on the premises. In
addition, a licensee shall be permitted to provide prepackaged snacks as part
of any tasting or sampling activity or on site consumption of wine on the
premises.
         f.    A class C-8 liquor licensee may sell bottles of wine of twelve
(12) ounces or more.
         g.   Class C-8 liquor licenses shall only be issued to a premises
located in a containing one thousand five hundred (1,500) or less square feet
of retail space.
         h.   All staff must be BASSET trained and certified.
         i.   No bar shall be permitted.
         j.   The annual fee for a Class C-8 liquor license is three thousand
dollars ($3,000.00).
   D.   Miscellaneous:
      1.   Club Class D-1 Liquor License: Club class D-1 liquor licenses shall
authorize the sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption only on the premises
where sold, and limited to members and their guests, and which shall be issued
only to "clubs", as defined in article 1 of this chapter maintaining permanent
club quarters irrespective of the size of their membership. The annual fee for
such liquor license shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00);
provided, however, if the holder of a class A-1 liquor license also holds a
Class D-1 liquor license, then the fee for the Class A-1 liquor license shall
be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      2.   Club Class D-2 Liquor License: Club Class D-2 liquor licenses shall
authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises for a
for profit private club and shall be subject to the following restrictions:
         a.   The principal activity of the club must be participatory sports
and recreation;
         b.   The club must have been in existence for at least three (3)
years;
         c.   Service of liquor is limited to members and guests, but not
necessarily to be in conjunction with the service of food;
         d.   The minimum period of membership for the club must be at least
three (3) months; and
         e.   No bar shall be permitted.
         f.   The annual fee for such a liquor license shall be one thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
      3.   Club Class D-3 Liquor License: Club Class D-3 liquor licenses shall
authorize the sale of beer and wine for consumption on the premises of a for
profit private club subject to the same restrictions as a Class D-2 liquor
license. The annual fee for such liquor license shall be seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00).
      4.   Bowling Alley Class D-4 Liquor License: Bowling Alley Class D-
4 liquor licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor from a service
bar in bowling alleys to persons on the premises for the purpose of using the
bowling alleys. The annual fee for such a liquor license is eight hundred fifty
dollars ($850.00).
      5.   Gift Package Class D-5 Liquor License:
         a.   Gift Package Class D-5 liquor licenses shall authorize the sale
of bottled wine as part of and incidental to gift packages including items such
as, but not limited to, food and flowers in a basket or other appropriate
container.
         b.   A Class D-5 liquor license shall entitle the licensee to sell
gift packages for delivery. Any deliveries must be made by agents or employees
of the licensee who shall confirm that the local recipients are over twenty one
(21) years of age prior to delivering any gift package to the recipient and
shall require signature of the recipient to confirm the same.
         c.   Orders for gift packages incorporating bottled wine may be placed
in the retail portion of a licensed premises but may not be delivered over the
counter unless totally packaged in a carton or wrappings.
         d.   Regulations governing promotional displays of gift packages which
include wine may be issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
         e.   The annual fee for a Class D-5 liquor license shall be one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
      6.   Auctioneer Class D-6 Liquor License: Auctioneer Class D-6 liquor
licenses shall authorize the sale at auction of alcoholic liquor in the
original package, not for consumption on the premises where sold. Class D-
6 liquor licenses will be subject to the following restrictions:
         a.   A Class D-6 liquor license will be issued only to an applicant
who holds a current Class 2 auctioneer's license in the Village and has held
such auctioneer's license for at least two (2) consecutive years prior to
filing the application for the Class D-6 liquor license. The Class D-6 liquor
license shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance or until such
time as the licensee no longer holds a valid Class 2 auctioneer's license,
whichever is shorter.
         b.   No packaged alcoholic liquor may be sold which is less than ten
(10) years of age. The original package must specifically indicate the year in
which the alcoholic liquor was manufactured, or the auctioneer must submit to
the Village Clerk for each auction an affidavit which identifies the packaged
liquor to be offered for sale at the auction and certifies that all of the
alcoholic liquor offered for sale at said auction is at least ten (10) years of
age. Alcoholic liquor which does not specifically indicate the year of its
manufacture as a part of the original packaging or for which no affidavit has
been submitted to the Village Clerk may not be sold at auction.
         c.   Packaged alcoholic liquor may be sold only on the licensed
premises, unless a change or extension of location is granted pursuant to
section
3-5-5 of this chapter.
         d.   No person under twenty one (21) years of age will be allowed to
purchase packaged alcoholic liquor or to sell it at auction.
         e.   No more than fifteen percent (15%) of the auction sales receipts
for all auctions held under one auction liquor license in any calendar year may
be derived from the sale of packaged alcoholic liquor. Each auctioneer must
retain receipts of all sales at auction for a period of two (2) years. All
receipts shall be compiled in a record which shall indicate the total sales
receipts for each auction and the total sales receipts for each year. The
auctioneer shall also maintain these records for two (2) years and shall allow
the Village access to such records for review during normal business hours. The
percentage of auction sale receipts attributable to packaged alcoholic liquor
sales shall be determined by the Village's review of the records required to be
maintained under this section and a review of the auctioneer's books and
records kept in accordance with section 23A-2-9 of this code. The failure of an
auctioneer to limit packaged alcoholic liquor sales to fifteen percent (15%) of
the total auction sales receipts for an entire year shall constitute cause for
the revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of the auctioneer's liquor license.
         f.   No exterior signage advertising the sale of alcoholic liquor will
be allowed.
         g.   The purchase of packaged alcoholic liquor at auction within the
Village is subject to the tax imposed upon the privilege of purchasing
alcoholic liquor at retail within the Village as set forth in chapter 23A,
article 2 of this code. The auctioneer shall be responsible for fulfilling all
obligations of the section with regard to any tax imposed under chapter 23A,
article 2 of this code.
         h.   The sale of packaged alcoholic liquor will be permitted only from
ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
         i.   The annual fee for such a liquor license shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
      7.   Park District Of Oak Park And The Oak Park Public Library Class D-
7 Liquor License: Park District of Oak Park and Oak Park Public Library class
D-7 liquor licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption in buildings owned or leased by the Park District of Oak Park and
the Oak Park Public Library and on grounds of Cheney Mansion. The Park District
of Oak Park and the Oak Park Public Library may apply for a class D-7 liquor
license which shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor in buildings owned
or leased by the Park District and the Public Library and on grounds of Cheney
Mansion during prearranged events which include the service of food. A
representative of the Park District and the Public Library must be present
throughout every such event. A monthly report of events at which alcoholic
liquor was sold or served shall be submitted to the Commissioner within fifteen
(15) days following the end of each month.
         a.   Guidelines for the service of alcoholic liquor in buildings owned
or leased by the Park District of Oak Park and the Oak Park Public Library and
on grounds of Cheney Mansion shall be established by the Park District
Commissioners and Public Library Board with the concurrence of the
Commissioner.
         b.   There shall be no fee for a class D-7 liquor license.
      8.   Park District Of Oak Park And Oak Park Public Library Class D-
8 Subsidiary Liquor License: Park District of Oak Park and Oak Park Public
Library class D-8 subsidiary liquor licenses shall be required of any caterer
or person hired to sell or serve alcoholic liquor for consumption in buildings
owned or leased by the Park District of Oak Park and the Oak Park Public
Library or on grounds of Cheney Mansion. They must apply to the Commissioner
and then obtain a D-8 subsidiary liquor license unless that caterer holds a
valid class A-4 liquor license. This liquor license does not permit the
licensee to sell alcoholic liquor by the drink to individuals attending the
event. Each D-8 subsidiary liquor license shall be independent of the class D-
7 liquor license for purposes of enforcement. No D-8 subsidiary liquor license
shall be issued unless a class D-7 liquor license has been issued. If a class
D-7 liquor license is canceled, no D-8 subsidiary liquor license shall be
renewed.
         a.   All regulations enumerated in this chapter or promulgated by the
Commissioner dealing with the sale of alcoholic liquor shall apply to any
holder of a class D-8 subsidiary license, except that in addition to the
provisions of section
3-2-1 of this chapter, a class D-8 subsidiary liquor license shall be required
for either the sale or service of alcoholic liquor as noted above.
         b.   The annual fee for a D-8 subsidiary liquor license shall be four
hundred dollars ($400.00). The single event fee for a D-8 subsidiary liquor
license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
      9.   Entertainment Club Class D-9 Liquor License: Entertainment club
class D-9 liquor licenses shall authorize the sale in entertainment clubs only
of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold, subject to the
following conditions:
         a.   Entertainment clubs shall be limited to the Central Business
Area.
         b.   The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to the hours of
five o’clock (5:00) P.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight Monday through
Thursday, from five o’clock (5:00) P.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Fridays,
from twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Saturdays and
from twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sundays.
         c.   The closing time for all entertainment clubs shall be no more
than one hour later than the time established for terminating the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
         d.   Patrons may continue to consume alcoholic beverages purchased
prior to the time limitation established for the sale of alcoholic beverages
until the time established for the closing of the entertainment club. The sale
of non-alcoholic beverages shall be available at all times that alcoholic
beverages are sold for on-site consumption.
         e.   There shall be no signage outside the club to indicate the sale
of alcoholic beverages.
         f.   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age shall be
permitted to be on licensed premises without the supervision of a parent or
legal guardian twenty-one (21) years of age or older while alcoholic liquors
are being served. Signage shall be posted at the entrance of the licensed
premises to reflect this requirement.
         g.   The sale of prepackaged food snacks shall be available for
consumption at all times when alcoholic beverages are sold. Customers shall be
permitted to bring food into the licensed premises for consumption during a
licensee’s hours of operation.
         h.   Alcoholic beverages shall be served only in single-servings and
shall be in containers no less than six (6) ounces and no larger than sixteen
(16) ounces in size. Alcoholic beverages shall not be served in bottles,
pitchers or buckets.
         i.   Containers in which alcoholic liquors are served must be a
different color, size and design of those in which non-alcoholic beverages are
served by the licensee.
         j.   A licensee shall not serve or deliver more than two (2) alcoholic
beverages to a person at a time and no customer shall possess more than two (2)
alcoholic beverages at any time.
         k.   Sales of alcoholic beverages may be made from service bars
containing alcoholic beverages, alcoholic liquors, mixes and related
preparation materials. Such service bars shall not have seats or stools for
customers at which to sit.
         l.   Licensees shall comply with section
3-2-4 of this chapter requiring BASSET training of all managers, supervisors,
sellers and servers of alcoholic beverages.
         m.   An entertainment club liquor license may be issued in conjunction
with a restaurant license or as a separate liquor license. In the case of
restaurants possessing both restaurant and entertainment club liquor licenses,
the entertainment club license shall in no way limit the right of the
restaurant liquor license holder to sell alcoholic beverages in accordance with
the provisions of the restaurant liquor license held by same. Likewise, the
entertainment club liquor license shall not expand the liquor license
privileges of the restaurant with regard to alcoholic liquor served in
conjunction with restaurant operations.
         n.   The annual fee for a class D-9 liquor license shall be two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
      10.   Coffee House And Teashop Class D-10 Liquor Licenses: There shall be
two (2) Coffee House and Teashop Class D-10 liquor license classifications as
follows:
         a.   A Coffee House And Teashop Class D-10-1 Liquor License: Coffee
bar house and teashop class D-10-1 liquor licenses shall authorize the retail
sale of specified spirituous alcoholic liqueurs that are sweetened, such as
brandy flavored with fruit, spices, nuts, herbs or seeds, beer and wine as long
as the business contains indoor seating for at least ten (10) or more patrons
for consumption on the premises only seating where coffee, tea or food service
is provided. The service of alcoholic liqueurs, beer and wine without the
availability to purchase, tea or food is prohibited. The sale of food shall be
available at all times that beer and wine are sold for on-site consumption. The
age of employees who may draw, pour, mix, sell and/or serve alcoholic liqueurs,
beer and wine shall be governed by subsection 3-5-9C of this chapter.
            (1)   All managers, supervisors, sellers and servers of liqueurs,
beer, and wine are required to be BASSET trained and certified. In addition,
there shall be no signage outside the venue to indicate the sale of liqueurs,
beer or wine.
            (2)   No alcoholic liqueurs, beer, and wine shall be served prior
to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or shall be served after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
on Sunday through Thursday and after twelve o'clock (12:00) Midnight on Friday
and Saturday.
            (3)   The number of Class D-10-1 liquor licenses which may be
issued is limited as designated in section
3-8-1 of this chapter. The annual fee for such liquor license for a coffee
house and teashop with a seating capacity of ten (10) to nineteen (19) shall be
six hundred dollars ($600.00). The annual fee for a Class D-10-1 liquor license
with a seating capacity of twenty (20) to twenty-nine (29) shall be twelve-
hundred dollars ($1,200.00). The annual fee for a Class D-10-1 liquor license
with a seating capacity of thirty (30) or over shall be eighteen-hundred
dollars ($1,800.00).
         b.   Coffee House and Teashop Class D-10-2 Liquor License: A Coffee
House and Teashop Class D-10-2 liquor license authorizes the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises. The licensee's total square
footage under roof shall be a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet. A
licensee must have indoor seating for at least ten (10) or more patrons and
coffee, tea or food service must be provided to seated patrons. The service of
alcoholic liquors without the availability for purchase of coffee, tea or food
for on-site consumption is prohibited. The age of employees who may draw, pour,
mix, sell and/or serve alcoholic liquor shall be governed by subsection 3-5-9C
of this chapter.
            (1)   There shall be no signage outside the licensed premises to
indicate the sale of alcoholic liquors and a licensee is prohibited from
displaying signage inside the business, visible from outside the licensed
premises, advertising the sale of alcoholic liquors.
            (2)   All managers, supervisors, sellers and servers of alcoholic
liquor are required to be BASSET trained and certified.
            (3)   No alcoholic liquors shall be served prior to ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. or after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on Sunday through Thursday and
after twelve o'clock (12:00) Midnight on Friday and Saturday. The number of
class D-10-2 liquor licenses which may be issued is limited as designated in
Section
3-8-1 of this chapter.
            (4)   The annual fee for a Class D-10-2 liquor license for a coffee
house and tea shop and with a seating capacity of ten (10) to nineteen (19)
shall be eight hundred dollars ($800.00). The annual fee for such liquor
license for a coffee house and teashop with a seating capacity of twenty (20)
to twenty-nine (29) shall be fifteen-hundred dollars ($1,500.00). The annual
fee for such liquor license for a coffee house and teashop with a seating
capacity of thirty (30) or over shall be two- thousand three-hundred dollars
($2,300.00).
      11.   Non-Profit Live Theater Performance Venue Class D-11 Liquor
License: Live theater performance venue class D-11 liquor licenses shall
authorize the sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises where
sold, subject to the following conditions:
         a.   The licensee shall be a local non-profit corporation organized
for the purpose of the performance of live theater, music, comedy, magic and
other performance productions in a permanent live theater location owned or
leased by the licensee.
         b.   The sale of alcoholic liquors shall be limited to the hours of
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight Monday through
Friday and from twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
on Saturdays and Sundays up to one hour prior to live performances, during the
intermissions of such performances and prior to the beginning of a group
discussion following the conclusion of such performances.
         c.   The sale of prepackaged snacks will be available at all times
when alcohol is being sold.
         d.   The closing time for all performance venues shall be one hour
later than the time established for terminating the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
         e.   Patrons may continue to consume alcoholic beverages purchased
prior to the time limitation established for the sale of alcoholic beverages
until the time established for the closing of the performance venue.
         f.   There shall be no signage outside the venue to indicate the sale
of alcoholic liquor.
         g.   All managers, supervisors, sellers and servers of alcoholic
liquors are required to be BASSETT trained and certified.
         h.   The annual fee for a class D-11 liquor license shall be six
hundred dollars ($600.00).
      12.   Market Cafe Class D-12 License: A market cafe class D-12 license
shall authorize both the retail sale of beer, wine and artisanal distilled
alcoholic liquor only, both in the original package and for consumption on the
premises where sold subject to the following conditions:
         a.   The primary business of the licensee must be the sale of artisan
cheeses and other gourmet food products.
         b.   The sale of beer, wine and artisanal distilled alcoholic liquor
in the original package shall not be for consumption on the premises where sold
and shall be subject to the restrictions imposed in subsection
3-4-2C1 of this section. The sale of beer, wine and artisanal distilled
alcoholic liquor in the original package shall not be permitted in any area of
the premises in which foods are sold for immediate consumption provided,
however, that tasting or sampling of wines or foods shall be permitted if the
tasting or sampling is part of a promotion or a sales device and no charge of
any kind or character is made for such sampling or tasting.
         c.   Any sale for consumption on the premises shall be in quantities
no greater than twenty two (22) fluid ounces for beer, and eight (8) fluid
ounces for wine and artisanal alcoholic liquor. Service shall be made, whether
by waiters or waitresses or directly from behind a service counter, only in an
area of the premises providing table seating for patrons and in which gourmet
or specialty foods (not including snack foods such as crackers, chips, nuts,
pretzels, raw vegetables, dips and spreads) are at all times available for
purchase. The area providing table seating shall be physically separated from
any area in which the sale of beer, wine and artisanal distilled alcoholic
liquor in the original package is permitted and shall constitute neither less
than twenty five percent (25%) nor more than seventy percent (70%) of the total
floor area of the premises.
         d.   Such business must be located in the Central Business Area, as
such term is defined in section
3-1-1 of this chapter.
         e.   The annual fee for such liquor license is two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
      13.   Village Of Oak Park Class D-13 Liquor License: Village of Oak Park
sponsored event class D-13 liquor licenses shall authorize the sale of beer and
wine only for consumption at Village sponsored events on premises owned and
controlled by the Village of Oak Park for which the Village has enacted an
ordinance authorizing the sale of beer and wine for consumption on the
premises. The Village may apply for a class D-13 liquor license which shall
authorize the sale of beer and wine on premises owned and controlled by the
Village during Village sponsored, prearranged events at which food is also
available for consumption on the premises under the following conditions:
         a.   A representative of the Village must be present throughout every
such event;
         b.   A monthly report of events at which alcoholic liquor was sold or
served shall be submitted to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner within
fifteen (15) days following the end of each month in which such an event has
occurred;
         c.   The Village shall apply all revenue remaining from the sale of
beer and wine after paying for the cost of such beer and wine and the wages of
the persons hired to serve same, to defray the cost of the Village sponsored
event at which the beer and wine were sold with the ultimate goal of having the
midweek market become totally self-sustaining;
         d.   The Village shall comply with the liquor liability insurance
requirements of section
3-4-6 of this article;
         e.   All persons who serve beer and wine at such Village sponsored
events shall be twenty one (21) years of age or older;
         f.   No person under twenty one (21) years of age shall be served beer
or wine;
         g.   Beer and wine may only be served to persons upon their display of
the authorized stamp on the back of their hand and upon their presentation of
the appropriate number of authorized tickets. Hands may be stamped by and
tickets may be purchased from the Manager of the event or the Manager's
designee. A photo identification containing the holder's name and age must be
presented to and verified by the Manager or the Manager's designee before the
Manager or designee may stamp the ID holder's hand or sell tickets to the ID
holder;
         h.   The Manager or employee in charge of the service of beer and wine
at the event shall have successfully completed a state certified beverage
alcohol sellers and servers education and training (BASSET) program approved by
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner;
         i.   The Village shall either hire qualified servers to staff the
event beer and wine service area or recruit a local liquor license holder to
volunteer its services in exchange for reimbursement of its costs in acquiring
the beer and wine and paying the wages of their servers who staff the event
beer and wine area. The Village shall publicly recognize a current license
holder who volunteers its services for the event;
         j.   In lieu of the standard liquor license application submitted to
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner in accordance with section
3-2-3 of this chapter, the Village through its Manager shall apply in writing
for the D-13 liquor license and provide to the Commissioner all relevant
background information on the Village sponsored event including dates, times,
location, participants and activities of the event and any ordinances, rules
and regulations applicable thereto. The Village shall provide evidence of
proper insurance coverage and BASSET training for the Manager or employee in
charge of beer and wine service;
         k.   The perimeter of and entrance to the midweek market shall be
clearly delineated. Beer and wine may only be consumed within the perimeter of
the market; and
         l.   There shall be no application fee, corporate surety bond or
annual license fee requirement applicable to the issuance of a class D-13
liquor license.
      14.   Brewpub Class D-14 Liquor License:
         a.   Authorized Activities: A brewpub class D-14 liquor license shall
authorize a licensee to:
            (1)   Manufacture and store up to five thousand (5,000) barrels of
beer only at the designated premises; and
            (2)   Make sales of the manufactured beer and other alcoholic
liquor at retail to nonlicensees for use and consumption on the licensed
premises in accordance with the following:
               (A)   The retail sale of alcohol on the licensed premises shall
be at tables in a restaurant with a seating capacity of not less than sixty
(60) persons for food service, and in a lounge area to patrons.
               (B)   Some service of food must be available to patrons in the
lounge area.
               (C)   The manufacturing area can not exceed twenty five percent
(25%) of the brewpub establishment.
               (D)   The lounge must be subsidiary to the restaurant; and
            (3)   Sell the manufactured beer at retail to nonlicensees who are
at least twenty one (21) years old in the original package for consumption off
the premises, or in refillable containers not to exceed sixty four (64) ounces
for consumption off the premises; and
            (4)   Sell the manufactured beer to importing distributors, and
distributors provided that those sales shall not exceed one thousand five
hundred (1,500) barrels per year.
         b.   Closing Hours: No person licensed under this subsection shall
sell any alcoholic liquor or permit it to be sold or given away between the
following hours:
            One o'clock (1:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. Monday
through Friday.
            Two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten thirty o'clock (10:30) A.M. on
Saturday.
            Two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten thirty o'clock (10:30) A.M. on
Sunday mornings and on the morning of January 1, Memorial Day, Labor Day and
Thanksgiving.
All patrons and customers of the licensee shall leave the licensed premises not
later than thirty (30) minutes following the closing hours established herein.
         c.   Fee: The annual fee for a class D-14 liquor license shall be two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
      15.   Craft Brewery Class D-15 Liquor License: A craft brewery Class D-15
liquor license shall authorize a licensee to produce at the licensed premises
no more than 155,000 gallons (5,000 barrels) of beer, per year, at the licensed
premises (production limit). In addition, licensees shall be:
         a.   Self-distribution eligible;
         b.   Eligible to transfer a portion of the beer manufactured on-site
to the premises of a State of Illinois licensed Class 3 brewer wholly owned and
operated by the same licensee;
         c.   Permitted to sell on the licensed premises to non-licensees, for
on or off premise consumption, beer manufactured by the licensee, a Class 3
State of Illinois approved license holder, and also sell beer manufactured by
any other brewer (State of Illinois approved Class 1 brewer, State of Illinois
Class 2 brewer or State of Illinois Class 3 brewer); and
         d.   Excluding the provisions in item "3" of this subsection, the
licensee shall be permitted to sell on the licensed premises to nonlicensees,
only for on-premise consumption, alcoholic liquor.
Class D-15 licenses shall be issued subject to the following conditions:
         a.   During authorized hours of business, it shall be unlawful for a
Class D-15 licensee to sell craft beer for off premises consumption in less
than a package of four (4) 12-ounce to 16-ounce containers, or a single
container of between twenty-two (22) and thirty-one (31) ounces. The sale of
thirty-two (32) ounce containers, standard kegs and mini-kegs may also be sold
for off-premise consumption
         b.   It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class D-15 license to
provide a sample of or sell any craft beer before the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) A.M. or after the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
         c.   All applicable taxes including Sales Tax shall be collected and
paid on all revenue realized from the retail sale of craft beer.
         d.   The sale of prepackaged food snacks shall be available at all
times when alcoholic liquors are available for sale.
         e.   Class D-15 licensees must have a valid State of Illinois Class 3
brewer's liquor license and or equivalent required State of Illinois liquor
licenses and comply with any and all applicable Federal, State, and local laws
and regulations, including, but not limited to, procurement of a requisite
Federal brewer's notice and any and all other requisite licenses and permits
concerning manufacture, packaging, storing, sale, and distribution of alcoholic
beverages. A licensee must first obtain a State of Illinois Class 3 brewer's
liquor license within three (3) months of obtaining a Class D-15 liquor
license. The licensee must maintain the State of Illinois Class 3 brewer's
liquor license in order to maintain a Class D-15 liquor license.
         f.   Every manager, supervisor, sellers and server of alcoholic
liquors must be BASSET trained and certified.
         g.   The location of the retail sale and consumption of craft beer
shall be limited to the retail portion of the licensed premises, except during
supervised tours and private parties located in the manufacturing area.
         h.   The portion of the licensed premises dedicated to the retail sale
of craft beer shall be segregated from the remainder of the premises.
         i.   At least twenty five percent (25%) of the total gross square
footage area of the physical premises shall be designated to the retail sale of
craft beer.
         j.   A licensee shall maintain accurate records as to the total
gallons of beer manufactured on the premises and the total gallons of beer
manufactured on the premises and sold for consumption off premises. Licensee
shall produce said records to the Village upon request.
         k.   There shall be no signage outside the licensed premises to
indicate the sale of alcoholic liquors and licensees are prohibited from
displaying signage visible from outside the licensed premises advertising the
sale of alcoholic liquors.
         l.   The annual fee for a Class D-15 license shall be two thousand
five hundred fifty dollars ($2,500.00).
      16.   Craft Brew Lounge Class D-16 Liquor License: A craft brew lounge
Class D-16 liquor license shall authorize the sale of craft beer for
consumption off site and craft beer and wine for consumption on site by persons
of at least twenty one (21) years of age. Class D-16 licenses shall be issued
pursuant to the package requirements of the Class C and Class D-15 liquor
licenses, subject to the following additional regulations and conditions:
         a.   The business of a craft brew lounge must include package craft
beer sales for off site consumption. No craft beer shall be brewed or
manufactured on site.
         b.   A lounge area which seats no more than ten (10) persons for on
site consumption shall be permitted.
         c.   The premises shall contain a minimum of one thousand (1,000)
square feet and no more than two thousand (2,000) square feet, and the lounge
area shall constitute no more than fifty percent (50%) of the floor space of
the premises.
         d.   On site consumption allowed in the lounge area of craft beer
shall be in containers no less than six (6) ounces and no larger than sixteen
(16) ounces. The sale of beer in growlers is prohibited.
         e.   Authorized hours of business shall be six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Sunday through Wednesday and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight Thursday through Saturday. Service of
craft beer and wine for consumption on the premises and the sale of package
craft beer shall be permitted beginning at eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. Monday
through Friday and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. Saturday and Sunday through the
closing hours set forth above.
         f.   All staff who participates in the packaged sale of craft beer or
on site serving of craft beer and wine must be BASSET trained and certified.
         g.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall be on the
premises without the supervision of a parent or legal guardian twenty one (21)
years of age or older. Signage shall be posted at the entrance of the premises
to reflect this requirement.
         h.   A licensee shall not prohibit lounge area patrons who intend to
consume craft beer or wine at the premises from providing and consuming their
own food.
         i.   The annual fee for a Class D-16 license shall be two thousand
five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
      17.   Bakeshop Class D-17 Liquor License: A bakeshop Class D-17 liquor
License shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine in the original
package for off-premises consumption and shall authorize the sale of beer and
wine for on-site consumption with food by persons at least twenty-one (21)
years of age, subject to the following additional regulations and conditions:
         a.   The licensee must be a bakeshop as defined in section
3-1-1 of this chapter and all baked goods sold to the public must be produced
on-premises and there shall be at least five (5) different types, not flavors,
of baked goods produced on-site for retail sale;
         b.   The licensee must be located within the boundaries of the
business areas as defined in section
3-1-1 of this chapter;
         c.   The licensee's total square footage under roof shall be a minimum
of one thousand (1,000) square feet with table seating for at least eight (8)
customers;
         d.   The sale of beer and wine for both on-site and off-site
consumption shall be incidental to the bakeshop business with less than twenty
five percent (25%) of a licensee's gross revenue derived from beer and wine
sales;
         e.   No bar shall be permitted;
         f.   The sale of baked-goods shall be available at all times that beer
and wine are sold for on-site consumption;
         g.   No individual dispensed serving of beer shall be larger than
twelve (12) fluid ounces and no individual dispensed serving of wine shall be
larger than six (6) fluid ounces in size; the sale of beer in growlers is
prohibited;
         h.   In addition to the sale of beer and wine, customers of the
licensee must be given the opportunity to purchase non-alcoholic drink
products;
         i.   All staff must be BASSET trained and certified;
         j.   The beer or wine authorized to be sold may occupy no more than
twenty (20) percent of a licensee's available and visible display space in the
public portion of the licensed premises and may not be visible from outside of
the premises or be within sight of the public entryway on the inside of the
business premises;
         k.   There shall be no signage outside the licensed premises to
indicate the sale of alcoholic liquors and a licensee is prohibited from
displaying signage, visible from outside the licensed premises, advertising the
sale of alcoholic liquors;
         l.   A license holder shall not sell or permit to be sold or given
away, any beer or wine, for consumption on-premises, between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M., Monday through Sunday, and
the license holder shall not sell or permit to be sold or given away, any beer
or wine, for consumption off-site, between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00)
P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M., Monday through Sunday; and
         m.   The annual fee for a licensee with an indoor seating capacity of
fifty (50) or more persons shall be three thousand five hundred dollars
($3,500). For an establishment with a seating capacity of between eight (8) and
forty-nine persons, the annual fee shall be two thousand five-hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
      18.   Movie Theatre Class D-18 Liquor License: Movie theatre class D-18
liquor license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the licensed premises where the primary business is that of a
movie theater as defined herein subject to the conditions listed below.
         a.   Sales of alcoholic liquor shall be limited to contracted theatre
rentals, theater production/box office events and regularly scheduled motion
pictures or films.
         b.   Alcoholic liquors shall not be served more than one (1) hour
prior to a scheduled event, rental or the advertised time of the first motion
picture or film showing on any day.
It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class D-18 license to sell alcoholic
liquor before the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. or after the hour of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
         c.   Sales of alcoholic liquors shall be made from service bars
containing alcoholic liquor, mixes and related preparation materials. Such
service bars shall not have seats or stools for customers at which to sit.
         d.   Food service must be available during all times alcoholic liquor
is available for purchase on the premises.
         e.   A licensee shall not serve or deliver more than two (2) alcoholic
beverages to a person at a time and no customer shall have in the customer's
possession two (2) alcoholic beverages at any time.
         f.   Containers in which alcoholic liquors are served must be a
different color, size and design of those in which non-alcoholic beverages are
served by the licensee.
         g.   Alcoholic liquors shall be served only in single-servings and not
served in bottles, pitchers or buckets.
         h.   There shall be no signage outside the licensed establishment to
indicate the sale of alcoholic liquors.
         i.   Licensees shall comply with section
3-2-4 of this chapter requiring BASSET training of all managers, supervisors,
sellers and servers of alcoholic liquors.
         j.   The annual fee for a Class D-18 license shall be two thousand
five-hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
      19.   Arts And Crafts Establishment Class D-19: An Arts and Crafts
Establishment license shall authorize the retail sale of beer, wine and
champagne, for onsite consumption with food, by persons at least twenty-one
(21) years of age, where the primary business is that of an Arts and Crafts
Establishment, as defined herein, subject to the following additional
regulations and conditions:
         a.   The licensee must be an arts and crafts establishment as defined
in Section
3-1-1 of this chapter;
         b.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the business's floor-space shall
be exclusively devoted to craft making activities;
         c.   The licensee must be located within the boundaries of the
business areas as defined in section
3-1-1 of this chapter;
         d.   The licensee's total square footage, under roof, shall be a
minimum of six-hundred (600) square feet;
         e.   It is intended that the service of beer, wine and champagne is
merely an adjunct to the operation of an Arts and Crafts Establishment and
shall not be advertised or otherwise held-out to be an alcohol drinking
establishment with less than ten percent (10%) of a licensee's gross revenue
derived from beer, wine and champagne sales;
         f.   Beer, wine and champagne service shall be limited to patrons
participating in craft making activities and shall terminate at the conclusion
of each craft making activity so that the service of beer, wine and champagne
shall not be allowed any time when a craft making session is not in actual
operation;
         g.   Customers may participate in regularly scheduled class sessions
by pre-registering, walk-in or by invitation to pre-planned party function(s);
         h.   No more than one (1) service bar shall be allowed on the premises
and said bar shall not have seats for customers at which to sit;
         I.   The sale or availability of food, for customer consumption, shall
be required at all times that beer, wine and champagne are sold;
         j.   No individual dispensed serving of beer shall be larger than
twelve (12) fluid ounces and no individual dispensed serving of wine or
champagne shall be larger than six (6) fluid ounces in size;
         k.   In addition to the sale of beer, wine and champagne, customers of
the licensee must be given the opportunity to purchase non-alcoholic drink
products while beer, wine and champagne are available and being consumed;
         l.   All staff must be BASSET trained and certified;
         m.   No beer, wine or champagne may occupy any of the licensee's
available and visible display space in the public portion of the licensed
premises and may not be visible from outside of the premises;
         n.   There shall be no signage outside the licensed premises to
indicate the sale of beer, wine or champagne and a licensee is prohibited from
displaying such signage inside, visible from outside the licensed premises,
advertising the sale of beer, wine or champagne.
         o.   A license holder shall not sell or permit to be sold or given
away, any beer, wine or champagne, for consumption on-premises, between the
hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M, Monday
through Sunday; and
         p.   The annual fee for a licensee shall be five hundred dollars
($500.00).
   E.   Special Events Liquor Licenses:
      1.   Special Events Class E-1 Liquor License: Special events Class E-
1 liquor licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption
on the premises owned or leased by nonprofit organizations and occupied by the
licensee only during ten (10) special events per year. Such Class E-1 liquor
licenses may also authorize two (2) of the ten (10) special events per year to
be the sale at auction of alcoholic liquor in the original package, not for
consumption on the premises where sold and subject to the restrictions as set
forth below:
         a.   No person under twenty one (21) years of age will be allowed to
purchase packaged alcoholic liquor or to sell it at auction.
         b.   No more than fifteen percent (15%) of the auction sales receipts
for all auctions held under one auction liquor license in any calendar year may
be derived from the sale of packaged alcoholic liquor. Each auctioneer must
retain receipts of all sales at auction for a period of two (2) years. All
receipts shall be compiled in a record which shall indicate the total sales
receipts for each auction and the total sales receipts for each year. The
auctioneer shall also maintain these records for two (2) years and shall allow
the Village access to such records for review during normal business hours. The
percentage of auction sale receipts attributable to packaged alcoholic liquor
sales shall be determined by the Village's review of the records required to be
maintained under this section and a review of the auctioneer's books and
records kept in accordance with section 23A-2-9 of this Code. The failure of an
auctioneer to limit packaged alcoholic liquor sales to fifteen percent (15%) of
the total auction sales receipts for an entire year shall constitute cause for
the revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of the auctioneer's liquor license.
         c.   No exterior signage advertising the sale of alcoholic liquor will
be allowed.
         d.   The purchase of packaged alcoholic liquor at auction within the
Village is subject to the tax imposed upon the privilege of purchasing
alcoholic liquor at retail within the Village as set forth in chapter 23A,
article 2 of this Code. The auctioneer shall be responsible for fulfilling all
obligations of the section with regard to any tax imposed under chapter 23A,
article 2 of this Code.
         e.   All special events must be sponsored by the licensee for members
and their guests, except that the licensee may sponsor no more than five (5)
special events for nonmembers of the licensed premises. All special events
shall be conducted by a nonprofit organization. A separate permit shall be
required for each event. No event shall last longer than one continuous twenty
four (24) hour period. The fee for such liquor license shall be fifteen dollars
($15.00) for each special event permit applied for not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the related event; and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
special event permit applied for less than thirty (30) days prior to the
related event.
      2.   Special Event Class E-2 Liquor License: Special events Class E-
2 liquor licenses shall authorize an Illinois licensed retailer to transfer a
portion of its alcoholic liquor inventory from its retail licensed premises to
the premises specified in the license hereby created, and to sell or offer for
sale at retail, only on the premises specified in the license hereby created,
the transferred alcoholic liquor for use or consumption, but not for resale in
any form, and shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the licensed premises subject to the following additional restrictions:
         a.   Special Event Requirement: A special event Class E-2 liquor
license may only be issued to participants in a Village sponsored or
cosponsored special event, or a special event for which the Village has granted
a special event permit in accordance with chapter 30 of this Code.
         b.   Term Of License: A special event Class E-2 liquor license may be
granted for the duration of the special event, or some shorter period as
determined by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, provided that each
licensee shall be eligible for no more than two (2) special event Class E-
2 liquor licenses per year and that each such license shall have a term of no
more than three (3) days.
         c.   State License Required: No sale of alcohol is permitted under a
special event Class E-2 liquor license until the licensee has obtained a valid
Illinois special use permit liquor license for the event.
         d.   Signage: The licensee is prohibited from displaying signage
visible from outside the licensed premises advertising the sale of alcoholic
liquor.
         e.   Tax Imposed: The purchase of alcoholic liquor at retail within
the Village is subject to the tax imposed thereon as set forth in chapter 23A,
article 2 of this Code. The licensee shall be responsible for fulfilling all
obligations of that article.
         f.   License Fee: The fee for such license shall be fifteen dollars
($15.00) for each day of the term of the license.
      3.   Special Events Class E-3 Liquor License: Special events Class E-
3 liquor license shall authorize the Park District of Oak Park ("Park
District") to allow bring-your-own ("BYO") possession and consumption of wine
and beer within Austin Gardens during a theatrical performance by the non-
profit theater organization Festival Theatre or its successor, subject to the
following restrictions:
         a.   A Class E-3 liquor license is valid only for outdoor theatrical
performances in Austin Gardens.
         b.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall be allowed
to possess or consume any wine and beer.
         c.   No signage announcing or advertising BYO wine and beer is
permitted.
         d.   BYO possession and consumption is authorized only for a time
period commencing ninety (90) minutes prior to the scheduled start of a
performance and ending no later than thirty (30) minutes after the end of a
performance.
         e.   No open containers of wine and/or beer shall be removed from
Austin Gardens.
         f.   The Park District shall maintain the insurance required by
section
3-4-6 of this article and shall name the Village as an additional insured on
the applicable policy.
         g.   Each Park District employee and volunteer who provides services
during an applicable theatrical performance shall complete BASSET training by a
State certified program approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and
shall provide proof of completion of such training to the Commissioner.
         h.   The annual fee for a Class E-3 liquor license shall be five
hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-1994; amd. Ord. 1994-0-55, 9-
19-1994; Ord. 1995-0-32, 6-12-1995; Ord. 1998-0-2, 1-5-1998; Ord. 2003-0-15, 3-
3-2003; Ord. 2008-0-046, 10-20-2008; Ord. 2010-0-20, 5-3-2010; Ord. 2011-0-4,
1-18-2011; Ord. 2011-0-43, 7-18-2011; Ord. 2011-0-66, 11-7-2011; Ord. 2013-0-
24, 3-18-2013; Ord. 2013-0-64, 11-4-2013; Ord. 15-092, 4-20-2015; Ord. 15-126,
7-20-2015; Ord. 15-154, 9-8-2015; Ord. 16-060, 5-16-2016; Ord. 16-102, 9-6-
2016; Ord. 16-061, 5-16-2016; Ord. 17-313, 11-20-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; Ord. 17-
199, 4-17-2017; Ord. 17-202, 5-15-2017; Ord. 17-313, 11-20-2017, eff. 1-1-2018;
Ord. 18-371, 5-21-2018; Ord. 18-459, 12-10-2018; Ord. 19-76, 9-16-2019; Ord.
19-104, 11-4-2019; Ord. 20-004, 1-13-2020; Ord. 20-012, 2-3-2020; Ord. 22-43,
5-2-2022; Ord. 22-44, 5-2-2022; Ord. 2022-60, 9-6-2022; Ord. 2022-61, 9-6-2022;
Ord. 2022-62, 9-6-2022; Ord. 2022-81, 11-7-2022; Ord. 2022-82, 11-7-2022; Ord.
23-34, 5-15-2023; Ord. 24-120, 4-30-2024; Ord. 24-121, 4-30-2024; Ord. 24-140,
7-9-2024; Ord. 24-152, 9-16-2024)
3-4-3: DISPOSITION OF FEES:
The amount of such fee, as is hereinbefore provided for licenses, shall be paid
to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner at the time application is made either
for the issuance of a liquor license or the renewal thereof and shall be
forthwith turned over to the Village. In the event the liquor license applied
for is denied, such payment shall be returned to the applicant; if the liquor
license is granted, such payment shall be deposited in the General Corporate
Fund or in such other funds as the Village Board of Trustees may, by
appropriate action, direct. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-4-4: NUMBER OF LIQUOR LICENSES:
No liquor licenses shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
except after review by the Liquor Control Review Board based on specific
applications for such a liquor license. After reviewing an application for
license, the Liquor Control Review Board shall report its findings and
recommendations to the Commissioner stating whether it is in the best interests
of the Village of Oak Park to create a liquor license in a particular category
to be granted to the applicant. The Commissioner shall submit the
Commissioner's recommendation and the findings and recommendations of the
Liquor Control Review Board to the Board of Trustees. Upon reviewing said
recommendations, if the Board of Trustees determines it is in the best
interests of the Village of Oak Park that such liquor license be issued, a
liquor license shall be created by amendment to the appropriate subsection of
section
3-4-2 of this article and said liquor license shall then be issued to the
applicant. Liquor licenses so approved are listed in article 8 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-4-5: FEES FOR MULTIPLE LIQUOR LICENSES:
Where more than three (3) liquor licenses are required by this article for the
same premises, then the annual fee for the third liquor license and each
subsequent liquor license shall be reduced by five hundred dollars ($500.00);
provided in no event shall the fee for the subsequent liquor license be less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00). This reduction is in addition to the
reduced liquor license fees provided in section 3-4-2 of this article for Class
A-4 and D-1 liquor licenses. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-4-6: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All licensees shall have in effect prior to the issuance of any liquor
license hereunder liquor liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit or one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and per aggregate, and shall submit a
certificate or policy of insurance as evidence of such coverage, issued by an
insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Illinois and having a
"Best" rating acceptable to the Village. The effective period of such insurance
coverage shall coincide with the period the liquor license is in effect.
   B.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may allow insurance in lesser
amounts as the Commissioner deems appropriate, based upon the conditions and
circumstances surrounding the sale of alcoholic liquor by such licensee. (Ord.
1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
ARTICLE 5
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Miscellaneous
3-5-2: Transfer Of Liquor License
3-5-3: Change In Personnel
3-5-4: Renewal Of Liquor License
3-5-5: Change Or Extension Of Location
3-5-6: Employees
3-5-7: Closing Hours
3-5-8: Signs
3-5-9: Sales To Minors
3-5-10: Sealing And Removal Of Open Wine From A Restaurant
3-5-11:    Delivery And Carry Out Mixed Drinks Permitted
3-5-1: MISCELLANEOUS:
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep, or cause to be kept, a
complete record of all such liquor licenses issued by the Commissioner. (Ord.
1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-5-2: TRANSFER OF LIQUOR LICENSE:
A liquor license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed
one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this chapter provided, and
shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated.
Such liquor license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and shall not
descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, provided that executors
or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of
any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of
alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, may exercise the
privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of
such licensee, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such
liquor license, but not longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy,
or insolvency of such licensee. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-5-3: CHANGE IN PERSONNEL:
   A.   Any changes in partnerships, officers, directors, persons holding
directly or beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the stock or ownership
interest or managers of establishments licensed under this chapter, shall be
reported in writing to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner within ten (10)
days of the change. All new personnel shall meet all the standards of this
chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a liquor license. All such changes
in personnel shall be subject to review by the Commissioner;
   B.   When a liquor license has been issued to a partnership and a change of
ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible
to hold a liquor license, said liquor license shall terminate;
   C.   When a liquor license has been issued to a corporation and a change
takes place in officers, directors, shareholders of more than five percent (5%)
of the stock, or managers, resulting in the holding of office or such shares of
stock by one who is not eligible for a liquor license, said liquor license
shall terminate;
   D.   When a liquor license has been issued to an individual who is no longer
eligible for a liquor license, said liquor license shall terminate. (Ord. 1994-
0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-5-4: RENEWAL OF LIQUOR LICENSE:
Any licensee may renew a liquor license at the expiration thereof, provided
that the licensee is then qualified to receive a liquor license and the
premises for which such renewal liquor license is sought are suitable for such
purpose and are handicapped accessible; provided further, that the renewal
privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which
shall in any case prevent the Village Board of Trustees from decreasing the
number of liquor licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction. (Ord. 1994-0-
43, 8-1-1994)
3-5-5: CHANGE OR EXTENSION OF LOCATION:
   A.   A liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the
premises described in the application and license. Such location may be changed
or extended only upon a written permission to make such change or extension
issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. No change or extension of
location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one
for the sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of this state and the
ordinances of the Village, and is handicapped accessible.
   B.   Permission may be granted for an extension of location to outdoor
areas, which for the purpose of this chapter, contain tables adjacent to a
facility at which alcoholic liquors are provided for sale. Permission for the
use of public sidewalk or paved parkway areas is contingent upon the prior
issuance of a permit pursuant to section
22-10-2 of this code. Any permission for extension of location shall be subject
to reasonable conditions prescribed by the Commissioner appropriate to the
location. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-5-6: EMPLOYEES:
It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the sale of alcoholic
liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any
contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for any
person who is afflicted with, or is a carrier of, any such disease to work in
or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or
distribution of such liquor. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-5-7: CLOSING HOURS:
   A.   No person licensed under subsections
3-4-2A1, A2, A4, B1, B2, B3, B4, B5, B6, D2, D3, and D4 of this chapter as a
seller of alcoholic liquor shall sell or permit to be sold or given away, any
alcoholic liquor between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. Monday through Friday, except that sales may be made up to two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. on Saturday or Sunday mornings and on the morning of New
Year's Day, Memorial Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas, however, no
such sales shall be made between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. on Saturday and Sunday.
No establishment licensed under subsection
3-4-2A1 of this chapter shall sell or serve alcoholic liquor in meeting rooms
and reception rooms in hotels between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M.
   B.   No person licensed under either subsection
3-4-2A3 or E1 of this chapter shall sell or permit to be sold or given away,
any alcoholic liquor between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. and all patrons and customers of said licensee shall leave
the premises not later than thirty (30) minutes following the closing hours
herein established.
   C.   Patrons who have been served a meal in food establishments under class
A-1 (in hotels with less than one hundred (100) rooms), B-1, B-2, B-3, or B-4,
B-5 or B-6 liquor licenses may continue to be served alcoholic liquor or
consume for one hour after the service of food has ceased, but in no event
later than the hours of closing established above.
   D.   Patrons of food establishments under class A-1 liquor licenses, in
hotels with one hundred (100) rooms or more, may continue to be served
alcoholic liquor for two (2) hours after the service of food has ceased, but in
no event later than the hours of closing established above. (Ord. 2014-0-36, 7-
7-2014; amd. Ord. 24-119, 4-11-2024; Ord. 24-121, 4-30-2024)
3-5-8: SIGNS:
Any sign on premises indicating that alcoholic liquor is sold therein shall be
subordinate to the sign indicating the principal business of the licensed
premises and shall conform to all applicable sign ordinances of the Village. No
such sign shall advertise any particular alcoholic product by brand name. (Ord.
1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-5-9: SALES TO MINORS:
   A.   No licensee or officer, associate, agent or employee of such licensee
shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of
purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor. In any place in the Village where
alcoholic liquor is sold, including at each cash register at which alcoholic
liquor may be sold, there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place
a printed card which shall be supplied by the Village Clerk and which shall
read substantially as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS:
You are subject to a fine up to $750.00 under the ordinances of the Village of
Oak Park, if you purchase alcoholic liquor, or misrepresent your age for the
purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a liquor license, or the
licensee's agent or employee, to suffer or permit any minor to be in, or remain
in, any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the room or
place where such licensed premises is located; provided that this subsection
shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by his or her parent or
guardian, or to any licensed premises which derives its principal business from
the sale of service or other commodities than alcoholic liquor. In addition to
all other fines and penalties, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke
the liquor dealer's license for any violation of the preceding subsection. It
shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any minor child of whom
he or she be parent or guardian to violate any provisions of this section.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a liquor license or the
licensee's agent or employee to employ any persons under the age of twenty one
(21) years for the purpose of drawing, pouring, mixing or selling any alcoholic
liquor or employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years for the
purpose of serving alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 2012-0-28, 6-4-2012)
3-5-10: SEALING AND REMOVAL OF OPEN WINE FROM A RESTAURANT:
Any class B restaurant liquor licensee may permit a patron to remove one
unsealed and partially consumed bottle of wine for off premises consumption
provided that the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the
bottle of wine with the meal on the restaurant premises. A partially consumed
bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises pursuant to this section
shall be securely sealed by the licensee or an agent of the licensee prior to
removal from the premises and placed in a transparent onetime use tamperproof
bag. The licensee or agent of the licensee shall provide a dated receipt for
the bottle of wine to the patron. Wine that is resealed in accordance with the
provisions of this section and not tampered with and is transported in the
trunk of a vehicle or in the cargo area of a sport utility vehicle, shall not
be deemed an unsealed container for the purposes of section 11-502 of the
Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 2008-0-046, 10-20-2008)
3-5-11: DELIVERY AND CARRY OUT MIXED DRINKS PERMITTED:
The delivery and carry out of mixed drinks for sale by Class B restaurant
liquor licensees is permitted in the Village pursuant to section 6-28.8 of the
Illinois Liquor Control Act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-28.8, as
amended ("section 6-28.8"), for such time as section 6-28.8 remains in effect.
The requirements of section 6-28.8 and any rules promulgated by the Illinois
Liquor Control Commission pursuant to said section shall be applicable to such
sales. (Ord. 20-044, 5-28-2020)
ARTICLE 6
SALES ON CREDIT
SECTION:
3-6-1: Sales on Credit
3-6-2: Purchase or Acceptance of Gifts of Liquor by Persons of Nonage;
Identification Cards
3-6-3: Reuse of Premises
3-6-1: SALES ON CREDIT:
No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor to any person on credit, or on
a passbook, or order on a store, or in exchange for any goods, wares or
merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered; and if any person shall
extend credit for such purpose the debt thereby attempted to be created shall
not be recoverable at law; provided that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prevent any club from permitting checks or statements for
alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona fide guests of members and
charged to the account of such members or guests in accordance with the bylaws
of said club; and provided further that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prevent any hotel from permitting checks or statements for liquor
to be signed by regular guests residing at said hotel and charged to the
accounts of said guests. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-94)
3-6-2: PURCHASE OR ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS OF LIQUOR BY PERSONS OF NONAGE;
IDENTIFICATION CARDS:
   A.   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because of age shall not purchase, or accept a gift of alcoholic
liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her possession.
   B.   If a licensee or the licensee's agents or employees believe or have
reason to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited
because of the nonage of the prospective recipient, the licensee or the
licensee's agent or employee shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand
presentation of some form of positive identification, containing proof of age,
issued by a public officer in the performance of such officer's official
duties. No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card;
use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of
alcoholic liquor in violation of this Section. Whoever violates any provisions
of this Section, shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each such
offense. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-94)
3-6-3: REUSE OF PREMISES:
When any liquor license shall have been revoked for any cause, no liquor
license shall be granted to any person for the period of one year thereafter
for the conduct of business of selling alcoholic liquor in the premises
described in such revoked liquor license. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-94)
ARTICLE 7
ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL OF LIQUOR LICENSES; ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
3-7-1: Authority Of Local Liquor Control Commissioner
3-7-2: Local Liquor Control Commissioner To Adopt Regulations
3-7-3: Functions And Duties Of The Liquor Control Review Board
3-7-4: Procedure For Issuing Local Liquor Licenses
3-7-5: Renewal Of Liquor License
3-7-6: Enforcement
3-7-7: Hearings
3-7-8: Complaints
3-7-9: Appeals
3-7-10: Village Officers And Employees To Cooperate
3-7-1: AUTHORITY OF LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have such authority to investigate,
conduct hearings and revoke or suspend local liquor licenses as is contained in
the Illinois liquor control act, and other powers and duties conferred by this
chapter. This chapter, having been enacted by the President and Board of
Trustees in the exercise of the home rule powers of the Village, shall control
in the event of any conflict between such Act and the terms hereof. (Ord. 1994-
0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-7-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER TO ADOPT REGULATIONS:
   A.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall adopt regulations for the
conduct of the Commissioner's office. Such regulations shall guarantee adequate
standards of substantive and procedural due process for local liquor licensees;
applicants for local liquor licenses and renewals thereof; persons who file
complaints as hereinafter provided; and the Village, when it appears as a party
in any hearing conducted by, or on behalf of, the Commissioner.
   B.   All such regulations shall be in writing and shall be approved as to
legal form by the Village Attorney prior to their becoming effective. All such
regulations are subject to prior approval by the President and Board of
Trustees. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-7-3: FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE LIQUOR CONTROL REVIEW BOARD:
   A.   The Liquor Control Review Board shall assist the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner in investigating applications for the initial issuance and
renewals of local liquor licenses, as provided by regulations issued by the
Commissioner. The Liquor Control Review Board shall perform the duties imposed
by this chapter and such other duties as the Commissioner may provide by
regulation.
   B.   The Commissioner may, by regulations adopted by the Commissioner,
appoint one or more members of the Liquor Control Review Board, or any other
resident or residents of the Village, to act as deputy Local Liquor Control
Commissioners to assist in the performance of the Commissioner's duties. Such
deputy Commissioner may be compensated as provided for by an ordinance or
resolution adopted by the President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-
1-1994)
3-7-4: PROCEDURE FOR ISSUING LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSES:
   A.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall, by regulation issued by
the Commissioner, determine the application procedure and the form of
applications for the initial issuance of local liquor licenses.
   B.   Upon receipt of an application for the initial issuance of a local
liquor license, the Commissioner shall first determine if the President and
Board of Trustees has created a liquor license category of the type applied
for, and if a liquor license in such category is available to be issued by the
Commissioner. The Commissioner shall forward it to the Liquor Control Review
Board, together with the Commissioner's findings and instructions, for review,
provided, however, that in the case of a special event class E-2 liquor
license, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may grant or deny the license by
letter to the applicant, without referral to the Liquor Control Review Board or
the Village Board, provided that the Commissioner may only grant a license if
he or she determines that the license is authorized in accordance with
subsection
3-4-2E2 of this chapter, and the applicant has complied with the requirements
of subsection
3-2-3B of this chapter. An applicant may appeal the denial of a special event
class E-2 liquor license as set forth in section
3-7-9 of this article. Notwithstanding the provisions in section
3-7-5 of this article, no special event class E-2 liquor license may be
renewed.
   C.   The Liquor Control Review Board shall, upon receipt of a liquor license
application, conduct an investigation of the advisability of issuing a liquor
license in an existing category, or the creation of a new category of liquor
license, as provided by regulations issued by the Commissioner. Such
investigation shall include, but is not limited to, determining those facts
which show if the applicant meets all requirements of the Illinois liquor
control act, and all other applicable State statutes, and ordinances of the
Village, relating to the granting of a local liquor license. The investigation
shall also include an examination of the experience of the applicant in the
business proposed to be conducted by the applicant and such facts as may be
considered necessary by the Commissioner and the Liquor Control Review Board to
demonstrate the likelihood of financial success of the applicant in the
proposed business. Opinions of the Commissioner and the Liquor Control Review
Board members with respect to such financial success which are not supported by
findings of fact shall not, in and of themselves, be grounds for denial of a
liquor license by the Commissioner, or for the refusal of the President and
Board of Trustees to create the category of liquor license applied for.
   D.   The Liquor Control Review Board shall, upon the completion of its
investigation, forward to the Commissioner a report of the facts determined in
its investigation, and its recommendations concerning the application, and the
creation of the category of liquor license applied for, if required. Upon
receipt of such report, the Commissioner may accept it, reject it, in whole or
in part, return it to the Liquor Control Review Board for further proceedings
as directed by the Commissioner, or take such other action as the Commissioner
believes appropriate.
   E.   The Commissioner shall, within a reasonable time in light of all
circumstances, forward the report to the President and Board of Trustees,
containing the Commissioner's recommendations concerning the creation of a new
liquor license in an existing category or a new liquor license category
requested by the applicant. The report shall also state the recommendation of
the Liquor Control Review Board and shall indicate the position of the
Commissioner with regard to such recommendation.
   F.   Upon receipt of the report of the Commissioner, the Village Board shall
determine, in its sole discretion, whether or not to create the new liquor
license in the existing category or the new liquor license category addressed
in the report and, if appropriate, the creation of a new liquor license under
the new category.
   G.   Within such time as the Commissioner judges appropriate after the
creation by the President and Board of Trustees of the local liquor license
requested by the applicant, the Commissioner shall issue the liquor license to
the applicant, if the Commissioner has determined that the applicant has
satisfied all requirements for the local liquor license.
   H.   In the event that an application is rejected by the Commissioner, the
Village Board may overrule the Commissioner and direct the Commissioner to
issue the liquor license if the applicant appeals the decision of the
Commissioner to the Village Board in writing within thirty (30) days of the
rejection of the application by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner is
overruled by the Village Board and the Village Board has, by ordinance, created
a new liquor license category and liquor license therefor, or a new liquor
license in an existing category of the class applied for by the applicant, the
Commissioner shall issue such liquor license to the applicant. (Ord. 2013-0-24,
3-18-2013)
3-7-5: RENEWAL OF LIQUOR LICENSE:
   A.   Not later than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of a local
liquor license, the licensee may submit an application to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner for renewal thereof. The Commissioner shall prescribe
regulations concerning the form and content of such application. If such
application is not filed within the time prescribed, the Commissioner may
conclude that the licensee does not desire that the liquor license be renewed
and may proceed accordingly.
   B.   Upon receipt of an application for renewal of a liquor license, the
Commissioner shall forward it to the Liquor Control Review Board for review.
   C.   The Liquor Control Review Board shall conduct an investigation to
determine facts concerning the continued qualifications of the licensee to hold
a local liquor license; the compliance by the licensee with all applicable
statutes and ordinances during the term of the liquor license; the continued
advisability of allowing the licensee to renew the licensee's liquor license,
and the advisability of continuing such category of local liquor license.
   D.   Within such time as the Commissioner may prescribe by regulation, the
Liquor Control Review Board shall submit a report to the Commissioner. Such
report shall state the findings of fact made by the Liquor Control Review Board
as a result of its investigation, and its recommendation about the renewal or
nonrenewal of the liquor license.
   E.   Upon receipt of the report of the Liquor Control Review Board, the
Commissioner may accept it, reject it, in whole or in part, return it to the
Liquor Control Review Board for further proceedings as directed by the
Commissioner or take such other action as the Commissioner feels appropriate.
If the Commissioner believes that the liquor license is to be renewed, the
Commissioner shall do so within such time as the Commissioner considers
appropriate in light of all the circumstances. If the Commissioner decides that
the liquor license should not be renewed, the Commissioner shall, not later
than five (5) days prior to the expiration of the current liquor license,
notify the licensee of such decision.
   F.   The Commissioner shall report all liquor license renewals to the
President and Board of Trustees. The Commissioner shall also report all
rejections of renewal applications, together with the reasons therefor, to the
President and Board of Trustees within ten (10) days after the decision is
made. Upon receipt of such report, the President and Board of Trustees may, not
later than the second regularly scheduled meeting thereof after the expiration,
without appeal, of the final date upon which the applicant may file an appeal
with the Village Board of the Commissioner's decision to reject the applicant's
renewal application, cancel the category of liquor license, or reduce the
number of liquor licenses available in such category.
   G.   If the President and Board of Trustees do not act to cancel the
category of liquor license or reduce the number of liquor licenses available in
such category within the time limit prescribed herein, the Commissioner may
issue a liquor license in such category to any applicant therefor, provided the
procedure required by section
3-7-4 of this article has been complied with. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-7-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner is charged with the enforcement
of the Illinois liquor control act and all other applicable State statutes,
this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, with respect to local liquor
control in the Village.
   B.   The Commissioner shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, all
complaints of violations of applicable law submitted in accordance with section
3-7-8 of this article. The Commissioner may initiate and conduct, or cause to
be conducted, an investigation if the Commissioner has reason to believe that a
licensee has violated any applicable law or regulation issued by the
Commissioner. The Commissioner may also initiate and conduct, or cause to be
conducted, an investigation into the advisability of the renewal of any liquor
license, or the continuance of a category of liquor license created by the
President and Board of Trustees. The Commissioner may appoint a deputy Local
Liquor Control Commissioner to conduct an investigation, or direct the Liquor
Control Review Board to conduct any such investigation, and submit the deputy's
or Board's report thereof to the Commissioner for action.
   C.   If, as the result of any investigation conducted by the Commissioner,
or on the Commissioner's behalf, the Commissioner determines that enforcement
of any applicable law may be required, the Commissioner shall conduct a hearing
thereon as hereinafter provided.
   D.   Provided that the Commissioner has complied with this chapter, and all
other applicable law and regulations, concerning notices, and hearings, if the
same be required, and also provided that the Commissioner has determined that
enforcement of this Chapter, or any other applicable law, is required under the
circumstances, the Commissioner may:
      1.   Issue a warning to the licensee;
      2.   Impose a fine upon the licensee, in lieu of suspension or revocation
of the liquor license, not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
violation; provided, that not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in
total fines may be imposed upon a licensee during the period of the liquor
license;
      3.   Suspend the local liquor license for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days;
      4.   Revoke the liquor license for cause.
The Commissioner will establish regulations which address the procedures,
content and form for orders providing for a warning, fine, suspension or
revocation. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-7-7: HEARINGS:
   A.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner, or a designee of the
Commissioner, or the Liquor Control Review Board, as determined by the
Commissioner, shall conduct all hearings required by the Illinois liquor
control act, this chapter, or other applicable law.
   B.   The Commissioner shall, by regulation, provide for the orderly conduct
of such hearings. Such regulations shall contain provisions for notice to all
parties as required by law, and may contain provisions for notice to other
interested persons as the Commissioner shall determine.
   C.   A transcript of all such hearings shall be made by a court reporter
appointed by the Commissioner. The cost of such transcript shall be paid by the
Village. The Commissioner may prescribe, by regulation issued by the
Commissioner, that the parties to any proceeding to be transcribed by a court
reporter, shall share the cost of such court reporter in order to obtain a copy
of such transcript. The Commissioner may, by regulation, prescribe that no
other record of the proceedings may be made by any person, including
electronic, or tape recording, other than the court reporter appointed by the
Commissioner. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-7-8: COMPLAINTS:
   A.   Any person may file a complaint with the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner that a licensee has violated any provision of the Illinois liquor
control act, this chapter, or any other applicable statute, ordinance or
regulation.
   B.   Such complaint shall be made on oath or affirmation, and be in the form
and contain the information the Commissioner shall prescribe by regulation.
   C.   Upon the receipt of such complaint, the Commissioner shall make an
initial determination if there is reasonable cause to believe that a violation
may exist. If the Commissioner determines that no such reasonable cause does
exist, the Commissioner's decision shall be final, and subject to appeal as
hereinafter provided. If the Commissioner determines that there is reasonable
cause to believe that a violation exists, the Commissioner shall conduct a
hearing thereon as provided in section
3-7-7 of this article, or appoint a deputy Local Liquor Control Commissioner to
conduct such hearing, or refer the matter to the Liquor Control Review Board
for hearing.
   D.   The Village may file a complaint by its Village Attorney if the
President and Board of Trustees have, by resolution, determined that a
violation may exist and that it is in the best interest of the Village to do
so. Such complaint shall be under oath, and signed by the Trustee with the
longest tenure in office then sitting on the Village Board.
   E.   All such complaints shall be made under oath or affirmation by the
complainant.
   F.   The Commissioner shall provide, by regulation adopted by the
Commissioner, for the orderly processing of a complaint filed as provided
herein. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-7-9: APPEALS:
   A.   A final determination by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner on any
complaint filed hereunder shall be subject to appeal to the Illinois Liquor
Control Commission, or the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois, as provided
by law.
   B.   A determination by the Commissioner with respect to any matter not
subject to appeal to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, or the Circuit
Court of Cook County, as provided by law may be taken by the aggrieved party to
the President and Board of Trustees. The decision of the President and Board of
Trustees on such appeal shall be final. It shall also be subject to appeal to
Circuit Court of Cook County as otherwise provided by law.
   C.   The Commissioner shall adopt regulations governing the appeal of any
matter provided for herein. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-1-1994)
3-7-10: VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO COOPERATE:
Every Village officer and employee by and through the Village Manager shall
render such assistance to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, the
Commissioner's deputies, and the Liquor Control Review Board as they may
request to assist them in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 1994-0-43, 8-
1-1994)
ARTICLE 8
LIST OF LICENSES FOR EACH LICENSE CLASS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Number Of Licenses Permitted To Be Issued Per License Class
3-8-2: Licenses By Name And Address Per License
3-8-1: NUMBER OF LICENSES PERMITTED TO BE ISSUED PER LICENSE CLASS:
A-1    No more than one Class A-1 license shall be issued.
A-2    No more than two (2) Class A-2 licenses shall be issued.
A-3    No more than one Class A-3 license shall be issued.
A-4    No more than four (4) Class A-4 licenses shall be issued.
B-1    No more than twenty-one (21) Class B-1 licenses shall be issued.
B-2    No more than eight (8) Class B-2 licenses shall be issued.
B-3    No more than three (3) Class B-3 licenses shall be issued.
B-4    No more than twenty-one (21) Class B-4 licenses shall be issued.
B-5    No more than one Class B-5 license shall be issued.
B-6    No more than three (3) Class B-6 licenses shall be issued.
B-7    No more than one (1) license shall be issued.
C-1    No more than eleven (11) Class C-1 licenses shall be issued.
C-2    No more than zero (0) Class C-2 license shall be issued.
C-3    No more than zero (0) Class C-3 licenses shall be issued.
C-4    No more than zero (0) Class C-4 licenses shall be issued.
C-5    No more than zero (0) Class C-5 licenses shall be issued.
C-6    No more than zero (0) Class C-6 licenses shall be issued.
C-7    No more than one Class C-7 license shall be issued.
C-8    No more than one Class C-8 license shall be issued.
D-1    No more than zero (0) Class D-1 licenses shall be issued.
D-2    No more than zero (0) Class D-2 licenses shall be issued.
D-3    No more than one (1) Class D-3 licenses shall be issued.
D-4    No more than zero (0) Class D-4 licenses shall be issued.
D-5    No more than zero (0) Class D-5 licenses shall be issued.
D-6    No more than zero (0) Class D-6 licenses shall be issued.
D-7    No more than one Class D-7 license shall be issued.
D-8    No more than three (3) Class D-8 licenses shall be issued.
D-9    No more than one (1) Class D-9 license shall be issued.
D-10-1 No more than zero (0) Class D-10-1 licenses shall be issued.
D-10-2 No more than one (1) Class D-10-2 license shall be issued.
D-11   No more than two (2) Class D-11 licenses shall be issued.
D-12   No more than zero (0) Class D-12 licenses shall be issued.
D-13   No more than zero (0) Class D-13 licenses shall be issued.
D-14   No more than one (1) Class D-14 licenses shall be issued.
D-15   No more than one (1) Class D-15 license shall be issued.
D-16   No more than one (1) Class D-16 license shall be issued.
D-17   No more than two (2) Class D-17 license shall be issued.
E-1    No more than seventeen (17) Class E-1 licenses shall be issued.
E-2    No more than twenty five (25) Class E-2 licenses shall be issued.
E-3    No more than one Class E-3 license shall be issued.
 
(Ord. 2014-0-04, 2-3-2014; amd. Ord. 2014-0-05, 2-3-2014; Ord. 2014-0-18, 4-7-
2014; Ord. 2014-0-53, 9-2-2014; Ord. 2014-0-67, 10-6-2014; Ord. 2014-0-68, 10-
6-2014; Ord. 2014-0-88, 11-17-2014; Ord. 2014-0-89, 11-17-2014; Ord. 2014-0-90,
11-17-2014; Ord. 15-060, 2-18-2015; Ord. 15-073, 3-16-2015; Ord. 15-090, 4-20-
2015; Ord. 15-091, 4-20-2015; Ord. 15-092, 4-20-2015; Ord. 15-111, 6-1-2015;
Ord. 15-126, 7-20-2015; Ord. 15-127, 7-20-2015; Ord. 15-125, 8-3-2015; Ord. 15-
153, 9-8-2015; Ord. 15-173, 10-19-2015; Ord. 16-006, 2-1-2016; Ord. 16-018, 2-
16-2016; Ord. 16-027, 3-7-2016; Ord. 16-042, 4-18-2016; Ord. 16-059, 5-16-2016;
Ord. 16-077, 6-6-2016; Ord. 16-135, 11-7-2016; Ord. 16-136, 11-7-2016; Ord. 16-
137, 11-7-2016; Ord. 16-162, 12-5-2016; Ord. 17-198, 4-17-2017; Ord. 17-199, 4-
17-2017; Ord. 17-202, 5-15-2017; Ord. 17-220, 6-5-2017; Ord. 17-221, 6-5-2017;
Ord. 17-234, 7-17-2017; Ord. 17-249, 9-5-2017; Ord. 17-251, 9-5-2017; Ord. 17-
294, 11-6-2017; Ord. 17-313, 11-20-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; Ord. 18-337, 1-16-2018;
Ord. 18-338, 1-16-2018; Ord. 18-348, 3-5-2018; Ord. 18-371, 5-21-2018; Ord. 18-
383, 7-9-2018; Ord. 18-400, 9-4-2018; Ord. 18-418, 10-1-2018; Ord. 18-419, 10-
1-2018; Ord. 18-420, 10-1-2018; Ord. 18-458, 12-10-2018; Ord. 18-459, 12-10-
2018; Ord. 19-11, 1-28-2019; Ord. 19-23, 3-4-2019; Ord. 19-24, 3-4-2019; Ord.
19-61, 9-3-2019; Ord. 19-76, 9-16-2019; Ord. 20-005, 1-13-2020; Ord. 20-076, 9-
8-2020; Ord. 20-095, 10-19-2020; Ord. 20-125, 11-16-2020; Ord. 21-37, 4-19-
2021; Ord. 21-38, 4-19-2021; Ord. 21-44, 5-24-2021; Ord. 21-49, 6-24-2021; Ord.
21-65, 9-20-2021; Ord. 21-66, 9-20-2021; Ord. 21-68, 9-20-2021; Ord. 21-69, 9-
20-2021; Ord. 21-94, 12-6-2021; Ord. 21-95, 12-6-2021; Ord. 22-20, 3-21-2022;
Ord. 22-41, 5-2-2022; Ord. 22-44, 5-2-2022; Ord. 2022-59, 9-6-2022; Ord. 2022-
82, 11-7-2022; Ord. 23-34, 5-15-2023; Ord. 23-35, 5-15-2023; Ord. 23-68, 7-5-
2023; Ord. 23-104, 11-6-2023; Ord. 23-105, 11-6-2023; Ord. 24-112, 3-5-2024;
Ord. 24-116, 4-11-2024; Ord. 24-119, 4-11-2024; Ord. 24-120, 4-30-2024; Ord.
24-121, 4-30-2024; Ord. 24-140, 7-9-2024; Ord. 24-151, 9-16-2024; Ord. 24-106,
1-28-2025; Ord. 24-107, 1-28- 2025; Ord. 25-132, 3-11-2025)
3-8-2: LICENSES BY NAME AND ADDRESS PER LICENSE:
CLASS                                                                      1110
A-1   Carleton Hotel                                                       Pleasant
                                                                           Street
CLASS                                                                      1120
A-2   La Notte Ventures, Inc.,DBA La Notte Ristorante Italiano             Pleasant
                                                                           Street
                                                                           139 S.
     Poor Phil's Inc., DBA Poor Phil's Oyster Bar and Grill               Marion
                                                                           Street
CLASS The Nineteenth Century Club                                          178 Forest
A-3                                                                        Avenue
CLASS Kettlestrings Kitchen & Tap, Inc., DBA Betty’s Pizza & Pasta       1103 South
A-4                                                                        Boulevard
                                                                           5559 S.
                                                                           Archer
     Premier Catering & Events, LLC                                       Avenue,
                                                                           Ste. 3,
                                                                           Chicago,
                                                                           IL 60638
                                                                           848
     Robinson's No. 1 Rib, Inc., DBA Robinson's Ribs Bar & Grill          Madison
                                                                           Street
     Twomaytoz, Inc., DBA Cucina Paradiso                                 814 North
                                                                           Boulevard
CLASS                                                                      1105
B-1   3Hearts Group Inc. dba Mira Social                                   Pleasant
                                                                           Street
      Breakfast House Marion, Inc. dba Breakfast House                     138 N.
                                                                         Marion
                                                                           Street
                                                                           163 South
     Brewpoint Craft OP LLC, DBA Brewpoint Craft Oak Park                 Oak Park
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           113 N. Oak
     Café Cubano Oak Park LLC, DBA Café                                 Park
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           1107-1109
     Cajun Seafood, Inc.                                                  South
                                                                           Boulevard
                                                                           814 S. Oak
     Chaiya, Inc., DBA SEN Asian Bowl and Sushi Bar                       Park
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           1130
     Eleven-Thirty Chicago, Inc., DBA Penny’s Oak Park                  Chicago
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           116 N. Oak
     Il Vicolo Oak Park, Inc., DBA Il Vicolo Trattoria                    Park
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           838
     Leek Restaurant Group, LLC, DBA Tacos 76                             Madison
                                                                           Street
     Oak Park Egg Harbor, LLC, DBA Egg Harbor                             1111 South
                                                                           Boulevard
                                                                           804 S. Oak
     Rene Roman, Inc., DBA Margaritas                                     Park
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           848
     Robinson's No. 1 Rib, Inc., DBA Robinson's Ribs Bar & Grill          Madison
                                                                           Street
     Scratch Properties, Inc., DBA Scratch on Lake                        733 Lake
                                                                           Street
     Seoul Ave Corporation dba Seoul Ave                                  728 Lake
                                                                           Street
     Sushi House Oak Park LLC, DBA Sushi House                            1107 Lake
                                                                           Street
     Tacos El Tio #4, Inc., DBA Tacos El Tio                              1115 Lake
                                                                           Street
                                                                           220 - 222
     Taco Mucho LLC, DBA Taco Mucho                                       Harrison
                                                                           Street
                                                                           187 N.
     The Little Gem, Inc., DBA Encore by Little Gem                       Marion
                                                                           Street
                                                                           189 N.
     The Little Gem, Inc., DBA Little Gem Cafe                            Marion
                                                                           Street
     Tre Sorelle Ristorante, Inc., DBA Tre Sorelle Ristorante             1111 Lake
                                                                           Street
                                                                           100 S.
     Victory Oak Park, LLC, DBA Victory Italian                           Marion
                                                                           Street
CLASS                                                                      1031 West
B-2   Jawid, Inc., DBA Khyber Pass                                         Lake
                                                                           Street
                                                                           118 N.
     Lux Food Service LLC, DBA Kyuramen                                   Marion
                                                                           Street
                                                                           1112
     Mama Thai, Inc., DBA Mama Thai Restaurant                            Madison
                                                                           Street
                                                                           1115
     Marie's Best Pizza, Inc., DBA Giordano's of Oak Park                 Chicago
                                                                           Avenue
     Nando’s of Oak Park, LLC, DBA Nando’s Peri-Peri                  1138 Lake
                                                                           Street
                                                                           124 North
     Q-BBQ Oak Park, LLC                                                  Marion
                                                                           Street
     Royale Liquors LLC DBA Pete's Fresh Market 259 Lake                  259 Lake
                                                                           Street
CLASS Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc., DBA Chipotle Mexican Grill             1132 Lake
B-3                                                                        Street
                                                                           136 N. Oak
     I'm Hot Sauce Company, DBA Mulata Kitchen + Coffee                   Park
                                                                           Avenue
     Suburrito, Inc., DBA Hecho En Oak Park                               1053 Lake
                                                                           Street
CLASS                                                                      128 N. Oak
B-4   Bricks of Oak Park, LLC, DBA Bricks Wood Fired Pizza Cafe            Park
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           100 S. Oak
     Citrine Cafe, LLC                                                    Park
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           225
     Costello's S & S, Inc., DBA Trattoria 225                            Harrison
                                                                           Street
     Crepas Culichi Brunch, Inc., DBA Crepas Culichi                      1101 Lake
                                                                           Street
     Grupo Fenix, LLC, DBA Amerikas                                       734 Lake
                                                                           Street
     Kettlestrings Kitchen & Tap, Inc., DBA Betty's Pizza and Pasta       1103 South
                                                                           Boulevard
                                                                           800 S. Oak
     Kettlestrings Kitchen & Tap, Inc., DBA Kettlestrings Tavern          Park
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           107 S.
     Kettlestrings Kitchen & Tap, Inc., DBA The Grove                     Marion
                                                                           Street
                                                                           1038 W.
     Luma Limited DBA Lou Malnati's Pizzeria                              Lake
                                                                           Street
                                                                           105 North
     Lux BBQ OP LLC, DBA Gyumon Japanese BBQ                              Marion
                                                                           Street
                                                                           142-44 S.
     Maya Del Sol, LLC, DBA Maya Del Sol                                  Oak Park
                                                                           Avenue
     Medicova, LLC                                                        722 Lake
                                                                           Street
                                                                           201
     Mora Asian Kitchen                                                   Harrison
                                                                           Street
     Nafpaktos, Inc., DBA Agora Bistro                                    728 Lake
                                                                           Street
                                                                           133 S. Oak
     Nikoathana, Inc., DBA Bourbon Fire                                   Park
                                                                           Avenue
     Oak Park Waffles, LLC                                                726 Lake
                                                                           Street
                                                                           825 S. Oak
     RG Management LLC, DBA Avenue Ale House                              Park
                                                                           Avenue
      Salerno’s Pizza & Pasta of Oak Park, Inc., DBA Salerno’s Pizza & 7124-28
     Pasta                                                                Roosevelt
                                                                           Road
                                                                           155 S. Oak
     Sistar 5 Inc., DBA Rustico                                           Park
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           401 N.
     T.G.I. Friday's, Inc., DBA T.G.I. Friday's                           Harlem
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           211 N. Oak
     Tasty Inc., DBA Hemmingway's Bistro                                  Park
                                                                           Avenue
     Twomaytoz, Inc., DBA Cucina Paradiso                                 814 North
                                                                           Boulevard
CLASS Cooper's Hawk Oak Park, LLC, DBA Cooper's Hawk Winery and Restaurant 950 Lake
B-5                                                                        Street
CLASS New Pot Restaurant                                                   727 Lake
B-6                                                                        Street
                                                                           543
     VFJ Enterprises II Inc., DBA Chicago;s Home Of Chicken & Waffles     Madison
                                                                           Street
                                                                           1048
     C. Parlato, LLC, DBA Ciro                                            Pleasant
                                                                           Street
CLASS                                                                      703
B-7   American House Illinois Liquor, LLC DBA American House               Madison
                                                                           Street
CLASS                                                                      6412
C-1   Bond Drug Company of IL, LLC, DBA Walgreens #5235                    Roosevelt
                                                                           Road
                                                                           811
     Bond Drug Company of IL, LLC, DBA Walgreens #11760                   Madison
                                                                           Street
                                                                           6748
     Highland Park CVS #2844                                              Roosevelt
                                                                           Road
                                                                           345
     Highland Park CVS #3163                                              Madison
                                                                           Street
                                                                           7036
     Jewel Food Stores, Inc., DBA Jewel Food Store #3236                  Roosevelt
                                                                           Road
                                                                           438
     Jewel Food Stores, Inc., DBA Jewel Food Store #3288                  Madison
                                                                           Street
     Royale Liquors LLC, DBA Pete's Fresh Market 259 Lake                 259 Lake
                                                                           Street
                                                                           812
     Sugar Beet Food Store Cooperative                                    Madison
                                                                           Street
     Target Corporation                                                   1129 Lake
                                                                           Street
                                                                           483 N.
     Trader Joe's East, Inc., DBA Trader Joe's #697                       Harlem
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           824 S. Oak
     Urban Markets of Oak Park, Inc., DBA Carnival Grocery                Park
                                                                           Avenue
CLASS                                                                      
C-2
CLASS                                                                      
C-3
CLASS                                                                      
C-4
CLASS                                                                      
C-5
CLASS                                                                      
C-6
CLASS Avarom, Inc., DBA Careful Peach Boutique                             1024 North
C-7                                                                        Boulevard
CLASS                                                                      128 S.
C-8   L'Alberello, Inc., DBA Anfora                                        Marion
                                                                           Street
CLASS Comedy Plex, LLC, DBA Comedy Plex                                    1128 Lake
D-9                                                                        Street
CLASS                                                                      
D-1
CLASS                                                                      
D-2
CLASS Berggren Development Corporation, DBA The Tennis and Fitness Centre  301 Lake
D-3                                                                        Street
CLASS                                                                      
D-4
CLASS                                                                      
D-5
CLASS                                                                      
D-6
CLASS The Oak Park Public Library                                          834 Lake
D-7                                                                        Street
                                                                           3651 W.
CLASS                                                                      Fullerton
D-8   Hospitality Services Group, LLC                                      Ave.,
                                                                           Chicago,
                                                                           IL 60647
                                                                           17W693
                                                                           Roosevelt
     La Cuisine Catering Company                                          Road, #3,
                                                                           Oakbrook
                                                                           Terrace,
                                                                           Illinois
                                                                           235 E.
                                                                           Irving
     Sweet Baby Ray's Barbecue Wood Dale, LLC, DBA True Cuisine Catering  Park Road,
                                                                           Wood Dale,
                                                                           IL 60191
CLASS                                                                      
D-9
CLASS                                                                      239
D-10- Atticus Edison, LLC, DBA Val's Halla Records                         Harrison
2                                                                          Street
CLASS                                                                      1010
D-11  OPRF Civic Theatre DBA Madison Street Theatre                        Madison
                                                                           Street
CLASS                                                                      
D-12
CLASS                                                                      
D-13
CLASS Lake Street Brewing, LLC                                             1 Lake
D-14                                                                       Street
CLASS                                                                      6806
D-15  Noble Kinsman Brewing Company, LLC, DBA Kinslahger Brewing Company   Roosevelt
                                                                           Road
CLASS JD North Blvd Holdings LLC, DBA                                      1026 North
D-16                                                                       Boulevard
     The Beer Shop                                                        1026 North
                                                                           Boulevard
CLASS MRM Three, LLC, DBA Spilt Milk                                       811 South
D-17                                                                       Boulevard
                                                                           211
     1759 W. Grand, LLC, DBA Publican Quality Bread                       Harrison
                                                                           Street
CLASS Tivoli Enterprises, Inc., DBA Lake Theatre                           1022 Lake
D-18                                                                       Street
CLASS                                                                      808 S.
E-1   Catholic Bishop of Chicago For Ascension, DBA Ascension Church       East
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           1045
     Catholic Bishop of Chicago For St. Giles Parish                      Columbian
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           1010 Lake
     Downtown Oak Park                                                    Street,
                                                                           #114
     Fenwick High School                                                  505
                                                                           Washington
     Good Shepherd Lutheran Church                                        611
                                                                           Randolph
     Oak Park Arts District Business Association                          Harrison
                                                                           Street
                                                                           218
     Oak Park Park District                                               Madison
                                                                           Street
                                                                           141 S. Oak
     Oak Park-River Forest Chamber of Commerce                            Park
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           1139
     Oak Park-River Forest Day Nursery                                    Randolph
                                                                           Street
     Oak Park-River Forest Infant Welfare Society                         330 Lake
                                                                           Street
                                                                           1235 N.
     Oak Park Temple                                                      Harlem
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           520 S.
     Rush Oak Park Hospital                                               Maple
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           34 N.
     St. Catherine - St. Lucy                                             Austin
                                                                           Boulevard
                                                                           545 S.
     St. Christopher's Episcopal Church                                   East
                                                                           Avenue
                                                                           188 S. Oak
     St. Edmund Church                                                    Park
                                                                           Avenue
     Seven Generations Ahead                                              642 S.
                                                                           Lombard
     Unity Temple - Unitarian                                             875 Lake
                                                                           Street
CLASS                                                                      218
E-3   Park District of Oak Park                                            Madison
                                                                           Street
 
(Ord. 2009-0-063, 9-8-2009; amd. Ord. 2009-0-064, 9-8-2009; Ord. 2009-0-065, 9-
8-2009; Ord. 2009-0-066, 9-8-2009; Ord. 2010-0-01, 1-4-2010; Ord. 2010-0-04, 2-
1-2010; Ord. 2010-0-05, 2-1-2010; Ord. 2010-0-06, 2-1-2010; Ord. 2010-0-17, 5-
3-2010; Ord. 2010-0-18, 5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-0-36, 6-7-2010; Ord. 2010-0-42, 7-
6-2010; Ord. 2010-0-43, 7-6-2010; Ord. 2010-0-67, 10-18-2010; Ord. 2010-0-94,
11-22-2010; Ord. 2010-0-95, 11-22-2010; Ord. 2011-0-7, 2-7-2011; Ord. 2011-0-
19, 3-7-2011; Ord. 2011-0-29, 6-6-2011; Ord. 2011-0-30, 6-6-2011; Ord. 2011-0-
31, 6-6-2011; Ord. 2011-0-36, 6-20-2011; Ord. 2011-0-37, 6-20-2011; Ord. 2011-
0-61, 10-3-2011; Ord. 2011-0-62, 10-3-2011; Ord. 2011-0-70, 11-7-2011; Ord.
2012-0-16, 3-5-2012; Ord. 2012-0-37, 7-16-2012; Ord. 2012-0-49, 9-4-2012; Ord.
2012-0-58, 10-1-2012; Ord. 2012-0-69, 11-19-2012; Ord. 2013-0-02, 1-7-2013;
Ord. 2013-0-15, 2-4-2013; Ord. 2013-0-27, 3-18-2013; Ord. 2013-0-30, 4-1-2013;
Ord. 2013-0-31, 4-1-2013; Ord. 2013-0-32, 4-1-2013; Ord. 2013-0-37, 4-1-2013;
Ord. 2013-0-39, 5-20-2013; Ord. 2013-0-40, 5-20-2013; Ord. 2013-0-46, 6-17-
2013; Ord. 2013-0-51, 7-22-2013; Ord. 2013-0-55, 8-19-2013; Ord. 2013-0-65, 11-
4-2013; Ord. 2014-0-01, 1-13-2014; Ord. 2014-0-04, 2-3-2014; Ord. 2014-0-05, 2-
3-2014; Ord. 2014-0-18, 4-7-2014; Ord. 2014-0-38, 7-21-2014; Ord. 2014-0-45, 8-
4-2014; Ord. 2014-0-46, 8-4-2014; Ord. 2014-0-52A, 9-2-2014; Ord. 2014-0-53, 9-
2-2014; Ord. 2014-0-67, 10-6-2014; Ord. 2014-0-68, 10-6-2014; Ord. 2014-0-88,
11-17-2014; Ord. 2014-0-89, 11-17-2014; Ord. 2014-0-90, 11-17-2014; Ord. 15-
060, 2-18-2015; Ord. 15-073, 3-16-2015; Ord. 15-090, 4-20-2015; Ord. 15-091, 4-
20-2015; Ord. 15-092, 4-20-2015; Ord. 15-111, 6-1-2015; Ord. 15-126, 7-20-2015;
Ord. 15-127, 7-20-2015; Ord. 15-125, 8-3-2015; Ord. 15-153, 9-8-2015; Ord. 15-
173, 10-19-2015; Ord. 16-006, 2-1-2016; Ord. 16-018, 2-16-2016; Ord. 16-027, 3-
7-2016; Ord. 16-042, 4-18-2016; Ord. 16-059, 5-16-2016; Ord. 16-077, 6-6-2016;
Ord. 16-102, 9-6-2016; Ord. 16-135, 11-7-2016; Ord. 16-136, 11-7-2016; Ord. 16-
137, 11-7-2016; Ord. 16-162, 12-5-2016; Ord. 17-182, 2-6-2017; Ord. 17-191, 3-
6-2017; Ord. 17-198, 4-17-2017; Ord. 17-199, 4-17-2017; Ord. 17-202, 5-15-2017;
Ord. 17-213, 5-15-2017; Ord. 17-220, 6-5-2017; Ord. 17-221, 6-5-2017; Ord. 17-
234, 7-17-2017; Ord. 17-249, 9-5-2017; Ord. 17-250, 9-5-2017; Ord. 17-251, 9-5-
2017; Ord. 17-294, 11-6-2017; Ord. 17-313, 11-20-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; Ord. 17-
319, 12-11-2017; Ord. 18-337, 1-16-2018; Ord. 18-338, 1-16-2018; Ord. 18-348,
3-5-2018; Ord. 18-371, 5-21-2018; Ord. 18-383, 7-9-2018; Ord. 18-400, 9-4-2018;
Ord. 18-418, 10-1-2018; Ord. 18-419, 10-1-2018; Ord. 18-420, 10-1-2018; Ord.
18-458, 12-10-2018; Ord. 18-459, 12-10-2018; Ord. 19-11, 1-28-2019; Ord. 19-23,
3-4-2019; Ord. 19-24, 3-4-2019; Ord. 19-58, 6-3-2019; Ord. 19-61, 9-3-2019;
Ord. 19-76, 9-16-2019; Ord. 20-005, 1-13-2020; Ord. 20-006, 1-13-2020; Ord. 20-
074, 9-8-2020; Ord. 20-075, 9-8-2020; Ord. 20-076, 9-8-2020; Ord. 20-095, 10-
19-2020; Ord. 20-124, 11-16-2020; Ord. 20-125, 11-16-2020; Ord. 21-37, 4-19-
2021; Ord. 21-38, 4-19-2021; Ord. 21-44, 5-24-2021; Ord. 21-49, 6-24-2021; Ord.
21-50, 6-24-2021; Ord. 21-64, 9-20-2021; Ord. 21-65, 9-20-2021; Ord. 21-66, 9-
20-2021; Ord. 21-68, 9-20-2021; Ord. 21-69, 9-20-2021; Ord. 21-94, 12-6-2021;
Ord. 21-95, 12-6-2021; Ord. 22-20, 3-21-2022; Ord. 22-41, 5-2-2022; Ord. 22-44,
5-2-2022; Ord. 2022-59, 9-6-2022; Ord. 2022-82, 11-7-2022; Ord. 23-34, 5-15-
2023; Ord. 23-35, 5-15-2023; Ord. 23-67, 7-5-2023; Ord. 23-68, 7-5-2023; Ord.
23-85, 7-31-2023; Ord. 23-104, 11-6-2023; Ord. 23-105, 11-6-2023; Ord. 24-112,
3-5-2024; Ord. 24-116, 4-11-2024; Ord. 24-117, 4-11-2024; Ord. 24-119, 4-11-
2024; Ord. 24-120, 4-30-2024; Ord. 24-121, 4-30-2024; Ord. 24-121, 4-30-2024;
Ord. 24-140, 7-9-2024; Ord. 24-141, 7-9-2024; Ord. 24-151, 9-16-2024; Ord. 24-
106, 1-28-2025; Ord. 24-107, 1-28-2025; Ord. 25-132, 3-11- 2025)
CHAPTER 4
AMBULANCES
Ambulance Regulations   1
ARTICLE 1
AMBULANCE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Definitions
4-1-2: License Required
4-1-3: Ownership
4-1-4: Application and Notice
4-1-5: License Fee; Different Locations
4-1-6: Village Ambulance Services; Fees
4-1-7: Sanitation and Safety Standards; Required Equipment
4-1-8: Inspections
4-1-9: Insurance; License Suspension
4-1-10: Attendant - License; Training Requirement; Examination
4-1-11: Renewal of License
4-1-12: Consent of Injured Person
4-1-13: Transportation of Deceased Persons Made Unlawful
4-1-14: Traffic Laws
4-1-15: Fair Employment Practices; Unlawful to Discriminate in Providing
Service
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
AMBULANCE means any motor vehicle, as defined in the motor vehicle law of the
State of Illinois, that is especially designed or constructed, and is intended
to be used for, and is maintained or operated for, transportation of patients.
ATTENDANT means a person trained and/or qualified in the operation of an
ambulance and care of patients, whether or not the attendant also serves as a
driver.
ATTENDANT-DRIVER means any person who is qualified as an attendant and also
qualified as a driver.
PATIENT means an individual who is sick, injured, wounded or otherwise
incapacitated or helpless, or under the care of a licensed physician.
4-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or maintain any ambulance within the Village without
first obtaining a license therefor; provided, however that no license shall be
required for the following:
   A.   An ambulance, or for the driver, attendant, or attendant-driver of an
ambulance, which is rendering assistance to licensed ambulances in the case of
major catastrophe or emergency with which the licensed ambulances of the
Village of Oak Park are insufficient or unable to cope;
   B.   An ambulance which is operated from a location or headquarters outside
of the Village in order to transport patients who are picked up beyond the
Village limits to locations within the Village, but no such outside ambulance
shall be used to pick up patients anywhere in the Village of Oak Park unless it
is licensed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and unless the
patient desiring transportation has specifically engaged such outside ambulance
by prearrangement;
   C.   The provisions of this Section shall not apply to ambulances operated
by a state, county, municipal or other governmental agency.
4-1-3: OWNERSHIP:
No person shall advertise or otherwise hold himself out as being engaged in the
business of operating or maintaining an ambulance service unless he shall
actually own or lease, operate and maintain vehicles used in the said business.
Any change of ownership of a licensed ambulance shall terminate the license and
shall require a new application and a new license, and conformance with all the
requirements of this Chapter as upon original licensing.
4-1-4: APPLICATION AND NOTICE:
Application for ambulance license shall be made in writing, signed and sworn to
by the applicant or, if applicant is a corporation, by its duly authorized
agent, upon forms prescribed by the Village Clerk. The application shall
contain the full name, Oak Park business address, residence address and
business and residence telephone numbers of applicant and owner of ambulance;
the trade or other fictitious name, if any, under which applicant does business
and proposes to do business; the training and experience of applicant in the
transportation and care of patients; description of each ambulance, including
make, model, year of manufacture, motor and chassis number, current State
license number; length of time in service, color scheme, insignia, name,
monogram or other distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate the
applicant's ambulance. In addition, applicant shall state the place or places
from which it is intended or desired to operate, or maintain an ambulance,
giving full description of the premises as well as the location of the same.
Every person licensed and operating any ambulance under the provisions of this
Chapter shall display on the vehicle a metal plate or other suitable emblem
having stamped or plainly marked thereon the word "AMBULANCE" in lettering not
less than three inches (3") on both sides.
It shall be the duty of every licensee under this Chapter to notify the Village
Clerk whenever any change in his address is made. Any notice required to be
given to a licensee shall be sufficient if addressed to the last address
recorded in the office of the Village Clerk.
4-1-5: LICENSE FEE; DIFFERENT LOCATIONS:
The annual license fee for each ambulance required to be licensed hereunder
shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). Any license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall entitle the licensee to engage in the business of operating an ambulance
service only at and from the place designated in such license; no such license
shall issue unless there is to be at least one licensed ambulance actually
operated from or maintained at that location. (1981 Code)
4-1-6: VILLAGE AMBULANCE SERVICES; FEES:
   A.   Fees: The ambulance services of the Oak Park Fire Department shall
convey or cause to be conveyed a sick or injured person, in emergency cases,
only from the place within the Village where such individual was overcome by
sickness or from the scene of an accident within the Village in which he or she
was injured to the nearest hospital in the Village, selected by the patient or
legal guardian, or the nearest hospital which specializes in treating certain
illnesses, or injuries or patients as and when necessary. The above limitations
shall not apply to Fire Department ambulances when assisting other
municipalities in emergency situations.
   B.   Ambulance Service Fee: A fee for residents and nonresidents ambulance
services shall be charged to all recipients of ambulance services provided by
the Oak Park Fire Department as set forth in this section, and all recipients
of ambulance services hereunder who have insurance for such services shall
promptly submit a claim therefor to their insurance company to reimburse the
Village for such fee.
   C.   Medicare/Medicaid: Ambulance charges for Medicare and Medicaid
recipients shall be processed in accordance with current Federal regulations.
In the event that charges for ambulance services exceed the Medicare/Medicaid
reimbursement and create a gap in the recoverable charges, the outstanding
charges shall be handled and documented as "write offs" and be reflected in the
quarterly and annual reports received from the Village of Oak Park's ambulance
billing vendor.
   D.   Fee Schedule: The fees assessed to residents and nonresidents for the
services set forth in this section provided by the Oak Park Fire Department
shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Charge Type         Resident Fee    Nonresident Fee
Ambulance transport $1,400.00       $1,800.00
Citizen assist      $300.00         $400.00
Mileage             $15.00 per mile $15.00 per mile
Mortuary service    $225.00         $300.00
 
   E.   Fee Increases: The fee set forth in the table above for ambulance
transport shall be increased annually, effective January 1 of each year,
without further Village Board action pursuant to the Medicare reimbursement
rate or three percent (3%), whichever is greater. The fees set forth in the
table for citizen assist and mortuary service shall be increased three percent
(3%) annually, effective January 1 of each year, without further Village Board
action.
   F.   Service To Residents: When ambulance or other services set forth in
this section are rendered by the Village to residents, such persons shall not
be billed for the remaining charges which may exist once final payment has been
received from all insurance providers of the resident.
   G.   Service To Non-Residents: When ambulance or other services set forth in
this section are rendered by the Village to nonresidents, such persons shall be
billed for the remaining charges which may exist once final payment has been
received from all insurance providers of the non-resident. Unpaid balances may
be assigned to a debt-collection agency of the Village's choice or other
alternative method of debt- collection.
   H.   Definitions:
   AMBULANCE TRANSPORT: The transport by ambulance of a patient from a pick up
location to the hospital facility where the patient is transported.
   CITIZEN ASSIST: A service call response for the same individual that exceeds
three (3) calls for service within a three (3) consecutive month period.
   MILEAGE CHARGE: A charge per mile from the patient pick up location to the
hospital facility where the patient is transported.
   MORTUARY SERVICE: A charge to provide transport of an expired patient to a
mortuary facility.
   NONRESIDENT: Any person whose permanent address of residence is outside the
Village's corporate limits.
   RESIDENT: Any person whose permanent address is within the Village's
corporate limits. (Ord. 17-314, 11-20-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
4-1-7: SANITATION AND SAFETY STANDARDS; REQUIRED EQUIPMENT:
Each ambulance shall, at all times when in use as such, be suitable for the
transportation of patients from the standpoint of health, sanitation and
safety, and be maintained in suitable premises; contain equipment conforming
with the standards, requirements and regulations provided for herein, which
equipment shall be in proper condition for such use; currently comply with all
applicable laws and local ordinances relating to health, sanitation and safety;
be equipped with such lights, sirens and special markings to designate it as an
ambulance; and be equipped with approved safety belts for the driver and for a
passenger in the front seat, if such seat is provided.
Required equipment in each ambulance shall include, at all times when the
ambulance is in use as such, equipment adequate for dressing wounds, splinting
fractures, controlling hemorrhages, administering oxygen and adequate to comply
with the September 1977 edition of "Minimal Equipment for Ambulances", adopted
by the American College of Surgeons.
Upon completion of the transportation of the patient under nondisaster
conditions, there shall be a complete change of linen in the ambulance and no
equipment shall be reused without full sterilization. (1981 Code)
4-1-8: INSPECTIONS:
No vehicle shall be licensed as an ambulance until it has been inspected by the
Village and found to be in a safe operating condition.
Further, the Village shall cause an investigation of the premises and ambulance
vehicle and vehicles named and described in such application for the purpose of
determining the fitness and suitability of such premises and vehicle for such
business from a sanitary standpoint, and determining that ambulance equipment
complies with all the requirements set out in this chapter.
In case the applicant is at the time of such application operating or
maintaining an ambulance, the Village shall make an investigation to determine
whether or not the applicant has complied with the State laws and provisions of
this Code relating to health, sanitation and safety so as to properly safeguard
the lives and health of the employees engaged therein and patients transported;
and no license shall issue until the Director of Health shall certify in
writing to the Village Clerk that the Department of Health has found compliance
with all the standards prescribed in this chapter.
Each licensed ambulance, its equipment and the premises designated in the
application and all records relating to its maintenance and operation as such,
shall be open to inspection by the Village, and the Village Health Department
is hereby authorized and empowered to inspect the same, no less than twice a
year; and to transmit to the Village Clerk a copy of each inspection report.
Each ambulance operator licensed pursuant to this chapter, shall maintain at
his place of business a permanent record which shall be available for
inspection by the Village, listing the dates of all trips, the time of the
trip, name of the patient, the person requesting the service, the location of
the pick up and discharge, together with the fee charged. (1981 Code)
4-1-9: INSURANCE; LICENSE SUSPENSION:
Every ambulance license holder shall carry public liability and property damage
insurance, and workers' compensation insurance for employees, with solvent and
responsible insurers authorized to transact insurance business in the State of
Illinois and qualified to assume the risks for amounts hereinafter set forth
under the laws of Illinois, to secure payment of any loss or damage resulting
from occurrence arising out of or caused by the operation or use of any of the
ambulances belonging to licensee.
The public liability insurance policy or contract may cover one or more
ambulance vehicles, but each ambulance shall be insured for the sum of at least
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for property damage and the amount of at
least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries to, or death of,
any one person, and for the sum of at least two hundred thousand dollars
($200,000.00) for injuries to, or death of, more than one person, in any one
accident. Every insurance policy or contract for such insurance, shall provide
for the payment and satisfaction of any final judgment rendered against the
owner, or any person driving any insured vehicle; and that suit may be brought
in any court of competent jurisdiction upon such policy or contract by any
person having claims arising from the operation or use of such ambulances; it
shall contain a description of each ambulance vehicle insured, manufacturer's
name and serial number, the state license number, and the ambulance license
number.
All insurance policies required by this section or copies thereof certified by
the insurers or sureties, shall be filed with the Village Clerk and no
insurance or bond shall be subject to cancellation, except on thirty (30) days'
previous notice to the Village Clerk. If any insurance or bond is canceled or
permitted to lapse for any reason, the Village Clerk shall suspend the license
for the ambulance affected for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, to
permit the insurance to be supplied in compliance with the provisions of this
section. If such other insurance is not supplied within the period of
suspension of the license, the President shall revoke the license of such
ambulance.
Every ambulance licensee shall pay each judgment or award for the loss or
damage caused in the operation or use of an ambulance rendered against such
licensee by any court or commission of competent jurisdiction within ninety
(90) days after its judgment or award shall have become final, and not stayed
by supersedeas. If any such judgment shall not be so paid, the President shall
revoke the license of the ambulance firm concerned. (1981 Code)
4-1-10: ATTENDANT - LICENSE; TRAINING REQUIREMENT; EXAMINATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive an ambulance, or to act as an
attendant on an ambulance, or to participate in the transportation and care of
patients in any manner whatsoever on any public way from place to place
originating within the corporate limits of the Village without first having
obtained a license as an attendant, or as an attendant-driver.
All applications for ambulance attendants or attendant-driver license shall be
made in the same manner as application for public chauffeur license, and shall:
contain a statement of applicant's training and experience in transportation
and care of patients; state whether applicant has previously been licensed as a
driver, chauffeur, attendant or attendant-driver, and if so, when and where;
and further, state whether or not such license has ever been revoked or
suspended in any jurisdiction and for what cause.
The Village Clerk shall not issue an attendant or attendant-driver license
unless applicant for such license shall have a currently valid certificate
evidencing successful completion of a course of training equivalent to that
provided by the Fire Department of the City of Chicago, the course content of
which has been approved by the Oak Park Director of Health. No certification
shall be issued until the applicant has successfully passed an appropriate
examination following the course of training. An applicant who holds a current
Chicago license, or who is a registered EMT shall be considered adequately
trained. (1981 Code)
4-1-11: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
The Village Clerk may renew any license issued pursuant to this chapter, from
year to year, upon application made on the form furnished by the Village Clerk
which shall state the name and Oak Park address of applicant, date upon which
his original license was granted and number thereof. No ambulance license shall
be renewed unless the Village Clerk has on file a current satisfactory
inspection report. (1981 Code)
4-1-12: CONSENT OF INJURED PERSON:
No sick or injured person shall be conveyed against his will by any private
ambulance service from the place where he was overcome by sickness or from the
scene of the accident in which he was injured, provided, that if such sick or
injured person is unable to give any direction in his own behalf and there is
no immediate relative present to direct where he shall be taken, such sick or
injured person shall be conveyed to the nearest hospital in the Village of Oak
Park, or the nearest specialty hospital when necessary. (1981 Code)
4-1-13: TRANSPORTATION OF DECEASED PERSONS MADE UNLAWFUL:
Any apparently deceased patient shall not be transferred by ambulance to any
location other than the closest hospital where a physician can certify death.
Police must be notified. No ambulance can be used to transport bodies to
funeral homes. (1981 Code)
4-1-14: TRAFFIC LAWS:
The driver of an ambulance, when responding to an emergency call or while
transporting a patient, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section,
subject to the conditions herein stated, and only when such driver has
reasonable grounds to believe that an emergency in fact exists requiring the
exercise of such privileges.
The driver of an ambulance may park or stand, irrespective of the otherwise
applicable provisions of law, ordinance or regulation, proceed past a red or
stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for
safe vehicle operation; disregard laws, ordinances or regulations governing
direction, movement, or turning in specified directions; provided, however,
that no ambulance shall exceed the lawful speed limit unless so directed by a
licensed physician, or unless ordered to do so by a police officer.
The exemptions herein granted shall apply only when the driver of said vehicle,
while in motion, sounds audible signal by siren as may be reasonably necessary,
and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying an
oscillating, rotating or flashing red or red and white beam visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to
the front of such vehicle.
The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an ambulance from duty
to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such
provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard
for the safety of others. (1981 Code)
4-1-15: FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES; UNLAWFUL TO DISCRIMINATE IN PROVIDING
SERVICE:
There shall be no discrimination against any person employed or seeking
employment with an ambulance operator licensed under this chapter, on account
of sex, race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry; likewise it shall
be unlawful for any ambulance operator, attendant, or attendant-driver licensed
under this chapter to refuse aid or transportation to any patient on account of
race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 5
ANIMALS
Purpose And Definitions   1
Administration Of Animal Program   2
Impounding Procedures   3
Owner's Duties   4
Prohibited Activities Of Owners And Others   5
Dealers In Household Pets   6
Veterinary Hospitals   7
ARTICLE 1
PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Purpose Of Chapter
5-1-2: Definitions
5-1-1: PURPOSE OF CHAPTER:
It is the purpose of the Village of Oak Park to protect animals from neglect
and abuse, to protect residents from annoyance and injury by animals, to assist
in providing housing for animals in the custody of the Village, to cover the
cost of licensing and caring for animals and to establish a program to
discourage the excessive multiplication of animals. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
ANIMAL: Every living creature, domestic or wild, not including human beings.
ANIMAL CONTROL ACT: The animal control act of the state of Illinois, 510
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., as amended.
ANIMAL CONTROL CENTER: A place designated by the Village Manager for the
housing of animals in the temporary custody of the Village.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: A person performing duties prescribed by the Village
Manager to effectuate this chapter, including the power and authority to issue
citations for any violations of this chapter.
ANIMAL UNDER RESTRAINT: Any animal:
   A.   Either secured by a leash or lead;
   B.   Within the premises of its owner, or confined within a crate or cage,
or confined within a vehicle, or on the premises of another person with the
consent of that person, provided that any animal not secured by a leash or lead
and that is outdoors on the premises of its owner or outdoors on the premises
of another person with consent of that person shall not be considered under
restraint unless the animal is on a fenced portion of the premises and the
fence is: 1) constructed to keep the animal from reaching through the fence;
and 2) of sufficient height appropriate to the size of the animal to prevent
the animal from jumping or reaching over the fence; or
   C.   Within an area specifically designated by the Park District of Oak Park
or by the Village as a dog park, or as an animal exercise run, provided that
the animal is under the control of a competent person.
BITE: Seizure with teeth or jaws of an animal so that the skin of a human being
or an animal has been pierced or broken and further includes contact of the
saliva of the biting animal with any break or abrasion of the skin of the human
being or animal bitten.
CAT: Any live male or female cat (Felis catus).
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any animal which meets any one of the following conditions:
   A.   Any animal which bites, inflicts injury on, kills or otherwise attacks
a human being or domestic animal without provocation on any public or private
property; or
   B.   Any animal which on more than one occasion, without provocation, chases
or approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack, on any public
property or in any place outside or over the boundaries of its owner's
property; or
   C.   Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
dog or other animal fighting or any animal trained for dog or other animal
fighting; or
   D.   Any dog that is used as a guard dog; or
   E.   Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog under state law.
DAYS: Any reference to the term "days" set forth in this article shall mean
calendar days.
DOG: Any live male or female dog (Canis familiaris).
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: Any animal, except birds or fish, the ownership of which
within the Village is not prohibited under section
5-4-10 of this chapter.
EUTHANASIA: Death brought about by any method which produces instant loss of
consciousness and results in painless death.
GUARD DOG: Any dog used primarily for the purpose of defending, patrolling, or
protecting property or life at a commercial establishment, not including any
dog that is the property of any local, state or federal government body or
agency.
IMPOUNDED: To be taken into the custody of the Village.
LICENSED DOG: Any dog four (4) months of age or older for which the owner can
produce proof of having paid the license for the current year.
MICROCHIP: A passive electronic device that is injected into an animal by means
of a prepackaged sterilized implanting device for purposes of identification or
recovery.
NEUTERED ANIMAL: A male or female animal treated by a licensed veterinarian to
render it incapable of reproduction.
OWNER: Any person who has: a) a right of property in the animal, b) keeps an
animal, c) has an animal in his or her care or custody, or d) who knowingly
permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him or her and
feeds an animal.
PET: Any species of domesticated animals customarily regarded as suited to live
within an abode used for human occupancy.
PROVOCATION: A wilful trespass or other tort, or committing or attempting to
commit a crime upon premises occupied by the owner of an animal or the
tormenting, abusing or assaulting of an animal.
RUN AT LARGE: To be free of restraint off the premises of the owner.
SERVICE ANIMAL: An animal trained in obedience and task skills to meet the
needs of a disabled person as defined in the human care for animals act of the
state of Illinois, 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 70/2.01C, as amended,
including dogs that are individually trained to do work or perform tasks for
the benefit of a person with a disability, including a physical, sensory,
psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental disability.
SEVERE INJURY: Any physical injury that results in death, loss of soft tissue,
a broken bone, hospitalization admittance, impairment of any bodily function,
disfiguring laceration, laceration requiring sutures or cosmetic surgery or
lacerations or puncture wounds caused by more than one bite or a bite to the
face of a child under the age of sixteen (16).
SPECIAL ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height,
forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young
children, and suitable to confine a vicious or dangerous dog in conjunction
with other measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as
tethering of a vicious dog within the enclosure. Such enclosure shall be
securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and
shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure.
STERILIZATION OR STERILIZE: The rendering of an animal unable to reproduce by
altering the animal's reproductive organs. Sterilization includes the spaying
of a female dog or cat, or the neutering of a male dog or cat.
STRAY ANIMAL: Any animal not under restraint and not in the presence of its
owner.
VACCINATION: The injection of an antirabies vaccine as approved by the Illinois
department of agriculture, with verification thereof consisting of a current
certificate and current tag issued in accordance with the laws of the state of
Illinois.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL: Any place used for the treatment of animals operated by a
veterinarian and licensed by the state of Illinois.
VILLAGE MANAGER: The Village Manager or the Village Manager's designee. (Ord.
15-138, 8-3-2015)
ARTICLE 2
ADMINISTRATION OF ANIMAL PROGRAM
SECTION:
5-2-1: Administration
5-2-2: Authority Of Animal Control Officers And Police Officers
5-2-1: ADMINISTRATION:
The Village Manager or the Village Manager's designee is responsible for the
administration of this chapter. The Village Manager shall establish such animal
control centers as are necessary to effectuate this chapter. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-
2015)
5-2-2: AUTHORITY OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS AND POLICE OFFICERS:
Animal control officers and/or police officers shall enforce this chapter. An
animal control officer shall have control over the animal control center; shall
have authority to issue citations for violations of this chapter; and shall
wear a uniform and a numbered badge identifying the person as an animal control
officer. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
ARTICLE 3
IMPOUNDING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Impounding Animals
5-3-2: Record Of Impounded Animals
5-3-3: Notice To Owner Of Impoundment
5-3-4: Redemption Of Impounded Animals
5-3-5: Impoundment Of Dogs And Cats; Compulsory Microchip Implantation
5-3-6: Disposition Of Animals Not Redeemed
5-3-7: Impounded Animals; Interference
5-3-8: Unwanted Pets
5-3-9: Removal Of Neglected Animal
5-3-1: IMPOUNDING ANIMALS:
An animal control officer or police officer may impound in an animal control
center any stray animal, unrestrained animal, animal running at large or any
animal maintained in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-3-2: RECORD OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
A record shall be made of all impounded animals, entering the breed, color and
gender, whether licensed or not, if known, date of impoundment and the name and
address of the owner or keeper, if known. If practicable, vaccinated animals
shall be kept separated from unvaccinated ones. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-3-3: NOTICE TO OWNER OF IMPOUNDMENT:
Immediately upon impoundment of an animal, notice shall be provided to the
owner of the animal if ownership is ascertainable through a current license
tag, microchip or other form of identification. Such notice shall inform the
owner of the procedure to regain custody of the animal. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-3-4: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
   A.   An animal of unknown ownership shall be available for redemption for a
minimum of five (5) days, or for such longer length of time as the Village
Manager may deem necessary to permit location of and redemption by the rightful
owner, except that wild animals which are noxious by their very nature, such as
wild rats, and undomesticated rodents may be euthanized immediately. An animal
whose owner is known to the Village shall be available for redemption for a
minimum or seven (7) days.
   B.   An animal impounded under the provisions of this article may be
redeemed by the owner upon the payment of the following fees and compliance
with the applicable license requirements, including:
      1.   Ten dollars ($10.00) for animals impounded for the first time;
      2.   Twenty five dollars ($25.00) for animals impounded for the second or
subsequent time;
      3.   In addition to the foregoing fees, a fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) for each day the animal has been impounded to reimburse the Village
for boarding costs; and
      4.   Any veterinary fees associated with the care of the animal during
impoundment.
   C.   Once the above referenced owner redemption period has lapsed for an
animal, the animal shall become the property of the Village and the Village is
authorized to place such animal for adoption, place such animal with a humane
society or other agency dedicated to placing animals for adoption or, under
certain prescribed conditions, to dispose of such animal in accordance with the
provisions of section
5-3-6 of this article.
   D.   An animal which has not been redeemed by the owner within the above
stated redemption period shall remain eligible for redemption by the owner upon
payment of the above referenced fees as long as the animal has not been placed
for adoption, placed with another agency or has not otherwise been disposed of
in accordance with section
5-3-6 of this article.
   E.   Calendar days shall be counted as "days" for the purpose of computing
fees authorized under this article. The payment of the fees provided for in
this section shall be in addition to any applicable fines. Any redeemed cat or
dog not inoculated against rabies shall be taken forthwith by the owner to a
licensed veterinarian for a rabies inoculation, and the owner shall be
responsible for the payment of any costs associated with the rabies
inoculation.
   F.   The impoundment period shall not apply to an animal relinquished by its
owner to the Village under owner signature authorizing the Village to make
immediate disposition of the animal at its discretion, nor shall any required
holding period apply to an animal received for impounding in obviously critical
physical condition or for which immediate euthanasia shall be deemed proper for
humane reasons by the Village Manager. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-3-5: IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS AND CATS; COMPULSORY MICROCHIP IMPLANTATION:
   A.   Any impounded dog or cat shall, prior to redemption, have a microchip
implanted pursuant to section 10 of the animal control act, 510 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/10, as amended.
   B.   In addition to all other applicable fees, the cost of the sterilization
and the implantation of the microchip shall be charged to the owner upon
redemption. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-3-6: DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS NOT REDEEMED:
   A.   The Village and its agents and contractors shall make a good faith
effort to place any animal not redeemed, as provided herein, with an
appropriate individual or individuals for adoption or with a humane society or
other agency which has, as one of its primary purposes, the placement of
animals for adoption. Such agencies shall be licensed as required by state and/
or local law. After all reasonable alternatives to place an animal for adoption
have been exhausted, or after the passage of thirty (30) days from impoundment,
whichever is greater, the animal may be destroyed in a humane fashion.
   B.   An unredeemed animal which has been examined by a licensed veterinarian
and found by same to be seriously ill or injured or dangerous, may be
immediately euthanized without regard to the required adoption efforts or time
frames set forth hereinabove.
   C.   Every animal adopted from an animal control center shall be required to
be licensed, inoculated for rabies and spayed or neutered within thirty (30)
days. A deposit sufficient to cover the current cost of inoculation, spaying or
neutering shall be made with the Village. The deposit shall be returned to the
adopting party on receipt of a certification of a licensed veterinarian that
the animal has been so inoculated and spayed or neutered. In the alternative,
the deposit may be applied directly to the payment of the veterinarian's
charges. If these requirements are not fulfilled, the animal shall be
reimpounded. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-3-7: IMPOUNDED ANIMALS; INTERFERENCE:
No unauthorized person shall interfere with the impounding of, or shall
release, any animal that has been impounded by the Village. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-
2015)
5-3-8: UNWANTED PETS:
No owner of an animal shall abandon an animal. Oak Park residents may assign
unwanted pets to the custody of the Village upon the payment of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each animal. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-3-9: REMOVAL OF NEGLECTED ANIMAL:
   A.   Whenever an animal control officer or police officer shall determine:
1) that any animal is kept within a building or upon any premises without food,
water, shelter, or proper care and attention for a period of time sufficient
within his or her judgment to cause undue discomfort or suffering, and the
owner cannot be located after reasonable search, or if the owner shall be known
to be absent due to injury, illness, incarceration, eviction, or other
involuntary circumstance; or 2) that any animal is kept at a residence under
such conditions that endanger the public health, safety and welfare, or the
safety and welfare of the animal, it shall be the duty of the Village Manager
to take the necessary legal steps to enter or to cause to have entered such
building or premises to take possession and remove such animal to an animal
control center.
   B.   The animal control center shall exercise due caution for the welfare
and temporary safekeeping of any animal so removed. After due notification to
the owner, or, if the owner cannot be located or contacted, after reasonable
effort by the animal control center, any animal so removed and unredeemed shall
become the property of the Village and shall be disposed of in the discretion
of the animal control center. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
ARTICLE 4
OWNER'S DUTIES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Rabies Vaccination
5-4-2: Animal Bites
5-4-3: Adoption Of State Law By Reference
5-4-4: License Required; Record; License Temporarily Waived; Exempt Owners;
Fine
5-4-5: Animal Care
5-4-6: Miscellaneous Offenses
5-4-7: Responsibility For Removal Of Excreta; Fine
5-4-8: Animal Restraint
5-4-9: Unlawful To Run At Large
5-4-10: Prohibited Animals
5-4-11: Limitation On Animals Per Household
5-4-12: Nuisance Defined
5-4-1: RABIES VACCINATION:
It is the duty of all persons owning or keeping either a dog or cat over four
(4) months of age to have such animals vaccinated against rabies. The rabies
vaccination shall be given in an amount sufficient to provide immunities from
rabies for one year and shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian. A
certificate from a licensed veterinarian shall be furnished to the Village. If
the rabies inoculation is effective for a period in excess of one year, the
certificate shall so state. Any person charged with the violation of this
section may avoid prosecution by presenting a certification of inoculation and
paying to the Village the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) within ten (10)
days of the notice of violation. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-4-2: ANIMAL BITES:
   A.   The Village Manager shall cause to be investigated reports of animal
bites. If an animal has bitten a person, the Village Manager shall notify the
owner of the animal and the animal shall be delivered promptly to a licensed
veterinarian who shall confine or cause to be confined such animal as provided
in the animal control act. If the owner is not known, the police officer or
animal control officer shall take such animal promptly to a licensed
veterinarian to be confined, as provided in the animal control act.
   B.   If any animal, such as a mouse, rat, squirrel or any other animal,
bites a person or other animal and subsequently expires, the bite shall be
reported to the Village and the carcass delivered to the Village.
   C.   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any animal
which has bitten any other domestic animal or person to:
      1.   Notify the Village of such bite within twenty four (24) hours of the
bite;
      2.   Subject to subsection
5-4-2A of this section, confine such animal under the observation of a licensed
veterinarian for a period of ten (10) days beginning within twenty four (24)
hours of the biting incident. If, however, a licensed veterinarian is presented
evidence that such animal has been inoculated against rabies within the time
prescribed by law prior to the biting, such animal shall be confined on the
premises of its owner and in a manner which shall prohibit such animal from
biting any other animal or person for a period of ten (10) days; except that,
where the animal bite has caused severe injury or death to a person,
confinement on the owner's premises shall not be permitted.
   D.   After notification by the owner pursuant to subsection
5-4-2A of this section, the Village may impound any animal that has bitten any
other animal or person. The owner shall be responsible for all fees and costs
of impoundment pursuant to section
5-3-4 of this chapter.
   E.   In the event of severe injury or death to a person, the Village shall
immediately impound the animal and the owner shall be responsible for all fees
and costs of impoundment pursuant to section
5-3-4 of this chapter. It further shall be the duty and responsibility of the
owner to have such animal examined by a licensed veterinarian on the first and
tenth day of impoundment or confinement or as soon thereafter as possible;
provided, that the impoundment or confinement of the animal described above
shall not be terminated until examination by a veterinarian.
   F.   Prior to the release of an impounded animal pursuant to this section,
vaccination and license certificates must be presented to the Village.
   G.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal that has bitten any
person to sell, euthanize, inoculate, or give away the animal or to permit or
allow the animal to be taken beyond the limits of the Village during the time
period for rabies observation.
   H.   Any person who violates any other provision of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In addition to any fine that
may be imposed by this section, if the owner fails to make the animal available
for impoundment, the animal shall become the property of the Village. (Ord. 15-
138, 8-3-2015)
5-4-3: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE:
Every owner of an animal in the Village shall comply with the animal control
act, 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., as defined herein, the
provisions of which are adopted by reference, three (3) copies of said act
being on file in the office of the Village Clerk, as provided by law. (Ord. 15-
138, 8-3-2015)
5-4-4: LICENSE REQUIRED; RECORD; LICENSE TEMPORARILY WAIVED; EXEMPT OWNERS;
FINE:
   A.   Any person owning within the Village limits any dog four (4) months of
age or over, or any cat allowed to run at large, four (4) months of age or
over, shall obtain a license for each animal within ten (10) days of acquiring
such animal or becoming a resident of the Village of Oak Park. Written
application for such license shall be made to the Village Manager and shall
state the name, address and telephone number of the owner and the name, breed,
color, age, and gender of such animal, the rabies inoculation certificate
number and date of issuance, and any other information deemed necessary. A
current rabies inoculation certificate for a dog or cat shall be required at
the time of the application for license, which shall certify that the
inoculation is effective on or prior to the date of licensure. In addition, a
certificate shall be required for each cat to be licensed that such cat has
been sterilized. Upon payment of a license fee, the Village Manager shall issue
a memorandum of registry and tag for each animal.
   B.   In the case of a dangerous dog, the Village Manager shall issue a
dangerous dog license which shall be contingent upon the owner's compliance
with this chapter, including any conditions imposed pursuant to section
5-5-5 of this chapter.
   C.   In the event a tag is lost, replacement tags may be purchased from the
Village. No tag shall be transferred from one animal to another. The license
shall expire on April 30 of each calendar year.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal required to be
licensed to keep such animal within the Village unless it wears a collar with
the animal license tag for the current license year attached at all times the
animal is off the premises of the owner, except for the red dangerous animal
license tag, which must be worn by and clearly visible on the dog at all times.
   E.   The Village Manager shall keep a complete registry of all licensed
animals, describing the same by name, species, breed, color and gender, the
name, address, and telephone number of the owner as given, and the number and
date of issuance of each rabies inoculation certificate and license tag. All
licensed dangerous animals shall be clearly identified in the main registry and
shall also be maintained in a separate registry of dangerous animals.
   F.   Except for dangerous animals, animals belonging to nonresidents kept
temporarily within the corporate limits of Oak Park shall be exempt from this
section; provided, however, that such animals have a license from the
jurisdiction of the owner, if required, and that all the other provisions of
this chapter must be complied with.
   G.   Except for dangerous animals, the annual license fees shall be twenty
five dollars ($25.00) for each animal, provided the fee shall be ten dollars
($10.00) for each neutered animal as established by a certificate from a
licensed veterinarian. The annual license fee for each dangerous animal shall
be one hundred dollars ($100.00). There shall be no license fee for dogs used
to assist the blind, or for animals used by law enforcement agencies in the
normal conduct of their activities.
   H.   If the owner of a dangerous dog does not obtain a license and/or rabies
inoculation after receiving notice and/or a citation from the Village for same
within ten (10) days of receipt of such notice or citation, the Village may
impound the animal and seek to have such dangerous animal humanely euthanized.
(Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-4-5: ANIMAL CARE:
An animal owner shall provide the following for each animal:
   A.   Sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and water;
   B.   Adequate shelter and protection from the weather;
   C.   Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; and
   D.   Humane care and treatment. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-4-6: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES:
No owner shall permit or suffer his or her animal to:
   A.   Molest persons or vehicles by chasing or barking or biting;
   B.   Attack other animals;
   C.   Damage property other than that of the owner;
   D.   Bark, whine or howl excessively; or
   E.   Create noxious or offensive odors. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-4-7: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL OF EXCRETA; FINE:
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for removal and sanitary
disposition of any excreta deposited by his animal(s) anywhere in the Village.
When accompanying the animal outside his premises, he shall have on his person
suitable means for the removal of such excreta. Any person charged with a
violation of this section shall be subject to a fine in accordance with section
1-1-5 of this code. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-4-8: ANIMAL RESTRAINT:
   A.   Each owner shall keep and maintain his animal under restraint;
provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any dog being used for
rescue or law enforcement purposes performed by a local, state or federal
governmental agency.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow his or her animal, other
than a cat pursuant to subsection
5-4-9B of this article, to cross outside the property line of its owner to any
extent, including reaching through, over or under a fence, or to keep or allow
his or her animal to be outdoors on an unfenced portion of the owner's
property, unless the animal is leashed and under the control of its owner or
another responsible person or is outdoors in a fenced area on the premises of
another person with consent of that person; provided that any animal not
secured by a leash or lead and that is outdoors on a fenced portion of the
owner's property or outdoors on the premises of another person with consent of
that person shall not be considered under restraint unless the fence is of
sufficient height appropriate to the size of the animal to prevent the animal
from jumping or reaching over the fence.
   C.   Failure to restrain an animal if the animal attacks, bites, threatens,
or jumps on any person without that person's consent, outside the property of
the animal's owner shall be unlawful. The provisions of this section shall be a
positive duty of the owner and the offenses described herein shall be strict
liability offenses.
   D.   Any owner who violates any provision of this section shall be subject
to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) if the violation does not result in severe
injury or death to any person or damage to another person's property. If the
violation results in severe injury or death to any person, the owner shall be
subject to a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and not
more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-4-9: UNLAWFUL TO RUN AT LARGE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for an owner to permit a dog, except on a leash
controlled by the owner, or any other responsible person authorized by the
owner, to use or be upon any public street, sidewalk, parkway, public area or
unenclosed premises within the Village. No leash shall be longer than eight
feet (8') in length.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any cat to run at large, unless neutered and
inoculated for rabies, and wearing a license tag issued for the current year by
the Village.
   C.   Any animal illegally running at large in the Village shall be impounded
in the animal control center. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-4-10: PROHIBITED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to keep any pigs, swine, sheep, cattle, horses, goats or
similar animals, or any naturally wild animals, except birds or fish, within
the Village, except in zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions,
educational institutions, veterinary hospitals, or animal shelters. (Ord. 15-
138, 8-3-2015)
5-4-11: LIMITATION ON ANIMALS PER HOUSEHOLD:
   A.   No person shall keep more than one pigeon, or more than two (2) of the
following: rabbits, guinea pigs, gerbils, or fowl of any kind in the Village,
except as in those circumstances enumerated in section 5-4-10 of this article
or in pet shops.
   B.   No person shall keep or permit more than three (3) dogs to be or remain
in or about any single-family residence (including townhomes), building or lot,
more than two (2) dogs in any dwelling unit of a two (2) or three (3) flat
residential building, or more than two (2) dogs in any dwelling unit of a
multi-family residential building containing four (4) or more dwelling units
within the Village, except as in those circumstances enumerated in section
5-4-10 of this article.
   C.   Where cats are allowed to run at large, no person shall keep or permit
more than two (2) cats to be or remain in or about any single-family residence,
building or lot, or more than one cat in any unit of a multi-family residence;
where cats are not allowed out of doors, no more than four (4) cats shall be
allowed in a single-family residence, building or lot, and no more than two (2)
cats in any unit of a multi-family residence, except as in those circumstances
enumerated in section
5-4-10 of this article.
   D.   Limit on total number of animals (not counting fish) allowed in a
single-family residence is ten (10), and a unit of multi- family residence is
five (5). (Ord. 19-19, 3-18-2019)
5-4-12: NUISANCE DEFINED:
Any animal that repeatedly violates the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a nuisance and said animal may be destroyed in a humane fashion.
(Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
ARTICLE 5
PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES OF OWNERS AND OTHERS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Cruelty To Animals
5-5-2: Unauthorized Removal Of Collars, Tags And Muzzles; Exceptions
5-5-3: Animals Prohibited In Public Buildings And Businesses
5-5-4: Animals Prohibited On School Premises And Village Playgrounds
5-5-5: Dangerous Animals
5-5-6: Dangerous Animals; Violations
5-5-7: Dangerous Animals; Miscellaneous
5-5-8: Diseased Animals
5-5-9: Birds And Squirrels; Harming And Taking Young Or Eggs
5-5-1: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.   No person or owner may abandon, cruelly beat, torment, overload,
overwork, or otherwise abuse animals in a manner to cause unnecessary
suffering.
   B.   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or give away as a pet any rabbit
or fowl which has been dyed, colored, or otherwise treated to impart an
artificial color thereto. Baby chicks, ducklings, goslings, or turtles shall
not be sold, offered for sale, bartered or given away as pets or novelties.
   C.   No person shall give away animals (other than fish) as a prize, or as
an inducement to enter any competition or contest or a place of amusement, or
offer such as an incentive to any business agreement for the purpose of
attracting trade.
   D.   No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed
with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal,
provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own
property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances. (Ord. 15-138,
8-3-2015)
5-5-2: UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF COLLARS, TAGS AND MUZZLES; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a police officer, animal
control officer, licensed veterinarian or owner, to remove the collar, license
tag or muzzle from any dog or cat within the limits of the Village without the
consent of the owner of such animal. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-5-3: ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND BUSINESSES:
It shall be unlawful for any animal, even though on a leash, to be in or enter
any public building, food establishment, or any business except a business for
the sale or treatment of animals or business offering services or goods for
animals, anywhere within the Village during the time that any of said places
are open for use by the public, except for:
   A.   Service animals;
   B.   Dogs used by persons in the employ of recognized local, State or
Federal law enforcement agencies;
   C.   Animals presented in animal exhibits;
   D.   Animals participating in authorized animal obedience training classes;
   E.   Animals kept by the owner or operator of a business establishment; or
   F.   Dogs, other than service animals, in an establishment that maintains a
Village issued craft brew lounge Class D-16 liquor license subject to the
following requirements:
      1.   Any dog must be on a leash at all times and if not on a leash, shall
be immediately removed by the patron with the dog from the premises;
      2.   A patron shall be allowed to bring one dog into the premises;
      3.   Dogs must keep off any furniture on the premises;
      4.   The licensee shall have the right to refuse to serve a patron with a
dog if a patron fails to keep a dog on a leash, fails to exercise reasonable
control over the dog, or the dog behaves in a manner that compromises or
threatens to compromise the health or safety of any person present in the
establishment;
      5.   Only dogs bearing a current Village license required by this Code
shall be permitted in the establishment;
      6.   A sign at least 81/2 inches by 11 inches in size, written in 16-
point font shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment
providing that the establishment permits dogs, that dogs must be on a leash,
dogs must keep off the furniture, only one dog per patron shall be allowed and
any dog entering the establishment must be licensed by the Village;
      7.   All furniture, fixtures and walking surfaces shall be made of hard
surfaces that can be washed with soap and water, hosed down and sanitized on a
regular basis and any dog waste shall be removed and disposed in a covered
waste receptacle and the area sanitized immediately;
      8.   Tables and chairs at which patrons with dogs are seated shall be
cleaned and sanitized after the seating of a patron with a dog;
      9.   The establishment shall immediately notify the Village if a dog with
a patron attacks, bites, or threatens another dog or person or jumps on any
person without that person's consent;
      10.   A dog on the premises shall not be provided any food;
      11.   A dog on the premises shall not have any contact with any food,
food contact surfaces, serving dishes or glasses, utensils, paper products or
any other food service products;
      12.   No establishment employee shall have any contact with a dog on the
premises and a sign shall be posted on the premises in an area viewable by
employees providing notice to employees of said requirement. If an employee has
contact with a dog or a surface touched by a dog, the employee shall
immediately wash his or her hands before continuing to provide any service to
patrons; and
      13.   The Class D-16 licensee shall maintain liability insurance with
limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single
limit or one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and per aggregate,
and shall submit a certificate or policy of insurance as evidence of such
coverage, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State
of Illinois and having a "Best" rating acceptable to the Village. The effective
period of such insurance coverage shall coincide with the period the applicable
license is in effect. (Ord. 18-394, 7-30-2018)
5-5-4: ANIMALS PROHIBITED ON SCHOOL PREMISES AND VILLAGE PLAYGROUNDS:
It shall be unlawful for any animal, even though on a leash to go or be upon
any school premises or Village maintained playground within the Village, or
upon a path or sidewalk extending through or within any school premises or
Village maintained playground within the Village, except for:
   A.   Service animals;
   B.   Dogs used by persons in the employ of recognized law enforcement
governmental agencies;
   C.   Animals presented in animal exhibits; or
   D.   Animals participating in authorized animal obedience training classes.
(Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-5-5: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
   A.   The Village Manager shall have the authority to make a determination
that an animal is a "dangerous animal" as defined pursuant to this chapter, and
to order the owner to comply with any of the measures set forth below for the
protection of public health, safety and welfare.
   B.   Upon receipt of a complaint or other report of an animal bite, attack,
threatening behavior, or other reason to believe an animal may be a dangerous
animal, the Village Manager or an animal control officer shall evaluate the
seriousness of the complaint or report and, if the circumstances warrant, may
conduct an investigation of the facts. Where practicable and readily located,
the investigation shall include interviewing the complainant, the victim, if
any, the animal's owner, any witnesses, observation of the animal and the
scene, and any other information presented by the owner. The investigator then
shall make a written finding of whether an animal is a dangerous animal as
defined pursuant to this chapter and of the basis for that finding. In
addition, if during the course of the investigation, the investigator uncovers
evidence of inhumane treatment of any animal in violation of sections
5-3-9 and
5-4-5 of this chapter and section
5-5-1 of this article, the investigator shall make a written finding of the
specific violation and forward such to the Village Manager. For purposes of
this section, a police report may constitute an investigation and may include a
finding of dangerousness. Based upon the investigator's finding of a dangerous
animal, the Village Manager shall declare in writing whether the animal is a
dangerous animal.
   C.   Where an animal is declared to be a dangerous animal, and the animal
has caused severe injury to any person or other domestic animal, then the
Village Manager may order the humane destruction of the animal, where
appropriate, taking into consideration the severity and the circumstances of
injury. Where an animal is declared to be a dangerous animal, and the animal
has caused death to any person, then the Village Manager shall order the humane
destruction of the animal.
   D.   Subject to subsection
5-5-5I of this section, in all cases where an animal is declared to be a
dangerous animal and the animal is not humanely destroyed, the Village Manager
shall order the owner to comply with the following requirements:
      1.   While on the owner's property, the owner must securely confine the
dangerous animal indoors or within a securely enclosed and locked pen,
structure, or fence, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and
designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen, structure, or fence
must be a minimum of six feet (6') in height and must have secure sides and
top. If it has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into
the ground no less than two feet (2') deep. The enclosure also must be humane
and provide some protection from the elements for the animal. In addition to
the enclosure required by this subsection, the owner shall erect a fence on the
perimeter of that portion of the property where the enclosure is located. The
location and height of the fence shall be approved by the Village Manager. The
enclosure and fence shall be erected within thirty (30) days of the declaration
that the animal is a dangerous animal.
      2.   While off of the owner's property, a dangerous animal must be
muzzled securely to prevent the possibility of biting, restrained by a
substantial chain or leash not exceeding six feet (6') in length, and under the
control of a responsible adult twenty one (21) years of age or older at all
times. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the
animal or impair its vision or respiration but must prevent it from biting any
person or animal.
      3.   Within ten (10) days of the declaration that the animal is a
dangerous animal, the owner, at the owner's expense, shall have an identifying
microchip installed under the animal's skin by a veterinarian.
      4.   Within ten (10) days of the declaration that the animal is a
dangerous animal, the animal shall be sterilized at the owner's expense.
      5.   Within ten (10) days of the declaration that the animal is a
dangerous animal, the owner must procure and maintain in effect liability
insurance, including coverage of claims arising from the conduct of the owner's
animal, in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
for each animal declared dangerous and provide proof of said insurance to the
Village. The insurance shall include a provision requiring the insurer to
notify the Village Manager not less than thirty (30) days prior to cancellation
or lapse of coverage.
   E.   The Village Manager may order the owner to comply with any of the
following requirements, in any combination, where an animal is declared to be a
dangerous animal and the animal is not humanely destroyed:
      1.   The owner must confine the dangerous animal to the secure enclosure
described above in subsection
5-5-5D1 of this section at all times and only allow the animal out under the
conditions set forth in subsection
5-5-5D2 of this section when it is necessary to obtain veterinary care for the
animal, comply with a court order, or where an emergency is declared by a
government agency requiring evacuation of the owner.
      2.   The owner and the animal must complete a course of animal obedience
training approved by the Village Manager.
      3.   The animal shall be permanently barred from the Village limits. The
owner shall provide a statement, verified by affidavit, to the Village Manager
indicating the new location of the animal, and the name and address of the
person having custody of the animal.
      4.   The owner must display a sign in a conspicuous manner on the owner's
premises warning that a dangerous animal is on the premises, which sign
provides in capital letters as follows:
WARNING - DANGEROUS ANIMAL - KEEP AWAY.
   F.   Where the owner's address can be reasonably ascertained, the Village
Manager shall send written notice to the owner, by first class mail, stating
that his or her animal has been declared a dangerous animal, describing the
basis for such declaration by specific behavior and date(s) of occurrence,
setting forth all applicable orders and restrictions imposed reason of such
declaration, and informing the owner of his or her right to appeal such
determination by filing a written request for an appeal hearing within fourteen
(14) days of service of the notice. A notice shall be deemed served on the date
the notice is mailed. A copy of such notice shall be sent to the complainant,
if any. Where the animal has been impounded pursuant to subsection
5-5-5H of this section, such notice shall be sent within thirty (30) days after
such impoundment.
 
   G.   If the owner requests an appeal of the Village Manager's determination,
the Director of Adjudication shall appoint a hearing officer and hold an appeal
hearing, at which all interested parties may present testimony and any other
relevant evidence, within thirty (30) days of the request for an appeal
hearing. The appeal hearing shall be taped or recorded by other appropriate
means. If the hearing officer upholds the Village Manager's determination that
the animal is dangerous, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to satisfy all
requirements set out in subsection
5-5-5D of this section and in the notice. In those cases where the Village
Manager has ordered humane destruction of the dangerous animal, that order
shall not be carried out until seven (7) days after the appeal hearing; if the
owner files an appeal to the circuit court during that time period, that order
shall be stayed until resolution of such appeal.
   H.   Where there is probable cause to believe that an animal is a dangerous
animal, the Village Manager is authorized to impound and hold such animal, at
the owner's expense, pending the investigation and final resolution of any
appeals. Where the animal has caused severe injury or death to any person, the
Village Manager is required to impound and hold such animal, at the owner's
expense, pending the investigation and final resolution of any appeal. In no
event shall a dangerous animal be released to its owner before the owner
obtains a dangerous animal license pursuant to section
5-4-4 of this chapter and complies with this section. The holding period and
impoundment procedures for animals of unknown ownership shall be governed by
section
5-3-4 of this chapter. The Village Manager may in the Manager's discretion
require a deposit in an amount or amounts to be paid by the owner to the
Village in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of impoundment during the
pendency of any investigation and final resolution of any appeals pursuant to
this article.
   I.   Guard dogs and dogs which have been found to be "vicious dogs" under
state law, automatically are required to comply with the requirements of
subsections
5-5-5D1 through D5 of this section without the need for any individualized
declaration or the right to any hearing, except that, to the extent an owner
disputes the fact that his or her animal is used as a guard dog, the hearing
procedure set forth in subsection
5-5-5G of this section shall apply. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-5-6: DANGEROUS ANIMALS; VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Any owner who fails to comply with any of the requirements of sections
5-5-5 and
5-5-7 of this article, or any additional orders of the Village Manager as
authorized by those sections shall be punished by a fine of not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), plus
impoundment of the animal. If the owner fails to make the animal available for
impoundment or fails to come into compliance with any applicable requirements
of this article within seven (7) days after the impoundment of the animal or
such additional time as may be determined by the Village Manager, the animal
shall become the property of the Village.
   B.   Any animal which has been declared a dangerous animal and which: 1) is
seen outside and not confined within the enclosure required by subsection
5-5-5D1 of this article, and not muzzled and under control as required by
section
5-5-5 of this article; or 2) thereafter attacks or injures a person or domestic
animal, shall be impounded by an animal control officer or a police officer, at
the owner's expense, and the Village Manager may order the owner to comply with
any of the alternatives set forth in subsections
5-5-5C and D of this article, including humane destruction of the animal. If
the owner fails to make the animal available for impoundment or fails to come
into compliance with the requirements or orders within seven (7) days after the
impoundment of the animal, the animal shall become the property of the Village.
The owner shall be entitled to notice and an opportunity for a hearing in the
same manner as provided in section
5-5-5 of this article. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-5-7: DANGEROUS ANIMALS; MISCELLANEOUS:
   A.   Every owner of a dangerous animal shall allow inspection of the
required enclosure by the Village Manager.
   B.   All dangerous animals as defined in this chapter are hereby declared to
be a public nuisance; provided that they are lawful if maintained in strict
compliance with the requirements set forth in section
5-5-5 of this article.
   C.   Where an animal has caused severe injury or death to any person, but it
is not found to be a dangerous animal on the grounds that the attack was
provoked, the Village Manager shall advise the owner to comply with the safety
measures set forth in section 5-5-5 of this article in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-5-8: DISEASED ANIMALS:
No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease or an infectious disease
shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place whereby
the health of other animals or man may be affected. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
5-5-9: BIRDS AND SQUIRRELS; HARMING AND TAKING YOUNG OR EGGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or wound or attempt to kill or
wound any squirrel or bird or for any person to take the eggs or young of any
bird within the limits of the Village. (Ord. 15-138, 8-3-2015)
ARTICLE 6
DEALERS IN HOUSEHOLD PETS
SECTION:
5-6-1: License Required
5-6-2: Application; Investigation; Issuance of License
5-6-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of buying, selling, grooming, training
or dealing in animals used as household pets or for domestic purposes without
first obtaining a State and Village license.
5-6-2: APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Any person desiring a license to engage in the business of buying, selling or
dealing in birds, dogs and other small animals used as household pets and for
domestic purposes, shall make written application to the Village Clerk, stating
the name and residence of the applicant and the place at which it is intended
or desired to carry on such business, giving the location as well as a
description of the premises. It shall be the duty of the Director of Public
Health and other appropriate inspection personnel of the Village to cause an
investigation of the premises named and described in such application for the
purpose of determining the fitness and suitability of such premises for such
business. Upon recommendation of the Director of Public Health and other
appropriate personnel, and upon payment by such applicant to the Village Clerk
of the license fee as set out in
Chapter 8 of this Code, on licenses, the Village Clerk shall issue or cause to
be issued to such applicant a license. A valid license certificate shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in such place of business. No license shall be
issued hereunder unless the applicant is in compliance with the Animal Welfare
Act of the State of Illinois, cited earlier.
ARTICLE 7
VETERINARY HOSPITALS
SECTION:
5-7-1: Definition
5-7-2: License - Required
5-7-3: License - Application
5-7-4: License - Investigation of Applicant; Issuance
5-7-5: License - Sanitary Regulations; Suspension
5-7-1: DEFINITION:
A veterinary hospital is defined as any place used for the treatment of animals
operated by a veterinarian licensed by the State of Illinois.
5-7-2: LICENSE - REQUIRED:
No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of a
veterinary hospital without first having obtained a license therefor.
5-7-3: LICENSE - APPLICATION:
Any person desiring to conduct, carry on or operate a veterinary hospital, as
defined in this Chapter, shall make a written application to the Village Clerk
for a license to do so, which shall conform to the general requirements of
Chapter 8 of this Code relating to applications for licenses. Such application
shall be filed with the Village Clerk who shall thereupon transmit it to the
Director of Public Health.
5-7-4: LICENSE - INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; ISSUANCE:
Upon receipt of the application referred to in the preceding Section, the
Director of Public Health shall cause such investigation to be made as in his
judgment is necessary for the issuance of the license. If the Director of
Public Health approves the application, and the applicant has paid the license
fee required by
Chapter 8 of this Code, the Village Clerk shall issue a license required by
this Article to the applicant.
5-7-5: LICENSE - SANITARY REGULATIONS; SUSPENSION:
All veterinary hospitals shall be kept free and clean from decaying food and
from filth of any kind. Every veterinary hospital conducted, maintained or
managed by any person licensed by this Article shall at all times be open to
the inspection of the Director of Public Health, or any duly appointed
assistants or inspectors; the Director of Public Health is hereby authorized
and empowered to inspect the same, or cause inspection thereof to be made,
whenever and as often as he may deem proper; if, upon such inspection, he shall
find any such hospital to be conducted, managed or maintained in violation of
the terms of the application for the license under which such hospital was
opened, conducted, managed or maintained, or in violation of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, or any of the health or sanitary ordinances, rules
or regulations of the Village, then, and in that event, he may suspend the
license for ten (10) days pending final action by the President and Board of
Trustees on revocation.
It shall also be the further duty of all persons licensed under this Article to
make a report to the Director of Public Health of any communicable diseases or
disease due to poisoning which may exist in such veterinary hospital.
Provisions shall be made in such veterinary hospital for securely impounding
any animal confined for observation for rabies. Special precaution shall be
taken to securely and separately confine any such animals during such period of
observation, and report shall be made to the Director of Public Health of any
such animal confined in any veterinary hospital. Said veterinary hospitals
shall comply with the Animal Welfare Act of the State of Illinois, Chapter 8,
Illinois Revised Statutes.
CHAPTER 6
AUCTIONS
General   1
Licenses   2
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL
SECTION:
6-1-1: Place of Holding
6-1-2: Noise
6-1-3: Unlawful Practices
6-1-1: PLACE OF HOLDING:
All auctions shall be conducted within buildings.
6-1-2: NOISE:
Auctioneers shall comply with the Chapter of this Code relating to noise.
6-1-3: UNLAWFUL PRACTICES:
It shall be unlawful:
   A.   For an auctioneer to make any false representation regarding any
article offered for sale.
   B.   To make a fictitious bid or for an auctioneer to procure or knowingly
permit a fictitious bid at an auction.
   C.   To substitute any article in lieu of that offered to and purchased by
the bidder at an auction.
ARTICLE 2
LICENSES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Required
6-2-2: Application
6-2-3: Fees; Bond
6-2-4: Transferability; Change of Address
6-2-5: Revocation
6-2-1: REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct a sale at public auction, other than a sale at auction
for a governmental agency pursuant to law, within the Village without first
having obtained a license for such purpose.
6-2-2: APPLICATION:
Every person desiring to obtain a license for the sale of real and personal
property at public auction within the Village shall apply in writing for the
same to the Village Clerk. The application shall state the location of his
place of business, the names of his sureties, and the location to be used for
this particular auction sale.
6-2-3: FEES; BOND:
Any person may become an auctioneer and be licensed to sell real and personal
property at public auction, at a place to be named in the license, upon paying
to the Village Clerk the fees required and executing a bond to the Village with
two (2) sureties either licensed as such by the State of Illinois or approved
by the Village's Director of Finance in the penal sum of five hundred dollars
($500.00), conditioned for the due observance of this Code and the other
ordinances of the Village.
6-2-4: TRANSFERABILITY; CHANGE OF ADDRESS:
In no case shall a license for the sale of real and personal property at public
auction within the Village be transferable, or the place of such auction sale
be changed, without the consent in writing of the Village Clerk.
6-2-5: REVOCATION:
All licenses issued to auctioneers, as provided for in this Article, shall be
subject to revocation by the Board of Trustees whenever it shall appear to its
satisfaction that the party so licensed shall have violated any provisions of
this Chapter or of any ordinance of the Village relating to auctions.
CHAPTER 7
BUILDINGS
Contractor Registration   0
Building Code   1
Existing Building Code   2
Electric Code   3
Mechanical Code   4
Fire Code   5
Residential Code   6
Signs   7
Fees   8
Historic Preservation   9
Vacant Buildings   10
Fuel Gas Code   11
Plumbing Code   12
Property Maintenance Code   13
Energy And Water Benchmarking   14
Pool Code   15
ARTICLE 0
CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION
SECTION:
7-0-1: Contractor Registration
7-0-1: CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION:
Contractors who seek to perform work in the Village for which a Village permit
is required or contractors performing lawn maintenance/landscaping work as
defined by article 8-41 of this Code shall be required to register with the
Village according to this code. No permit will be issued for work to be
performed by a contractor until the contractor has registered in accordance
with this code and paid a registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
   A.   Registration: Registration shall be submitted electronically to the
Village and shall include the following information:
      1.   The contractor's full name, business name, full address of the
business, business telephone and federal employer identification number (FEIN);
      2.   Whether the business is a sole proprietorship, partnership, or
corporation and if a corporation, the name of the registered agent;
      3.   If the contractor is a corporation, annual certification from the
Illinois secretary of state that the corporation is in good standing in the
state of Illinois as either a domestic or foreign corporation and has not been
dissolved;
      4.   If the contractor is required to be licensed by the state of
Illinois, a copy of the current license with the license number; and
      5.   An original certificate of insurance or policy declaration
documenting that the contractor carries general liability insurance with a
minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, bodily injury
insurance with a minimum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per
occurrence, property damage insurance with a minimum of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00), and workers' compensation insurance at the statutory
minimum amounts.
         a.   Sole proprietorships and partnerships with no employees are
exempt from the worker's compensation insurance requirement.
         b.   Contractors who are engaged to perform work in the public right
of way shall be required to name the Village of Oak Park as an additional
insured on their policies of insurance and to provide proof of that insurance
to the Village.
         c.   Contractors who are required to maintain insurance as part of
their state licensure shall be required to provide proof of insurance only in
forms and amounts required by state law.
   B.   Reciprocity: Any contractor who is required to register with the state
of Illinois, may, in lieu of the registration required by subsection
7-0-1A of this section, provide the Village with its state registration and
license.
   C.   Registration Expiration And Renewal: A contractor's registration issued
pursuant to this section shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance.
Upon expiration, a contractor may renew its registration from the date of
issuance pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection
7-0-1A of this section.
   D.   Reporting Changes In Registration: Contractors who experience a change
in the business structure, name, or location; changes in ownership of the
registered contractor; or changes in the license listed on the registration
application shall reapply for registration and pay the applicable fifty dollar
($50.00) fee. The new registration will be valid for a one year period.
   E.   Business Location: Should a contractor operate a business governed by
this section within the Village’s boundaries, a business license shall also be
required.
   F.   All contractors performing lawn maintenance/landscaping work are
subject to the equipment restrictions contained in section
8-41-4 of this Code. Lawn maintenance/landscaping contractors shall not be
subject to the registration fee until the year 2025 and thereafter, but shall
be required to register with the Village. (Ord. 2014-0-52, 8-4-2014; amd. Ord.
23-19, 3-13-2023)
ARTICLE 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
7-1-1: Adoption
7-1-2: Amendments
7-1-1: ADOPTION:
   A.   The 2021 international building code ("IBC"), as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted by the Village by reference and
is made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this section with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes set forth in section 7-1-2 of this article.
To the extent that the provisions of the IBC are inconsistent with any codes
previously adopted by the Village by reference, the provisions of the IBC shall
govern unless specifically set forth in this code. In the event of a conflict
between any provisions of the IBC and any provision of the Oak Park Village
Code, the provisions of the Oak Park Village Code shall govern.
   B.   There shall be three (3) copies of the IBC kept on file for public
inspection in the office of the Chief Building Official. (Ord. 2014-0-58, 10-6-
2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. Ord. 20-081, 9-21-2020; Ord. 23-47, 6-20-2023; Ord.
23-48, 6-20-2023)
7-1-2: AMENDMENTS:
The international building code, 2021 edition, as adopted pursuant to section
7-1-1 of this article is hereby amended by adding the underlined language and
deleting the overstricken language as follows:
   101.1 Title. These regulations, as amended and adopted by the Village, shall
be known as the building code of the Village of Oak Park, hereinafter referred
to as "this code."
   Section 101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply
unless specifically adopted. The following appendices are adopted as part of
this code:
      1.   Appendix A - Employee Qualifications;
      2.   Appendix E - Supplementary Accessibility Requirements;
      3.   Appendix F - Rodent-Proofing;
      4.   Appendix I - Patio Covers;
      5.   Appendix J – Grading; and
      6.   Appendix P – Electrification Requirements for All New Buildings.
   101.4 Referenced Codes. The other codes specified in Sections 101.4.1
through 101.4.7, as amended and adopted by the Village, and referenced
elsewhere in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this
code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
   101.4.1 Gas. The provisions of the 2021 International Fuel Gas Code, as
amended and adopted by the Village, shall apply to the installation of gas
piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as
covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending
from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the
installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and
related accessories.
   101.4.2 Mechanical. The provisions of the 2021 International Mechanical
Code, as amended and adopted by the Village, shall apply to the installation,
alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including
equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including
ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems,
incinerators, and other energy systems.
   101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code current
edition of the State of Illinois Plumbing Code, pursuant to section 7-12-1 of
the Village Code, shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and
replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures,
fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewerage sewer
system. and all aspects of a medical gas system. The provisions of the
international private sewage disposal code shall apply to private sewage
disposal system. In addition, the provisions of chapter 11 of the 2018 2021
edition of the International Plumbing Code shall be applicable to the
installation, alteration, repair and replacement of storm drainage systems.
   101.4.4 Property Maintenance. The provisions of the International Property
Maintenance Code, as amended and adopted by the Village, shall apply to
existing structures and premises; equipment and facilities; safety hazards,
responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants; and occupancy of existing
premises and structures.
   101.4.5 Fire Prevention. The provisions of the 2021 International Fire Code,
as amended and adopted by the Village, shall apply to matters affecting or
relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire and
explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or
devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the
occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension,
repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems or fire
hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation.
   101.4.6 Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation
Code, as amended and adopted by the Village, shall apply to all matters
governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency.
   101.4.7 Existing Buildings. The provisions of the International Existing
Building Code, 2021 edition, as amended and adopted by the Village, shall be
applicable to the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and
relocation of all existing buildings, regardless of occupancy, subject to the
criteria set forth within that code.
   101.4.8 Electrical. The provisions of the National Electric Code, NFPA 70,
2020 edition, as amended and adopted by the Village shall apply to all matters
governing the design, installation, alteration, repair and replacement of
electrical components, equipment and systems installed in buildings and
structures covered by this code.
   101.4.9 Swimming Pools and Spas. The provisions of the International
Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2021 edition, as amended and adopted by the
Village, shall be applicable to the design, construction and alterations of
private and public swimming pools and spas.
   101.5 Effective Date. This code and all codes adopted by reference herein
shall be effective pursuant to the applicable adopting ordinance, provided
however, that:
      a.   For any construction project where a permit has been issued prior to
the effective date of this code and the Chief Building Official has determined
that the permittee has pursued the work in good faith and where the work has
not been abandoned within 90 days after the effective date of this code, the
code in effect at the time of issuance of the permit shall be applicable.
      b.   For any construction project for which an application for a permit
has been filed with the Village prior to the effective date of this code and
the permit has not been issued, and for a project where a permit has been
issued and the permittee has not substantially changed their position in
reliance on the permit, the Chief Building Official has discretion to apply
either the code in effect at the time of the permit application or this code.
   PART 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
   SECTION 103 - DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY
   103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency. The Permitting and Development
Division of the Development Services Department is hereby created and the
official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official Chief
Building Official. The function of the agency Division shall be the
implementation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code.
   SECTION 104 - DUTIES AND POWERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL
   104.1.1 Building Official. All references to the "building official" or
"code official" shall mean the Chief Building Official.
   104.3.1 Failure to Comply. Failure to comply with any notice or order issued
by the Chief Building Official for the enforcement of this code shall be
considered a violation of this code's requirements for regulation of
construction.
   104.8 Liability is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following
language:
   Any building official, member of the board of appeals or any other employee
or appointed official charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting
in the course and scope of his employment, appointment, or official duties and
responsibilities for the Village and under color of law shall be entitled to
full protection pursuant to the local governmental and governmental employees
tort immunity act, 745 ILCS 10/1 et seq., as well as the full protections of
any other statutory or common law defenses, and shall not be held personally
liable and is relieved from personal liability for any damage, loss or costs,
including attorneys' fees, accruing to persons or property as a result of any
act or omission in the discharge of official duties or appointment. The Village
will indemnify and defend any officer, member or employee from any suit
instituted against him or her alleging an act or omission performed or not
performed by that officer, member or employee in the lawful discharge of his or
her duties under the provisions of this code, until final determination of the
proceedings, provided that the officer, member or employee gives the Village
Attorney notice, within 21 days of the service of summons and complaint of any
such lawsuit or proceeding.
   104.12 Requirements Not Covered by Code. The Chief Building Official shall
have discretion to impose additional requirements not specifically set forth in
this code necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an
existing or proposed installation; the construction, repair, alteration, change
of occupancy or addition to buildings and structures; and the relocation of all
existing buildings, in the interests of public safety, health and general
welfare.
   SECTION 105 - PERMITS
   105.1 Required. Any owner or owner’s authorized agent who intends to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a
building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove,
convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the
installation of which is regulated by this code, add insulation to an attic, or
to cause any such work to be performed, shall first make application to the
building official and obtain the required permit.
   With the exception of work items set forth in section 105.2, any work
performed without a required permit is illegal and constitutes an unlawful act
and shall be subject to administrative penalties under this code and/or
penalties in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Oak Park Village
Code.
      a.   No building permit or demolition permit shall be issued and no
alteration authorized by the Permit Processing Division affecting any site,
building, structure or improvement designated as set forth below until such
time as the corresponding requirement or requirements set forth below for each
such designated site, building, structure or improvement shall first have been
satisfied:
         1.   In the case of the construction on, and/or the alteration,
relocation, demolition or removal of an eligible historic landmark, the
building or demolition permit shall be issued or the alteration authorized upon
the denial of designation of historic landmark status by the Village Board;
provided, however, that if the site, building, structure or improvement which
has been denied landmark status is located within a designated historic
district, then the issuance of a building or demolition permit shall also be
contingent upon satisfying the requirements set forth herein for property
located within a designated historic district; or
         2.   In the case of a demolition or removal of: a) an eligible or
designated historic landmark; b) any site, building, structure or improvement
within a designated historic district; or c) a site, building, structure or
improvement located in a designated historic district or listed in the national
register of historic places, which is wholly or partially financed by the
Village or by one or more federal, state or Village funding sources which are
dispersed through or administered by the Village, the demolition permit shall
be issued upon the authorization of such a permit by formal resolution of the
Village Board as being necessary to protect the public health, safety or
welfare; or
         3.   In the case of: a) the construction on, and/or the alteration,
relocation, demolition or removal of an eligible or designated historic
landmark; b) the alteration, demolition or removal of a site, building,
structure or improvement located in a designated historic district or listed in
the national register of historic places which is wholly or partially financed
by the Village or by one or more federal, state or Village funding sources
which are dispersed through or administered by the Village; or c) the removal
or demolition of any building, structure or improvement located within a
designated historic district for which demolition has not been authorized under
subsection 7-9-9A2 of the Oak Park Village Code, as amended, the building or
demolition permit shall be issued or the alteration shall be authorized upon
the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with section 7-
9-13 of the Oak Park Village Code, as amended, or a certificate of economic
hardship in accordance with section 7-9-14 of the Oak Park Village Code, as
amended.
      b.   No building permit for construction shall be issued by the Permit
Processing Division affecting any non-landmark property or structure within a
designated historic district unless a certificate of advisory review is issued
in accordance with section 7-9-16 of the Oak Park Village Code, as amended.
   105.1.1.1 Scope of Annual Permit. The scope of work permitted under an
annual permit shall not include the construction, alteration, movement or
enlargement of a building or structure, alterations or renovations that involve
structural modifications or changes to established paths of egress or fire-
resistant wall or horizontal assemblies, or change of use or occupancy.
   105.1.3 Application for Permit Filed After Work Has Commenced. In addition
to the fees and penalties imposed by section 109 of this code, and by the Oak
Park Village Code, any person who commences work before obtaining a permit,
where a permit is required, shall submit a signed and sworn statement, on a
form acceptable to the building official, which provides the following
information. Where the following information is contained in a document, that
document may be provided as an attachment to the sworn statement:
      1.   Complete description of the scope of work.
      2.   Date(s) of construction.
      3.   Contract for construction services. In lieu of the submittal of a
contract for construction services, the building official is authorized to
estimate the cost of construction using industry standard construction cost
sources.
      4.   Name(s) of all contractors, sub-contractors and other persons that
received payment or material consideration in exchange for performing such work
without permit(s).
      5.   Dated and notarized signature of the owner or owner's agent.
      6.   All construction documents that would be required for properly
obtained permit(s) including, but not limited to, architectural drawings,
engineering calculations and plat of survey.
      7.   Certification of work from a third-party testing service as deemed
necessary by the building official to ensure that work performed is in
accordance with this code.
      8.   Any other relevant documentation as required by the building
official.
   105.1.4 Permit Applicant. Application for permit shall be made by the owner,
owner's agent, a duly licensed and/or registered contractor, lessee of the
space(s) to be occupied who has written approval from the owner, or other
responsible party.
   105.1.5 Demolitions and Moved Structures. In order to demolish or move any
free-standing principal structure, coach house, garage or other accessory
structure, the responsible party must obtain a demolition permit issued by the
Cook County Department of Environmental Control, a demolition permit issued by
the Village, and for structures located within a designated historic district,
a certificate of appropriateness as may be required by chapter 7 article 9 of
the Village Code, as amended.
   105.1.6 Previous Approvals. This code shall not require changes in the
construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for
which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully
authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within
90 days after the date of effective date of this code and has not been
abandoned.
   105.2 Work Exempt from Permit. A permit shall not be required for the work
items set forth below. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall
not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in
violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of
this jurisdiction, the Village. A certificate of advisory review is required,
and a certificate of appropriateness may be required, for any work items
performed on an eligible or designated historic landmark or any building,
structure or improvement located within a designated historic district, listed
in the National Register of Historic Places or determined to be eligible to be
listed in the National Register of Historic Places by the State Historic
Preservation Officer.
   Permits shall not be required for the following:
   Building:
      1.   One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses and similar uses provided the floor area does not exceed
120 is less than 70 square feet (11 m2).
      2.   Fences not over 7 feet (1829 mm) high. Retaining walls with an
unbalanced soil load of one foot or less in height.
      3.   Oil derricks. Interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting or
other floor surface treatments, countertops and similar finish work with the
condition that no electrical, mechanical, plumbing or structural work is
associated with these activities.
      4.   Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height
measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge or impounding class I, II or IIIA liquids. Exterior
painting.
      5.   Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not
exceed 5,000 gallons (18925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width
does not exceed 2:1. Masonry tuckpointing, involving replacement of less than
20 masonry units. 
      6.   Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above
adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an
accessible route. Pressure washing of building exteriors.
      7.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and
similar finish work. Resealing caulked joints in a building envelope. 
      8.   Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and
scenery. Replacement of cracked or missing glazing in existing window sashes. 
      9.   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a group R-3 occupancy that
are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18925 L)
and are installed entirely above ground. Installation of residential storm
windows and doors.
      10.   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural
purposes, not including service systems. Repair or replacement of deteriorated
wood siding to match existing siding in a single or cumulative area not to
exceed 100 square feet.
      11.   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one-
and two-family dwellings. Repair of cracks or replacement of missing sections
of existing stucco to match existing stucco in a single or cumulative area not
to exceed 100 square feet where the existing lath remains in place. 
      12.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project
more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require
additional support of groups R-3 and U occupancies. Repair or replacement of
existing fencing in a single or cumulative area not exceeding 100 square feet.
      13.   Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and
partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height. Minor residential
household repair projects which do not require electrical, mechanical, plumbing
or structural work.
      14.   Sealcoating of existing driveways.
      15.   Sealcoating of existing parking lots with less than 5 parking
stalls and not requiring accessible stalls.
      16.   Waterproofing of perimeter basement walls with spray-on membrane
material or epoxy injection of cracks.
      17.   Repair of pavement cracks not involving removal and replacement of
existing paved materials.
      18.   Repair of leaking roof flashings involving less than 10 linear feet
of flashing.
      19.   Repair of leaking roof membrane involving less than 100 square feet
of roof covering materials.
      20.   Replacing wood treads and risers on stairs of residential buildings
not more than four dwelling units in size.
      21.   Replacing handrails on stairs of residential buildings not more
than four dwelling units in size.
      22.   Erection of temporary tents and membrane structures in size
exempted from permits under section 2403.2 of the International Fire Code as
amended and adopted by the Village.
      23.   Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and
scenery.
      24.   Prefabricated temporary swimming pools, accessory to a group R-
3 occupancy, that are less than 18 inches deep, do not exceed 2,500 gallons
when filled to the highest level that water can reach before it spills out, and
are installed entirely above ground.
      25.   Non-fixed and movable non-electrified fixtures, cases, racks,
counters and office partitions.
      26.   Installation, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubbery or
landscape plantings on private property.
   Electrical:
      1.   Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the
replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical
equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.
      2.   Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this
code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television
transmissions, but do apply to equipment installation, installation of
electrical equipment and wiring for a power supply and the cabling and
installation of towers and antennas.
      3.   Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the
installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of
electrical equipment or apparatus.
      4.   Replacement of plug-and-cord connected residential kitchen and
laundry appliances.
   Gas:
      1.   Portable heating appliances.
      2.   Replacement of any minor part component of an appliance or equipment
that does not alter approval of equipment or make such appliance or equipment
unsafe.
      3.   Replacement of portable residential kitchen and laundry appliances.
   Mechanical:
      1.   Portable heating appliance.
      2.   Portable ventilation equipment not connected to permanent building
duct system.
      3.   Portable cooling unit equipment not connected to permanent building
duct system.
      4.   Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling
equipment regulated by this code.
      5.   The replacement of any part that does not alter its approval of or
make unsafe.
      6.   Portable evaporative cooler cooling equipment not connected to
permanent building duct system.
      7.   Self-contained, plug-in refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds
(5 kg) or less of refrigerant, or that are and actuated by motors of 1
horsepower (746 W) or less.
      8.   Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not connected to a power grid.
   Plumbing:
      1.   The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe,
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste
or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace
the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a
permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in required by this
code.
      2.   The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves
or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such
repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves,
pipes, or fixtures or an electrical connection.
      3.   The removal and replacement of residential fixtures that do not
require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes, fixtures, or an
electrical connection.
      4.   The removal and replacement of residential portable sump pump or
ejector pumps.
   Emergency Work:
   Emergency work that commences after regular Village business hours to
maintain electric, plumbing, sewerage, heating, air conditioning, or other
essential utility service shall not require a permit prior to the work being
commenced subject to the following: (1) the work is performed in conformance
with this code; (2) a permit is obtained the next regular work day; and (3) the
work is inspected and approved within 48 hours of permit issuance.
   105.3.1 Action on Application. The building official shall examine or cause
to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a
reasonable time after filing. Based on a project's use group, complexity of the
scope of work or location of a property within a designated historic district,
the application shall be subject to a formal plan review which must be approved
prior to the issuance of a permit. If the application for plan review or the
construction documents are incomplete or do not conform to the requirements of
this code or pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such
application or submittal documents in writing, stating the reasons therefor.
Upon completion and/or correction of the permit application and/or submittal
documents, revised submittal documents shall be resubmitted to the building
official for further review. If the building official shall be satisfied that
the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and
ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit
therefore as soon as possible.
   105.3.1.1 Application Forms. The application for a permit shall be submitted
on a form supplied by the Permit Processing Division. The building official is
authorized to establish supplemental submittal requirements for each permit
type in addition to those established in this code.
   105.5 Expiration. Every permit shall become invalid unless the work on the
site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance,
or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned
for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The building
official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more up to two extensions
of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be
requested in writing the justifiable cause be demonstrated.
   Unless noted otherwise upon a permit placard, every initial permit issued
shall become invalid upon the occurrence of any one of the following
conditions:
      1.   The work is not completed within one year of the date of issuance of
the permit;
      2.   The work on the site authorized by such permit is not commenced
within 90 days after the date of issuance of the permit; or
      3.   The period of time between validated inspections exceeds 90 days.
The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more
extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each. The extension shall
be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
   105.5.1 Extensions. A responsible party holding an unexpired permit shall
have the right to apply for an extension of time within which the party shall
complete the applicable work when the work is unable to be completed within the
time requirements set forth in section 105.5. The building official is
authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time for additional
periods for not more than 90 days. The extension of time shall be requested in
writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions of time are subject to
administrative fees in accordance with section 109 of this code.
   105.6 Suspension or Revocation. The building official is authorized to
suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever:
      1.   The permit is found to be issued in error or on the basis of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information.
      2.   The permit is found to be issued in violation of any ordinance or
regulation of any of the provisions of this code.
      3.   The work being performed is found to be in violation of any Village
ordinance, law or regulation or any of the provisions of this code.
      4.   The scope of work being performed is found to exceed the work
authorized by the permit.
      5.   Conditions and limitations set forth in the permit have been
violated.
      6.   The permit placard was not posted in accordance with section 105.7
of this code.
      7.   The permit is used for a location or establishment other than that
for which it was issued.
      8.   The permit is used for a condition or activity other than that
listed in the permit.
      9.   The permit is used for a different person or firm than the name for
which it was issued.
      10.   The permittee failed, refused or neglected to comply with an order
or notice duly served in accordance with the provisions of this code within the
time provided therein.
   105.6.1 Reinstatement of Permit. Upon the expiration of a permit or the
suspension, revocation or invalidation of a permit, a renewal or extension may
be granted contingent on the responsible party's showing of good cause and the
payment of administrative fees in accordance with Section 109 of this code. A
permit that has been suspended or revoked for more than 30 calendar days shall
be considered invalid and cannot be renewed.
   SECTION 107 - SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS
   107.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents,
statement of special inspections, geotechnical report and other data shall be
submitted in two or more sets, or in a digital format with each permit
application. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered
design professional.
   Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of
construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work
applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to
obtain compliance with this code.
   107.2.9 Permit submittal documents shall include the following:
      1.   Structural, architectural, mechanical, plumbing, fire protection and
electrical drawings;
      2.   Plat of survey;
      3.   Structural calculations and/or drawings signed and sealed by an
Illinois licensed structural engineer or Illinois licensed architect;
      4.   Cut sheets for proposed manufactured floor systems with applicable
span chart to verify code compliance unless engineering calculations for the
design of the manufactured floor systems or open web wood truss joists have
been submitted. Engineering calculations must be submitted for any manufactured
floor systems or open web wood truss joists supporting loads other than
uniformly distributed loads;
      5.   A statement with the permit application listing the materials and
work requiring special inspections, describing the inspections to be performed
and listing the individuals, approved agencies and/or firms required to conduct
the inspections;
      6.   Window cut sheets for opening sizes specified for bedroom windows to
determine if windows meet egress requirements;
      7.   Detailed layouts, schedules and manufacturer’s data sheets for
kitchen and any food processing equipment;
      8.   ComCheck for commercial and mixed commercial and residential
buildings;
      9.   ResCheck for one and two-family residential buildings;
      10.   Specified fire-resistant assemblies listed rating descriptions; and
      11.   Village of Oak Park “Water Service Upgrade Worksheet.”
   Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of
construction document drawings and other data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work is
such that the review of construction documents is not necessary for compliance
with this code.
   107.2.2 Fire Protection System Shop Drawings. Shop drawings for any fire
protection system shall be submitted to indicate conformance to this code and
the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system
installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the
referenced installation standards in chapter 9 of this code.
   107.2.2.1 Shop Drawings. Shop drawings for a fire protection system shall be
submitted and approved prior to the start of system installation. The shop
drawings shall serve as a guide for the fabrication and installation of a fire
sprinkler system. The shop drawings shall either be prepared by a licensed
design professional or a National Institute for Certification in Engineering
Technologies (“NICET”) level 3 or 4 certified technician. If the shop drawings
are prepared by a licensed design professional, they shall bear an original
signature and seal of the design professional on each page. If the shop
drawings are prepared by a NICET certified technician, the drawings shall have
the preparer's name, signature and NICET certification number on each page. The
drawings shall at a minimum contain the following:
      1.   Scaled plans prepared in accordance with NFPA 13 indicating the size
and location of risers, cross mains, branch lines, sprinkler heads, and piping
as required for the installation of the fire protection system;
      2.   Technical data sheets of all system components and hardware; and
      3.   Supplemental hydraulic calculations prepared in accordance with the
approved technical submission and NFPA 13.
   The system layout documents shall bear a certification from the design
professional of record that the system shop drawings are in conformance with
the requirements established for the project.
   SECTION 109 - FEES
   109.2 Schedule of Permit Fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas,
mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for
each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as
established by the applicable governing authority. A fee for each permit shall
be paid as required for all work governed by the Oak Park Village Code or an
adopted code in accordance with the applicable Village fee schedule. It shall
be a violation of this code to perform work without a permit where a permit is
required.
   SECTION 111 - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
   111.1.1 Certificates of Occupancy Required. The following work requires a
certificate of occupancy to be issued prior to the occupancy of any area:
      1.   New construction, including building additions;
      2.   Commercial build-outs for new tenancy;
      3.   Interior alterations of more than 50% of a given commercial lease
space;
      4.   Interior alterations of any size that affect means of egress, exit
signage, emergency lighting or other life-safety features;
      5.   Change of occupancy classification;
      6.   Change of use;
      7.   Moved structures; and
      8.   Other project types as deemed necessary by the Chief Building
Official.
   SECTION 113 - BOARD OF APPEALS
   113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this code, or the building official's designee, there shall
be and is hereby created a board of appeals which shall be the Village's
Building Code Advisory Commission. The board of appeals shall be appointed by
the applicable governing authority and shall hold office at its pleasure. The
board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall
render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate
copy to the building official.
   113.4 Administration Appeals. The building official shall take immediate
action in accordance with the decision of the board. Any person directly
affected by a decision of the building official or the building official's
designee or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to
appeal to the board of appeals, provided that a written application for appeal
is filed within twenty (20) calendar days after the day the decision, notice or
order was served.
   113.5 Board Decision. The board of appeals shall modify or reverse the
decision of the building official or the building official's designee or a
notice or order issued under this code upon a concurring vote of a majority of
the total number of appointed board members. The board of appeals shall have
the discretion to allow a variance from the provisions of the code if, after
having received a written report, certified by a licensed architect or
engineer, the board of appeals determines that strict compliance with the code
is impractical from an engineering, architectural or structural standpoint,
that the spirit and intent of the code has been met and life safety has not
been materially compromised as a result of the variance. The decision of the
board of appeals shall be in writing and shall be furnished to the appellant
and to the building official.
   113.6 Administration. The building official shall take immediate action in
accordance with the decision of the board of appeals. Appeals of decisions of
the building official or a notice or order issued under this code (other than
those of immediate threat to life safety) shall stay the enforcement of the
decision, notice or order until the appeal is heard by the board of appeals and
a decision is rendered.
   SECTION 116 - UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
   116.5 Restoration or abatement. Where the structure or equipment determined
to be unsafe by the building official shall be is permitted to be restored to a
safe condition, the owner, the owner’s authorized agent, operator or occupant
of a structure, premises or equipment deemed unsafe by the building official
shall abate or cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe conditions by
repair, rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action. To the
extent that repairs, alterations or additions are made or a change of occupancy
occurs during the restoration of the structure, such repairs, alterations,
additions or change of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of the
International Existing Building Code as amended and adopted by the Village of
Oak Park.
   CHAPTER 2
   DEFINITIONS
   SECTION 202 – DEFINITIONS. Section 202 is amended to add the following:
   Responsible Party: Except as may otherwise be specified herein, the owner or
the owner's designated agent shall be considered a responsible party for
ensuring compliance with this code. In addition, any other person or entity
that may be reasonably considered to have a role or responsibility in the
creation, continuation, or correction of any violation of this code shall be
considered a responsible party or additional responsible party for such
violation.
   CHAPTER 9
   FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
   SECTION 907 - FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS
   907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant
notification system in accordance with section 907.5 shall be installed in
group A occupancies having an occupant load of 300 100 or more or where the
Group A occupant load is more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level
of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in
accordance with Section 707.3.10 shall be considered as a single occupancy for
the purposes of applying this section. Portions of group E occupancies occupied
for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required
for the group E occupancy.
   SECTION 913 - FIRE PUMPS
   913.2.2 Construction of Fire Pump Rooms. Fire pumps, where required by the
edition of the International Fire Code as amended and adopted by the Village of
Oak Park shall be located in an enclosure designed for protection of the
equipment from weather or mechanical damage. The fire pump room shall have each
of the following features.
   1.   Lighting and power. The room shall be adequately lighted to facilitate
operation and maintenance of the equipment. At least one 110-volt duplex
convenience outlet with ground-fault protection as regulated by the national
electric code as amended and adopted by the Village of Oak Park shall be
provided in a safe location within the enclosure.
   2.   Drainage. At least one floor sink complying with the state of Illinois
plumbing code shall be provided. The floor sink shall be capable of draining
waste water drained from the sprinkler system inspection port or main sprinkler
piping system drain without accumulation on the floor. The floor sink shall be
installed a minimum of 36 inches from any panel or piece of equipment.
   3.   Access. The room shall be in an accessible location as approved by the
fire department with a minimum 36-inch wide door leading directly to the
building exterior unless otherwise approved by the fire department.
   4.   There shall be a minimum 3-foot-wide access path with minimum 7-foot-
high clear headroom through the fire pump room to all equipment. There shall be
a minimum 36-inch wide by 36-inch deep by 84-inch high service clearance in
front of each piece of equipment or panel in the fire pump room.
   5.   Separation. Other than piping, conduits, ducts and/or equipment
directly serving the fire pump or the fire pump room, no other building
components or systems shall be installed in or pass through the fire pump room.
   CHAPTER 10
   MEANS OF EGRESS
   SECTION 1013 - EXIT SIGNS
   1013.5 Internally Illuminated Exit Signs. Electrically powered, self-
luminous and photoluminescent exit signs shall be listed and labeled in
accordance with UL 924 and shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions and chapter 27 the edition of the National Electric
Code as amended and adopted by the Village of Oak Park. Exit signs shall be
illuminated at all times.
   SECTION 1006 - NUMBER OF EXITS AND EXIT ACCESS DOORWAYS
   1006.3 Egress from Stories or Occupied Roofs. The means of egress system
serving any story or occupied roof shall be provided with the number of
separate and distinct exits based on the aggregate occupant load served in
accordance with this section. For purpose of means of egress only, roofs that
are intended for private or public use occupied space shall have two separate
means of egress. For purpose of this section only, exterior spiral stairways
constructed in accordance with this code may be provided as a second means of
egress from an occupied roof area.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Buildings provided throughout with automatic sprinkler protection.
   2.   Buildings with parapets or roof edges no higher than 30 feet above the
level of Fire Department access.
   3.   Buildings with windows or other exterior wall openings leading directly
to the occupied roof area which have a sill height no higher than 30 feet above
the level of Fire Department access.
   CHAPTER 14
   EXTERIOR WALLS
   SECTION 1407 - EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEMS (EIFS)
   1408.5.1 Height Above Grade. EIFS other than ultra-high impact systems shall
not be installed closer than 8 feet to finished exterior grade. High impact
EIFS systems shall be provided with high impact glass fiber reinforcing mesh
tested in accordance with ASTM E2486 for high impact resistance (90-150 inch-
lbs. and minimum 15 oz/yd2) in combination with standard mesh.
   CHAPTER 15
   ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES
   SECTION 1503 - WEATHER PROTECTION
   1503.6 Roof Drainage. Design and installation of roof drainage systems shall
comply with section 1803 of this code and chapter 11 of the International
Plumbing Code appended to this code and re-titled as chapter 36 Storm Drainage.
   1503.7 Minimum Slope. The minimum slope of a roof surface toward gutters,
scuppers, roof drains or other water collectors shall be 1/4-inch per foot or
the roof shall be designed in accordance with this code.
   SECTION 1507 - REQUIREMENTS FOR ROOF COVERINGS
   Section 1507.13 Sprayed Polyurethane Foam Roofing is deleted in their
entirety.
   CHAPTER 16
   STRUCTURAL DESIGN
   SECTION 1607 - LIVE LOADS
   1607.3.1 Balconies, Decks, Porches And Stairways. In addition to the minimum
uniformly distributed unit loads required by table 1607.1 of this code, all
exterior balconies, decks, porches and stairways shall be designed to resist a
lateral live load not less than 10 pounds per square foot applied either
perpendicularly and parallel to the main building exterior wall on all
horizontal occupied surfaces including, but not limited to built-in seating
areas, stairs and walking surfaces. Structures need not be designed for the
simultaneous application of lateral loads perpendicular and parallel to the
main building exterior wall.
   CHAPTER 17
   STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS
   SECTION 1705 – REQUIRED SPECIAL INSPECTIONS AND TESTS
   1705.18 Fire-resistant penetrations and joints. In high-rise buildings,
residential structures greater than three stories above grade, in buildings
assigned to Risk Category III or IV, or in fire areas containing Group R
occupancies with an occupant load greater than 250, special inspections for
through-penetrations, membrane penetration firestops, fire-resistant joint
systems and perimeter fire containment systems that are tested and listed in
accordance with Sections 714.4.1.2, 714.5.1.2, 715.3.1 and 715.4 shall be in
accordance with Section 1705.18.1 or 1705.18.2.
   CHAPTER 18
   SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS
   SECTION 1809 - SHALLOW FOUNDATIONS
   1809.5 Frost Protection. Except where otherwise protected from frost,
foundations and other permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be
protected from frost by one or more of the following methods:
      1.   Extending below the frost line of the locality;
      2.   Constructing in accordance with ASCE 32; or
      3.   Erecting on solid rock.
   Exception 1: Free-standing buildings meeting all the following conditions
shall not be required to be frost protected:
      1.   Assigned to occupancy risk category I, in accordance with section
1604.5; or
      2.   Area of Total building area measured at the outside perimeter area
is 600 square feet (56 m2) or less for light-frame construction or 400 square
feet (37 m2) or less for other than light-frame construction; and
      3.   Building not higher than 1-story and have height of not higher than
10 feet (3048 mm) or less; and
   Exception 2: Free-standing buildings not higher than 1-story meeting any the
following conditions shall not be required to be frost protected:
      1.   Building with attic space clear headroom less than 80 inches in
height. Higher clear headroom is permitted where the total floor area of the
attic space with clear headroom greater than 80 inches occurs over an area less
than 70 square feet;
      2.   Building envelope is not constructed with brittle materials such as
masonry, stucco, EIFS or similar materials;
      3.   Any overall exterior wall line dimension does not exceed 24 feet;
and
      4.   Where an “accessory building” or an “accessory structure” as defined
in the zoning ordinance of the Village of Oak Park is not connected to a
plumbing sewer line.
   CHAPTER 27
   ELECTRICAL
   SECTION 2701 - GENERAL
   2701.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter and NFPA 70 shall govern the
design, construction, erection and installation of the electrical components,
appliances, equipment and systems used in buildings and structures covered by
this code. The International Fire Code, the International Property Maintenance
Code and NFPA 70 shall govern the use and maintenance of electrical components,
appliances, equipment and systems. The International Existing Building Code and
NFPA 70 shall govern the alteration, repair, relocation, replacement and
addition of electrical components, appliances, or equipment and systems.
Electrical components, equipment and systems shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with the provisions of the edition of the National Electrical
Code as amended and adopted by the Village of Oak Park.
   CHAPTER 29
   PLUMBING SYSTEMS
   SECTION 2901 - GENERAL
   2901.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter and the international plumbing
code the state of Illinois Plumbing Code shall govern the design, construction,
erection and installation of plumbing components, appliances, equipment and
systems used in buildings and structures covered by this code. Toilet and
bathing rooms shall be constructed in accordance with Section 1210. Private
sewage disposal systems shall conform to the International Private Sewage
Disposal Code. The International Fire Code, the International Property
Maintenance Code and the International Plumbing Code shall govern the use and
maintenance of plumbing components, appliances, equipment and systems. The
International Existing Building Code and the International Plumbing Code shall
govern the alteration, repair, relocation, replacement and addition of plumbing
components, appliances, equipment and systems.
   SECTION 2903 – INSTALLATION OF FIXTURES
   2903 Installation of Fixtures is deleted in its entirety.
   CHAPTER 30
   ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS
   3002.4 Elevator Car to Accommodate Ambulance Stretcher. Where elevators are
provided in buildings four or more stories above, or four or more stories
below, grade plane, not fewer than one elevator shall be provided for fire
department emergency access to all floors. The elevator car shall be of such a
size and arrangement to accommodate an ambulance stretcher 24 inches by 84
inches (610 mm by 2134 mm) with not less than 5-inch (127 mm) radius corners,
in the horizontal, open position and shall be identified by the international
symbol for emergency medical services (star of life). The symbol shall be not
less than 3 inches (76mm) in height and shall be placed inside on both sides of
the hoist-way door frame. The interior cab dimensions of such ambulance
stretcher accommodating elevator shall be a minimum of 60 inches by 85 inches,
clear inside of walls and handrails. The elevator shall be equipped with backup
power per Section 3003 of this code.
   CHAPTER 33
   SAFEGUARDS DURING CONSTRUCTION
   SECTION 3301 - GENERAL
   Section 3301.2 Storage and Placement. Construction equipment and materials
shall be stored and placed so as not to endanger the public, the workers or
adjoining property for the duration of the construction project and as follows:
      1.   Mobile construction offices shall not be located closer than 10 feet
to any property line not adjoining the public right-of-way.
      2.   Site stored materials shall be kept under tarps or other approved
coverings and shall be located not closer than 10 feet to any property line.
      3.   Fuel supply tanks shall be maintained a minimum of 10 feet from any
structure or combustible material. Fuel tanks shall be enclosed with chain link
fencing or barricades to prevent mechanical damage to the tanks.
      4.   Temporary heating units shall be maintained a minimum of 10 feet
from any combustible material or structure. The local fire department shall be
notified a minimum of 24 hours in advance of the use of any temporary heating
units.
   3301.3 Construction Work Sites and Execution of Work. All construction work
shall be performed in accordance with this code and other pertinent laws and
ordinances. For purposes of this section, the term "construction" shall mean
the erection of new buildings or structures or the, remodeling, alteration,
renovation or repair of existing structures.
   3301.3.1 Responsibility. It shall be the duty of every person or entity that
performs work regulated by this code, including but not limited to
construction, installation or repair of a building, structure or equipment, to
comply with the provisions of this code.
   3301.3.2 Items to Be Made Available on Site. The following items shall be
maintained at the work site and made available to the building official or his
or her designee upon request during all work hours:
      1.   Copy of permit(s) or placard authorizing the commencement of
construction for the authorized scope of work;
      2.   Approved set of construction documents; and
      3.   A copy of all inspection reports issued by Village inspectors.
   3301.3.3 Cleaning. Construction sites and sites for the storage of
construction materials and/or equipment shall be kept clean and maintained.
Debris and trash from the site shall be removed or contained daily and when
otherwise requested by the building official or his or her designee. Debris
shall not be allowed to accumulate on the public right-of-way.
   3301.3.3.1 Responsible Party for Disposal of Construction Debris. Property
owners and/or the prime contractor in charge of the construction site shall
furnish non-combustible leak-proof containers for construction debris, garbage,
trash and litter, and shall be the responsible parties for the disposal of same
by private waste haulers.
   3301.3.3.2 Containment of Debris, Garbage, Trash and Litter. All debris,
garbage, trash and litter shall be picked up from the ground of the
construction site and adjoining areas if scattered during the course of the
day. All debris, garbage, trash and litter shall be placed in approved
containers as set forth in section 3301.3.3.1 of this code.
   3301.3.3.2.1 Dumpsters. The use of dumpsters or other containers for
collection of construction debris, garbage, trash and/or litter shall require a
permit if such dumpster or container is placed within the public right-of-way.
A barricade with flashing light shall be erected at each end and on the street
side of any dumpster or container placed in the public right-of-way.
   3301.3.3.3 Air-Borne Dust and Particulate Matter. Air-borne dust and
particulate matter shall be controlled such that adjoining properties within
500 feet of the construction site are not affected by air-borne dust and
particulate matter.
   3301.3.3.4 Public Right-Of-Way. The public right-of-way shall be maintained
in a broom swept condition at all times. Excavation and backfill materials
shall not be allowed to accumulate on the public right-of-way.
   3301.3.4 Security. Construction sites shall be maintained secure at all
times from entry by unauthorized persons and from all trespassers. Construction
gates shall be locked at all times workers are not on site.
   3301.3.5 Signage. The contractor shall securely attach his sign to the
construction fence in a location visible from the public right-of-way. The sign
shall be a maximum of 18 inches high by 24 inches long. The sign shall include
the following:
      1.   Name and address of the project;
      2.   Name of the general contractor; and
      3.   The contractor's contact information in case of an emergency.
   3301.3.6 Unauthorized Use of Construction Site. Construction sites or sites
used for storage of construction materials and/or equipment shall only be used
for the activities approved by a permit(s) issued by the Village, and for the
duration of permit(s) or license(s) issued.
   Exception: Premises where additions, remodeling or renovations are being
performed, and on which existing buildings or structures are currently
occupied, in use, or have been determined to contain no imminent hazards
associated with a use while construction is on-going, may be used for their
originally approved building code classifications so long as safety hazards do
not impact the safe use of the building during construction.
   3301.3.7 Damages and Hazards to Adjacent Properties and Neighborhoods.
Construction sites shall be used in a manner so as not to cause damage or
hazards to adjacent public or private properties, residential neighborhoods or
business districts. The contractor of record shall be responsible for the
construction site and shall ensure that damage and hazards do not exist on
adjacent public or private properties within proximity of the construction
site. The building official is authorized to issue a stop-work order for a
project until any damage or hazard to an adjacent property are corrected or
abated.
   3301.3.8. Construction Work Hours. Construction work hours shall be
maintained in accordance with the Oak Park Village Code.
   3301.3.9 Construction Staging and Material Storage Areas. Areas used for
construction staging and/or material storage shall not be permitted to encumber
the public right-of-way without prior written permission by the building
official. Unless staging and storage on adjacent properties is agreed to by the
owner(s) of such properties, staging and storage of materials shall be on the
property on which work is being executed. Additional permits may be required
for staging and storage of materials on properties other than which work is
being executed.
   3301.3.10 Job-Site Safety. Construction sites shall be maintained in a safe
working condition, and workers and visitors to the site shall practice safety
measures for construction sites in accordance with applicable law.
   3301.3.11 Vacating of Structure. When, during construction there is imminent
danger or failure of collapse of a building or structure or any part thereof
which endangers life safety, or when, during construction of any building or
structure or part of same has fallen and life safety is endangered by the
occupancy, use, or continued construction of the building or structure, the
building official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the
occupants to vacate the building or structure forthwith.
   3301.3.12 Temporary Safeguards And Emergency Repairs. Upon the building
official’s finding of any unsafe condition capable of posing imminent danger to
its condition or the life safety of persons on site, the building official
shall have the authority to order temporary safeguards and emergency repairs to
render the building or structure temporarily safe until permanent repairs can
be facilitated. For purposes of this section, upon the disregard to any notice
issued by the building official to provide temporary safeguards and emergency
repairs to render a building or structure temporarily safe, the building
official shall have the authority to employ the necessary labor and materials
to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible with all costs to be
reimbursed by the contractor or other responsible party.
   301.3.13 Right of Condemnation Before Completion. The building official
shall have the authority to condemn a building or structure under construction
before its completion where the building or structure is found to be unsafe and
endangers the life, health and safety of adjacent property occupants or the
general public.
   3301.3.14 Abatement or Removal. The building official shall have the
authority to order abatement and/or removal of any unsafe building, structure
or condition thereon.
   SECTION 3305 - SANITARY
   3305.1 Facilities Required. Sanitary facilities shall be provided during
construction, remodeling, renovation or demolition activities in accordance
with the international plumbing code applicable law. Sanitary facilities shall
be serviced and cleaned on a weekly basis at a minimum.
   1.   Sanitary facilities shall not be located closer than 10 feet to any
property line;
   2.   Sanitary facilities shall not be installed in any residential front
yard; and
   SECTION 3306 - PROTECTION OF PEDESTRIANS
   TABLE 3306.1 PROTECTION OF PEDESTRIANS is modified to include the following:
   TABLE 3306.1
   HEIGHT OF CONSTRUCTION
   More than 8 feet
   DISTANCE FROM CONSTRUCTION TO LOT LINE
   Less than 10 feet
   TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED
   System of scaffolding and netting shall be provided to fully encompass all
work areas at a level higher than the top of the barrier or covered walkway
   3306.9 Adjacent to Excavations. Every excavation, including trenches, on a
site located 5 feet (1524 mm) or less from the street lot line shall be
enclosed with a barrier not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) high. Where located more
than 5 feet (1524 mm) from the street lot line, a barrier shall be erected when
required by the building official shall be fully enclosed with a minimum 4 feet
high chain link fence or barrier, or by other measures to ensure public safety,
when workers are not present on site. Barriers The enclosure shall be of
adequate strength to resist wind pressure as specified in chapter 16.
   3306.10 Adjacent to Construction. All construction sites shall be fully
enclosed with an 8 feet high barrier of chain link fence with closed selvages
on top and full-height opaque fabric during all phases of the work unless
approved in writing by the building official. Chain link fencing shall have
full-height posts driven into or staked to the ground at 8 feet on center
maximum along the length of the construction fence. The fence shall be of
adequate strength to resist wind pressure as specified in chapter 16 of this
code. Sandbagging of fence posts shall not be permitted without the prior
approval of the building official. Minimum 6 feet wide lockable double-leaf
gates shall be provided at every 50 feet on center or fraction thereof along
the length of the fence facing the public right-of-way for emergency access.
Fencing may be omitted, upon approval of the building official, where adjacent
buildings or fences provide protection from entry into the construction site.
All construction fences shall have a permanent sign, in accordance with Section
3301.3.5 of this code. The use of barbed wire, razor wire or similar fencing
materials are not permitted.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Fence height shall be a minimum 6 feet in height on properties
within residential zoning districts established by the Zoning Ordinance of the
Village of Oak Park.
      2.   Lockable double-leaf gates are not required on properties within
residential zoning districts established by the Zoning Ordinance of the Village
of Oak Park.
      3.   Opaque fabric fence covering shall not be required for projects
governed by the edition of the International Residential Code adopted and
amended by the Village.
   SECTION 3313 - TREE PROTECTION
   3313.1 Where Required. Parkway trees and their root zones are required to be
protected during construction in the following instances:
   1.   Where excavation of the parkway occurs within the drip zone of any tree
located within the parkway;
   2.   Where powered wheel or track vehicles or equipment cross the parkway in
areas other than on a driveway;
   3.   Where construction operations have the potential to affect the health
and/or safety of a parkway tree as determined by the building official or the
building official’s designee; or
   4.   Where a dumpster is located within 10 feet of a parkway tree.
   3313.2 Protection Required. Prior to the start of any construction, tree and
root zone protection, root pruning and/or barriers shall be installed in
accordance with the tree protection specifications for construction and the
right-of-way restoration standards of the Village, and shall be maintained in
place for the duration of the work.
   3315.3 Damage to Trees. Any damage to Village trees or landscaped areas
shall be restored in accordance with the standards, specifications, codes and
regulations for construction and right-of-way restoration of the Village.
   APPENDIX P
   ELECTRIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL NEW BUILDINGS
   SECTION P101
   ADMINISTRATION
   P101.1 Purpose. The purpose of this appendix is to provide minimum
requirements for electrification for all new buildings.
   P101.2 Objectives. The objectives of this appendix are to reduce production
of greenhouse gasses.
   SECTION P201
   DEFINITIONS
   P201.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall for the purpose of
this appendix have the meaning set forth below.
   COMMERCIAL KITCHEN. A kitchen for food preparation intended to service
commercial restaurants, institutional uses, cafeterias and other similar dining
or food preparation facilities.
   FOSSIL FUELS: Fossil fuels are made from decomposing plants and animals and
contain carbon and include coal, crude oil and natural gas.
   NEW BUILDING: A newly constructed structure with an existing or new
foundation.
   SECTION P301
   ELECTRIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
   P301.1 Electrification for New Buildings. New buildings shall be designed
and constructed as follows:
   1.   The source of energy for the building shall be all electric and the
source of energy shall not be fossil fuels. Energy from fossil fuels may be
provided by generators for emergency backup power and for commercial kitchens.
   2.   All heating and air conditioning shall be provided by cold climate air
source or ground source heat pumps.
   3.   A building shall contain an energy recovery ventilation system.
   4.   A report shall be provided to the building official that verifies all
systems related to heating, ventilation, and conditioning systems, lighting
controls and service hot water systems comply with this code prior to final
occupancy.
   5.   All refrigerators, dishwashers, and clothes washers shall be Energy
Star certified.
   6.   All cooktops shall be electric induction types.
   7.   All cooking ovens shall be electric types.
   8.   Energy for any clothes dryer shall be provided by an electric heat
pump.
   9.   A minimum of one Level 2 electric vehicle charging station at each
onsite parking area shall be installed for every 5 parking spaces. One charging
station may serve an adjacent pair of spaces. Electrical vehicle charging
stations in Group R-3 and R-4 occupancies are not required.
   10.   Directly piped exterior gas fire pits and gas cooking grills whose
source of energy are fossil fuels are prohibited.
(Ord. 2014-0-58, 10-6-2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. Ord. 20-081, 9-21-2020; Ord.
23-47, 6-20-2023; Ord. 23-48, 6-20-2023)
ARTICLE 2
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
7-2-1: Adoption
7-2-2: Amendments
7-2-1: ADOPTION:
   A.   The 2018 international existing building code (IEBC), as published by
the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by the Village by reference
and is made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this section with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes set forth in section
7-2-2 of this article. To the extent that the provisions of the IEBC are
inconsistent with any codes previously adopted by the Village by reference, the
provisions of the IEBC edition shall govern unless specifically set forth in
this code. In the event of a conflict between any provisions of the IEBC and
any provision of the Oak Park Village Code, the provisions of the Oak Park
Village Code shall govern.
   B.   There shall be three (3) copies of the IEBC kept on file for public
inspection in the office of the Village Clerk. (Ord. 2014-0-59, 10-6-2014, eff.
1-1-2015; amd. Ord. 20-066, 9-21-2020)
7-2-2: AMENDMENTS:
The 2018 international existing building code ("IEBC"), as adopted pursuant to
section
7-2-1  of this article, is hereby amended by adding the underlined language and
deleting the overstricken language as follows:
   CHAPTER 1
   SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
   PART 1 - SCOPE AND APPLICATION
   SECTION 101 - GENERAL
   Section 101.1 Title. These regulations, as amended and adopted by the
Village of Oak Park, shall be known as the existing building code of the
Village of Oak Park, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
   Section 101.2.1 Appendices. Adopted as part of this code are:
   1.   Appendix A - Guidelines for The Seismic Retrofit of Existing Buildings,
including chapters A1 through A5
   2.   Appendix B - Supplementary Accessibility Requirements for Existing
Buildings and Facilities; and
   3.   Resource A - Guidelines on Fire Ratings of Archaic Materials and
Assemblies.
   CHAPTER 1, PART 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT is deleted in its
entirety.
   Administration and enforcement of this code shall be governed by applicable
provisions of chapter 1 of the international building code, as amended and
adopted by the Village.
   PROVISIONS FOR ALL COMPLIANCE METHODS
   SECTION 305 - ACCESSIBILITY FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS
   Section 305.8.2 Elevators. Altered elements of existing elevators shall
comply with ASME A17.1 and ICC A117.1 the current provisions of the state of
Illinois safety codes and standards for conveyances. Such elements shall also
be altered in elevators programmed to respond to the same hall call control as
the altered elevator.
   Section 305.8.3 Platform Lifts. Platform (wheelchair) lifts complying with
ICC A117.1 and installed in accordance with ASME A18.1 the current provisions
of the state of Illinois safety codes and standards for conveyances shall be
permitted as a component of an accessible route.
   CHAPTER 4
   REPAIRS
   SECTION 408 PLUMBING is deleted in its entirety.
   CHAPTER 8
   ALTERATIONS - LEVEL 2
   SECTION 805 MEANS OF EGRESS
   805.2 General
   3.   In R-3 buildings, stairs to basement or attic may remain or be
remodeled in their current configuration.
   SECTION 806 STRUCTURAL
   806.2 Existing Structural elements carrying gravity loads
   3.   In R-3 buildings, where an attic is converted to use as habitable
space, attic floor structure in good condition which spans no greater than
twelve feet with at least 2x6 joists @ 16" OC may remain as is.
   SECTION 807 ELECTRICAL
   807.3.8 In dwelling units where interior wall coverings as defined in the
international residential code as amended and adopted by the Village (e.g.,
plaster or gypsum board) are removed from a wall or floor/ceiling assembly, the
wiring methods, receptacle spacing, household smoke detectors, and carbon
monoxide detectors shall be brought into conformance on both sides of the wall
or floor/ceiling assembly that is opened. Where legal existing non-conforming
wiring methods are routed to/from concealed walls or floor/ceiling assemblies,
the existing wiring shall transition to a method in conformance with this code
as soon as practical as approved by the building official.
   807.3.9 In dwelling units where cabinets in kitchens are removed or
additional cabinets are installed the minimum number of small appliance branch
circuits and receptacles, and receptacle spacing shall be brought into
conformance with the adopted electrical code.
   807.3.10 At least one 20-ampere branch circuit shall be provided in all
remodeled dwelling unit bathrooms where one or more of the following conditions
exist:
   (1)   Where the floor area of the bathroom is reconfigured in size.
   (2)   Where the bathroom wall covering as defined in the international
residential code as amended and adopted by the Village (e.g., plaster or gypsum
board) is removed and replaced in the area of required electrical devices.
   Exception: The above requirements may be waived by the building official
where the nature of the existing construction does not practically allow for
conformance with this code.
   SECTION 809 PLUMBING
   Replace paragraph 809.1 with the following:
   Section 809.1 Increase in Number of Plumbing Fixtures. Where the number of
plumbing fixtures is increased by more than 7 water supply fixture units (WSFU)
above the existing number, provide one of the following:
   (1)   If minimum constant water pressure is tested less than 8 psi or the
minimum recommended by the fixture manufacturer, provide a booster pump to
increase the pressure in accordance with the current edition of the state of
Illinois plumbing code.
   (2)   Increase the water supply pipe diameter from the street main and the
water meter size to comply with the requirements of the current edition of the
state of Illinois plumbing code for the number of WSFUs.
   Section 809.2 Provide an RPZ (reduced pressure zone backflow preventer)
device on the potable water supply in an existing commercial or mixed
commercial and residential building, where a minimum of 25% of lineal feet of
existing hot and cold-water piping is to be increased and/or replaced.
   Exception: If there is no existing floor drain within ten feet from the
water meter, a testable double check valve may be provided in lieu of an RPZ.
   CHAPTER 10
   CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY
   SECTION 1002 - SPECIAL USE AND OCCUPANCY
   Section 1002.1 Compliance with the building code shall be modified to add
the following:
   12.   Bed and breakfast establishments.
   SECTION 1009 - PLUMBING
   Section 1009.1 Increased Demand. Where the occupancy of an existing building
or part of an existing building is changed such that the new occupancy is
subject to increased or different plumbing fixture requirements, or to
increased water supply requirements in accordance with the international
plumbing code current edition of the state of Illinois plumbing code, the new
occupancy shall comply with the intent of the respective provisions of the
current edition of the state of Illinois plumbing code.
   Section 1009.2 Food-Handling Occupancies. If the new occupancy is a food-
handling establishment, all existing sanitary waste lines above the food or
drink preparation or storage areas shall be panned or otherwise protected to
prevent leaking pipes or condensation on pipes from contaminating food or
drink. New drainage lines shall not be installed above such areas and shall be
protected in accordance with the international plumbing code.
   Section 1009.3 Interceptor Required. If the new occupancy will produce
grease or oil-laden wastes, interceptors shall be provided as required in the
international plumbing code by the current edition of the state of Illinois
plumbing code.
   Section 1009.5 Group I-2. If the occupancy group is changed to Group I-2,
the plumbing system shall comply with the applicable requirements of the
current edition of the state of Illinois plumbing code.
   Section 1010.6 Correction Of Health Or Safety Hazards. Regardless of the age
of the building, where a health or safety hazard exists because of an existing
plumbing installation or lack thereof, the owner or other responsible party
shall install additional plumbing or make such corrections as may be necessary
to abate the hazard or violation in accordance with the current edition of the
state of Illinois plumbing code.
   CHAPTER 11
   ADDITIONS
   Add the following new Section:
   SECTION 1108
   PLUMBING
   1108.1
   809.2 Provide an RPZ (Reduced Pressure Zone backflow preventer) device on
the potable water supply when an existing commercial or mixed commercial and
residential building is added to with the addition exceeding 500 gross square
feet in total area.
   Exception: If there is no existing floor drain within ten feet from the
water meter, a testable double check valve may be provided in lieu of an RPZ.0
   CHAPTER 12
   HISTORIC BUILDINGS
   SECTION 1207 EXTERIOR GUARDS AND HANDRAILS is added as follows:
   SECTION 1207 - EXTERIOR GUARDS AND HANDRAILS
   Section 1207.1 Guards Required. New guards or replacement guards shall be
installed in accordance with section R312 of the international residential code
as amended and adopted by the Village or section 1014 of the international
building code as amended and adopted by the Village, as applicable.
   Exception: Where a building is located within a designated Oak Park or
National Register historic district, or is a National Historic Landmark, or is
listed in the National Register of Historic Buildings, or is determined
eligible to be listed in the National Register of Historic Buildings by the
State Historic Preservation Officer, or listed individually as an Oak Park
Landmark, or such building has significant historical and/or aesthetic
characteristics similar to those which qualified that district as a historic
district pursuant to the Village Code, the height of guards for porches,
balconies or raised floors that are visible from the street shall be permitted
to be installed to a height lower than that required by section R312 of the
international residential code as amended and adopted by the Village or section
1015 of the international building code as amended and adopted by the Village,
as applicable, under the following conditions:
   1.   Existing guards which are removed to facilitate refinishing shall be
permitted to be reinstalled to the same height, but no lower than the
documented height of the existing guards without being required to meet the
structural loading conditions required under section R301.5 of the
international residential code as amended and adopted by the Village or section
1607.8 of the international building code as amended and adopted by the
Village, as applicable;
   2.   Existing guards which are repaired and retain a minimum of 50 percent
of original materials shall be reinstalled no lower than the documented height
of the existing guards without being required to meet the structural loading
conditions required under section R301.5 of the International residential code
as amended and adopted by the Village of Oak Park or section 1607.8 of the
international building code as amended and adopted by the Village, as
applicable;
   3.   Existing guards which are repaired in excess of 50 percent of the
original material, or are totally replaced, shall be allowed to be installed to
the same height as the existing guard provided that the guard meets the
structural loading conditions of section R301.5 of the international
residential code as amended and adopted by the Village of Oak Park or section
1607.8 of the international building code as amended and adopted by the
Village, as applicable; and
   4.   Existing guards which are totally replaced or new guards which are
installed to recreate a documented historic condition, shall be allowed to be
installed to the same height as the previously existing guard(s) provided that
the guard meets the structural loading conditions of section R301.5 of the
international residential code as amended and adopted by the Village or section
1607.8 of the international building code as amended and adopted by the
Village, as applicable.
   Section 1207.2 Handrails Required. New handrails or replacement handrails
shall be installed in accordance with section R311.7.8 or R311.8.3 of the
international residential code as amended and adopted by the Village, or
section 1014 of the international building code as amended and adopted by the
Village of Oak Park, as applicable.
   Exception: Where a building is located within a designated Oak Park or
National Register historic district, or is a National Historic Landmark, or is
listed in the National Register of Historic Buildings, or is determined
eligible to be listed in the National Register of Historic Buildings by the
State Historic Preservation Officer, or listed individually as an Oak Park
Landmark, or such building has significant historical and/or aesthetic
characteristics similar to those which qualified that district as a historic
district pursuant to the Village Code , the height of handrails for stairs that
are visible from the street shall be permitted to be installed to a height
lower than that required by section R311.7.8 or R311.8.3 of the international
residential code as amended and adopted by the Village or section 1014 of the
international building code as amended and adopted by the Village, as
applicable under the following conditions:
   1.   Existing handrails which are removed to facilitate refinishing shall be
permitted to be reinstalled to the same height, but no lower than existing
without being required to meet the structural loading conditions required under
section R301.5 of the International Residential Code international residential
code as amended and adopted by the Village or section 1607.8 of the
international building code as amended and adopted by the Village, as
applicable;
   2.   Existing handrails which are replaced shall be allowed to be installed
to the same height as the existing handrail provided that the guard meets the
structural loading conditions of section R301.5 of the international
residential code as amended and adopted by the Village or section 1607.8 of the
international building code as amended and adopted by the Village, as
applicable;
   3.   Where an existing stair is replaced with construction of materials,
dimensions and aesthetic features documented to match existing, the handrail
may be omitted where there is documentation that a handrail did not originally
exist; and
   4.   New handrails which are installed to recreate a documented historic
condition, shall be allowed to be installed to the same height and in the same
shape and configuration as the previously existing handrail(s) provided that
the handrail meets the structural loading conditions of section R301.5 of the
international residential as amended and adopted by the Village or section
1607.8 of the international building code, as amended and adopted by the
Village, as applicable.
   CHAPTER 14
   RELOCATED OR MOVED BUILDINGS
   SECTION 1402 REQUIREMENTS
   Section 1402.7.1 Inspection and approval of Moved Structures. After being
set upon an approved foundation, a structure which is moved from one lot to
another shall be inspected by an Illinois Licensed structural engineer or
Illinois Licensed Architect hired by the owner or other responsible party at no
cost to the Village to ensure the structural integrity of the structure in its
new location. Any deficiencies noted by the engineer or architect shall be
corrected in accordance with requirements for new construction provisions of
this code prior to re-occupying the structure. If the building is moved from
another jurisdiction, the structure shall be inspected by the Village for
conformance with the provisions of this code and other pertinent ordinances for
new construction. The moved structure shall not be occupied until a certificate
of occupancy is issued for the new location.
   APPENDIX J
   EXISTING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
   SECTION AJ102 - COMPLIANCE
   Section AJ102.10 Conversion into habitable space. When any area not
previously approved or utilized as habitable space is converted into and/or
utilized as habitable space, regardless of the amount of construction work done
in this area, it shall be considered as reconstruction and shall be subject to
the requirements of this Appendix and the provisions of section R310 of this
code.
   Section AJ102.11 Conversion into a sleeping room. When any area not
previously approved or utilized as a sleeping room is converted into and/or
utilized as a sleeping room, regardless of the amount of construction work that
was or was not done in this conversion or change of utilization, it shall be
subject to all requirements for new construction of a sleeping room as found in
this code.
(Ord. 2014-0-59, 10-6-2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. Ord. 20-066, 9-21-2020)
ARTICLE 3
ELECTRIC CODE
SECTION:
7-3-1: Adoption
7-3-2: Amendments
7-3-1: ADOPTION:
   A.   The 2021 International Energy Conservation Code, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted by the Village by reference and
is made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this section with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes set forth in section 7-13-2 of this article.
To the extent that the provisions of the IMC are inconsistent with any codes
previously adopted by the Village by reference, the provisions of the 2021 IECC
shall govern unless specifically set forth in this code. In the event of a
conflict between any provisions of the IMC and any provision of the Oak Park
Village Code, the provisions of the Oak Park Village Code shall govern.
   B.   There shall be three (3) copies of the NEC kept on file for public
inspection in the office of the Chief Building Official. (Ord. 2014-0-60, 10-6-
2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. Ord. 20-082, 9-21-2020; Ord. 23-49, 6-20-2023; Ord.
23-55, 6-20-2023)
7-3-2: AMENDMENTS:
The 2021 National Electric Code, as adopted pursuant to section
7-3-1 of this article is hereby amended by adding the underlined language and
deleting the overstricken language as follows:
   ARTICLE 110
   Requirements for Electrical Installations
   Section 110.26 Spaces About Electrical Equipment.
   Add the following sentence to Section 110.26: The working space and access
shall be entirely on the legal property which the equipment serves or public
right-of-way.
   ARTICLE 210
   Branch Circuits
   Add the following sentence to Section 210.50 (G):
   Provide minimum of one receptacle outlet on the outside of each garage and
not more than 1.7 m (5 ½ ft) above grade.
   ARTICLE 230
   Services
   Section 230.43 Wiring Methods For 1000 Volts, Nominal, Or Less. Service-
entrance conductors shall be installed in accordance with the applicable
requirements of this code covering the type of wiring method used and shall be
limited to the following methods:
   1.   Type IGS cable
   2.   Rigid metal conduit
   3.   Intermediate metal conduit
   4.   Electrical metallic tubing
   5.   Electrical nonmetallic tubing (ENT)
   6.   Service-entrance cables
   7.   Wireways
   8.   Busways
   9.   Auxiliary gutters
   10.   Rigid PVC nonmetallic conduit
   11.   Cable bus
   12.   Type MC cable
   13.   Mineral insulated, metal-sheathed cable
   14.   Flexible metal conduit not over 1.8 m (6 ft) long or liquid tight
flexible metal conduit not over 1.8 m (6 ft) long between raceways, or between
raceway and service equipment, with equipment bonding jumper routed with the
flexible metal conduit according to the provisions of 250.102(A), (B), (C), and
(E)
   15.   Liquid tight flexible nonmetallic conduit
   16.   High Density Polyethylene conduit (HDPE)
   17.   Nonmetallic underground conduit with conductors (NUCC)
   18.   Reinforced thermosetting resin conduit (RTRC)
   ARTICLE 250
   Grounding and Bonding
   Section 250.118 Types of Equipment Grounding Conductors is modified to list
items (2), (3), and (4) to read as follows:
   (2)   Rigid metal conduit installed above ground.
   (3)   Intermediate metal conduit installed above ground.
   (4)   Electrical metallic tubing installed above ground.
   ARTICLE 314
   Outlet, Device, Pull, and Junction Boxes;
   Conduit Bodies; Fittings; and Handhole Enclosures
   Add the following new paragraph to 314.27:
   (C)   Where a lighting outlet installed in the ceiling of a dwelling unit is
located such that the location makes it feasible to attach a ceiling fan to the
outlet box, the outlet box shall be listed for sole support of a ceiling
suspended (paddle) fan, regardless of the initial intentions of use for the
outlet box.
(Ord. 2014-0-60, 10-6-2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. Ord. 20-082, 9-21-2020; Ord.
23-55, 6-20-2023)
ARTICLE 4
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
7-4-1: Adoption
7-4-2: Amendments
7-4-1: ADOPTION:
   A.   The 2021 international mechanical code (IMC) as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted by the Village by reference and
is made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this section with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes set forth in section
7-4-2 of this article. To the extent that the provisions of the IMC are
inconsistent with any codes previously adopted by the Village by reference, the
provisions of the 2009 IMC shall govern unless specifically set forth in this
code. In the event of a conflict between any provisions of the IMC and any
provision of the Oak Park Village Code, the provisions of the Oak Park Village
Code shall govern.
   B.   There shall be three (3) copies of the IMC kept on file for public
inspection in the office of the Chief Building Official. (Ord. 2014-0-61, 10-6-
2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. Ord. 20-079, 9-21-2020; Ord. 23-51, 6-20-2023)
7-4-2: AMENDMENTS:
The 2021 international mechanical code, as adopted pursuant to section
7-4-1 of this article is hereby amended by adding the underlined language and
deleting the overstricken language as follows:
   CHAPTER 1
   SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
   PART I - SCOPE AND APPLICATION
   SECTION 101 - GENERAL
   Section 101.1 Title. These regulations, as amended and adopted by the
Village, shall be known as the mechanical code of the Village of Oak Park,
hereinafter referred to as "this code".
   CHAPTER 1, PART 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT is deleted in its
entirety with the exception of the following sections to remain:
   1.   Section 105 Approval,
   2.   Section 107 Inspections And Testing,
   3.   Section 108 Violations, sections 108.7 through 108.7.3 inclusive, and
   4.   Section 110 Temporary Equipment, Systems And Uses.
   Administration and enforcement of this code shall be governed by the
sections set forth above and by the applicable provisions of chapter 1 of the
international building code, as amended by the Village.
   CHAPTER 5
   EXHAUST SYSTEMS
   SECTION 506 - COMMERCIAL KITCHEN HOOD VENTILATION SYSTEM DUCTS AND EXHAUST
EQUIPMENT
   Section 506.6 Exhaust System Discharge. The permit holder shall verify that
the exhaust system discharge does not constitute a nuisance as defined in the
Village Code or violate the provisions of any county, state or federal law
regulating smoke and particulate emissions. In the event that the building
official determines that a nuisance exists, or that a violation of any county,
state or federal regulation is found to occur, the business owner or other
responsible party shall take immediate measures to abate the nuisance or
violation within the timeframe established by the building official for
compliance.
   SECTION 509 - FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS
   Section 509.1 Where Required. Commercial Cooking cooking appliances required
by section 507.2 507.2.1 to have a type I hood shall be provided with an
approved automatic fire suppression system complying with the international
building code and the international fire code, each as amended and adopted by
the Village, and NFPA 17A, wet chemical extinguishing systems - 2009 and NFPA
96, ventilation control and fire protection of commercial cooking operations.
   CHAPTER 12
   HYDRONIC PIPING
   SECTION 1206 - PIPING INSTALLATION
   Section 1206.8 Steam Piping Pitch. Steam piping shall be installed to drain
to the boiler or the steam trap. Steam systems shall not have drip pockets that
reduce the capacity of the steam piping. Steam condensate pipe shall be pitched
to the boiler or condensate receiver.
(Ord. 2014-0-61, 10-6-2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. Ord. 20-079, 9-21-2020; Ord.
23-51, 6-20-2023)
ARTICLE 5
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
7-5-1: Adoption
7-5-2: Amendments
7-5-1: ADOPTION:
   A.   The 2021 international fire code (IFC) as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted by the Village by reference and
is made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this section with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes set forth in section
7-5-2 of this article. To the extent that the provisions of the IFC are
inconsistent with any codes previously adopted by the Village by reference, the
provisions of the IFC shall govern unless specifically set forth in this code.
In the event of a conflict between any provisions of the IFC and any provision
of the Oak Park Village Code, the provisions of the Oak Park Village Code shall
govern.
   B.   There shall be three (3) copies of the IFC kept on file for public
inspection in the office of the Chief Building Official. (Ord. 2014-0-62, 10-6-
2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. Ord. 20-083, 9-21-2020; Ord. 23-52, 6-20-2023)
7-5-2: AMENDMENTS:
The 2021 international fire code, as adopted pursuant to section
7-5-1 of this article, is hereby amended by adding the underlined language and
deleting the overstricken language as follows:
   CHAPTER 1
   SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
   PART 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
   SECTION 101 - GENERAL
   101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless
specifically adopted. The following appendices are adopted as part of this
code:
      1.   Appendix B - Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings;
      2.   Appendix C - Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution;
      3.   Appendix D - Fire Apparatus Access Roads;
      4.   Appendix F - Hazard Ranking;
      5.   Appendix H - Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) and
Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) Instructions;
      6.   Appendix I - Fire Protection Systems - Noncompliant Conditions;
      7.   Appendix K - Construction Requirements for Existing Ambulatory Care
Facilities; and
      8.   Appendix L - Requirements for Fire Fighter Air Replenishment
Systems.
   SECTION 103 – CODE COMPLIANCE AGENCY
   103.1 Creation of agency. The Village of Oak Park Fire Department Fire
Prevention Bureau is hereby created and the official in charge there shall be
known as the Fire Code Official. The function of the agency shall be the
implementation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code.
   SECTION 111 MEANS OF APPEALS is deleted in its entirety and appeals shall be
governed by section 113 of the 2021 International Building Code, as amended and
adopted by the Village.
   CHAPTER 2
   DEFINITIONS
   SECTION 202 - GENERAL DEFINITIONS
   202 General Definitions is modified to add the definition of "Responsible
Party" to read as follows:
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Except as may otherwise be set forth herein, the owner or
the owner's designated agent shall be considered a responsible party for
ensuring compliance with this code. In addition, any other person or entity
that may be reasonably considered to have a role or responsibility in the
creation, continuation, or correction of any violation of this code shall be
considered a responsible party or additional responsible party for such
violation.
   CHAPTER 6
   BUILDING SERVICES AND SYSTEMS
   SECTION 606 - COMMERCIAL COOKING EQUIPMENT AND SYSTEMS
   606.1 General. Commercial kitchen exhaust hoods shall comply with the
requirements of the International Building Code and the International
Mechanical Code, each as amended and adopted by the Village, and National Fire
Protection Agency (“NFPA”) 17A and 96.
   CHAPTER 9
   FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
   SECTION 901 - GENERAL
   901.4.2 Nonrequired fire protection and life safety system. Fire protection
and life safety systems or portion thereof not required by this code or the
International Building Code shall be allowed to be furnished for partial or
complete protection provided that such installed systems meet the applicable
requirements of this code, and the International Building Code, NFPA 72 and the
current Illinois Accessibility Code.
   901.4.3 Alterations in buildings and structures. For any alteration within a
building or structure, the fire protection and life safety systems shall be
extended, altered or augmented to maintain and continue protection within the
building or structure. Persons shall not remove or modify any fire protection
or life safety system installed or maintained under the provisions of this code
or the international building code without approval from the fire code
official. Fire panels approved for replacement by the Fire Code Official
require all components to be listed within such panel and the panel service
area to comply with this code and NFPA 72.
   SECTION 903 - AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
   903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
group A-1 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists:
   1.   The fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet.
   2.   The fire area has an occupant load of 300 100 or more.
   3.   The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit
discharge serving such occupancies.
   4.   The fire area contains a multi-theater complex.
   903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
group A-3 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists:
   1.   The fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet.
   2.   The fire area has an occupant load of 300 100 or more.
   3.   The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit
discharge serving such occupancies.
   903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
group A-4 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists:
   1.   The fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet.
   2.   The fire area has an occupant load of 300 100 or more.
   3.   The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit
discharge serving such occupancies.
   903.2.1.6 Assembly Occupancies on roofs. Where an occupied roof has an
assembly occupancy with an occupant load exceeding 100 for Group A. A-2 and 300
for other Group A occupancies, all floors between the occupied roof and the
level of exit discharge shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
   Exception: Open parking garages of Type I or Type II construction.
   903.2.1.7 Multiple fire areas. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided where multiple fire areas of Group A-1, A-2, A-3 or A-4 occupancies
share exit or exit access components and the combined occupant load of these
fire areas is 300 100 or more.
   903.2.2 Ambulatory Care Facilities is hereby re-numbered in its entirety and
relocated to Section 903.2.2.1.
   903.2.2 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for group B
occupancies where one of the following conditions exists:
   1.   The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more.
   2.   The fire area is located in a basement.
   903.2.2.1 Ambulatory Care Facilities. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
installed throughout the entire floor area containing an ambulatory care
facility where either of the following conditions exist at any time:
   1.   Four or more care recipients are incapable of self-preservation,
whether rendered incapable by staff or staff has accepted responsibility for
care recipients already incapable.
   2.   One or more care recipients that are incapable of self-preservation are
located at other than the level of exit discharge serving such a facility.
   In buildings where, ambulatory care is provided on levels other than the
level of exit discharge, an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout the entire floor where such care is provided as well as all floors
below, and all floors between the level of ambulatory care and the nearest
level of exit discharge, including the level of exit discharge.
   Exception: Floors classified as an open parking garage are not required to
be sprinklered.
   903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for group E
occupancies as follows:
   1.   Throughout all group E fire areas greater than 12,000 square feet in
area.
   2.   Throughout every portion of educational buildings below the lowest
level of exit discharge serving that portion of the building
   Exception: In buildings where every classroom has not fewer than one
exterior exit door at ground level, an automatic sprinkler system is not
required in any area below the lowest level of exit discharge serving that
area.
   3.   The Group E fire area has an occupant load of 300 100 or more.
   903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
buildings containing a group M occupancy where one of the following conditions
exists:
   1.   A group M fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet in area.
   2.   A group M fire area is located more than three stories above grade
plane.
   3.   The combined area of all group M fire areas on all floors, including
any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000 square feet (2300 m²).
   4.   The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more.
   903.2.11.1.3 Basements. Where any portion of a basement is located more than
75 feet (22 860 mm) from openings required by Section 903.2.11.1., or where
walls, partitions or other obstructions are installed that restrict the
application from hose streams, the basement shall be equipped throughout with
an approved automatic sprinkler system. Where any occupancy classification
except Group S or U occurs in a basement, the entire basement shall be equipped
throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
   903.3.1.1 NFPA 13 sprinkler systems. Where the provisions of this code
require that a building or portion thereof be equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with this section, sprinklers shall be
installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13 except as provided in Sections
903.3.1.1.1 and 903.3.1.1.2. A safety factor for hydraulic calculations shall
be a minimum of 5 psi or 10% of the available pressure, whichever is greater.
Flexible sprinkler hose is not be permitted for use in any NFPA 13, 13R or 13D
system, unless specifically approved by the Fire Code Official.
   903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems. Automatic Sprinkler Systems in Group R
occupancies shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with
NFPA 13R where the Group R occupancy meets all of the following conditions:
   1.   Four stories or less above grade plane.
   2.   The floor level of the highest story is 30 feet or less above the
lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
   3.   The floor level of the lowest story is 30 feet or less below the lowest
level of fire department vehicle access.
   The number of stories of Group R occupancies constructed in accordance with
Sections 510.2 and 510.4 of the International Building Code shall be measured
from grade plane. A safety factor for hydraulic calculations shall be a minimum
of 5 psi or 10% of the available pressure, whichever is greater.
   903.3.1.2.1 Balconies and decks. Sprinkler protection shall be provided for
exterior balconies, decks and ground floor patios of dwelling units and
sleeping units. where either of the following conditions exists:
   1.   The building is of Type V construction, provided that there is a roof
or deck above.
   2.   Exterior balconies, decks and ground floor patios of dwelling units and
sleeping units are constructed in accordance with Section 705.2.3.1, Exception
3 of the International Building Code.
   Sidewall sprinklers that are used to protect such areas shall be permitted
to be located such that their deflectors are within 1 inch to 6 inches below
the structural members and a maximum distance of 14 inches below the deck of
the exterior balconies and decks that are constructed of open wood joist
construction.
   903.4 Sprinkler systems supervision and alarms. Valves controlling the water
supply for automatic sprinkler systems, pumps, tanks, water levels and
temperatures, critical air pressures and water flow switches on all sprinkler
systems shall be electrically supervised by a listed fire alarm control unit
manual fire alarm system in compliance with NFPA 72 requirements and the
Illinois Accessibility Code for occupant notification.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Automatic Sprinkler systems protecting one- and two family dwellings.
   2.   Limited area sprinkler systems in accordance with Section 903.3.8
   3.   Automatic sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13R where
a common supply main is used to supply both domestic water and the Automatic
sprinkler system, and a separate shutoff valve for the automatic sprinkler
system is not provided.
   4.   Jockey pump control valves that are sealed or locked in the open
position.
   5.   Control valves to commercial kitchen hoods, paint spray booths or dip
tanks that are sealed or locked in the open position.
   6.   Valves controlling the fuel supply to fire pump engines that are sealed
or locked in the open position.
   7.   Trim valves to pressure switches in dry, preauction and deluge
sprinkler systems that are sealed or locked in the open position.
   8.   Underground key or hub gate valves in roadway boxes.
   903.4.2 Alarms. An approved audible and visual device with a blue lens,
located on the exterior of the building in an approved location, shall be
connected to each automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler waterflow alarm
devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single
sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Where a fire
alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall
actuate the building fire alarm system.
   FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
   SECTION 907 - FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS
   907.1.3 Equipment. All fire alarm systems shall be of the addressable type
and shall be installed per NFPA 72. Systems and components shall be listed and
approved for the purpose for which they are installed.
   907.1.4 Notification of Disconnection. Any disconnection of an active fire
alarm system from the system monitoring station on file with the Village’s Fire
Department shall be reported in writing to the Fire Department by the property
owner or other responsible party within 24 hours of such disconnection. Failure
to make such notification to the Fire Department shall be a violation of this
code.
   907.1.4 Re-Connection of Alarm System. Failure to reconnect a required fire
alarm system to a system monitoring station approved by the Village’s Fire
Department within 24 hours of any disconnection shall be a violation of this
code.
   907.2 Where Required-new buildings and structures. An approved fire alarm
system installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and NFPA 72,
shall be provided-in new buildings and structures in accordance with Sections
907.2.1 through 907.2.23, and provide occupant notification in accordance with
Section 907.5, unless other requirements are proved by another section of this
code. Not fewer than one manual fire alarm box shall be provided in an approved
location to initiate a fire alarm signal for fire alarm systems employing
automatic fire detectors or waterflow detection devices. Where other sections
of this code allow elimination of fire alarm boxes due to sprinklers, a single
fire alarm box shall be installed.
   Exceptions Exception:
   1.   The manual fire alarm box is not required for alarm systems dedicated
to elevator recall control supervisory service.
   2.   The manual fire alarm box is not required for Group R-2 occupancies
unless required by the fire code official to provide a means for fire watch
personnel to initiate an alarm during a sprinkler system impairment event.
Where provided, the manual fire alarm box shall not be located in an area that
is open to the public.
   907.2.1 Group A. Group A is deleted and replaced in its entirety with the
following:
   907.2.1 Group A. A manual/automatic fire alarm system and an automatic fire
detection system that activates an occupant notification system in accordance
with Section 907.5 of this code shall be installed throughout all Group A
occupancies.
   Exception: Where an automatic sprinkler system is provided throughout a
building and connected to the building fire alarm system, an automatic fire
detection system is not required unless otherwise required by law.
   907.2.2 Group B. Group B is deleted and replaced in its entirety with the
following:
   907.2.2 Group B. A manual/automatic fire alarm system and an automatic fire
detection system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance
with Section 907.5 shall be installed throughout all occupancies containing
group B occupancies.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Group B occupancies having an occupant load of less than 50 which have
a direct exit to a building exterior except restaurants or establishments where
alcoholic beverages or cannabis are permitted to be consumed.
   2.   Where an automatic sprinkler system is provided throughout the building
and connected to the building fire alarm system, and automatic fire detection
system is not required unless otherwise required by law.
   907.2.3 Group E. Group E is deleted and replaced in its entirety with the
following:
   907.2.3 Group E. A manual/automatic fire alarm system and an automatic fire
detection system which activates an occupant notification system in accordance
with Section 907.5 of this code shall be installed throughout group E
occupancies. Activation of the fire alarm in Group E occupancies shall initiate
a signal using an emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with
Section 907.5.2.2 of this code.
   Exception: Where an automatic sprinkler system is provided throughout a
building and connected to a building fire alarm system, an automatic fire
detection system is not required unless otherwise required by law.
   907.2.4 Group F. Section 907.2.4 Group F is deleted and replaced in its
entirety with the following:
   907.2.4 Group F and S. A manual/ automatic fire alarm system and an
automatic fire detection system that activates an occupant notification system
in accordance with Section 907.5 of this code shall be installed throughout all
group F and S occupancies.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Occupancies having an occupant load of less than 50 and having direct
exiting to the building exterior.
   2.   Where an automatic sprinkler system is provided throughout a building
and connected to a building fire alarm system, an automatic fire detection
system is not required unless otherwise required by law.
   3.   An automatic fire detection system is not required in open parking
garages.
   907.2.7 Group M. Section 907.2.7 is deleted and replaced in its entirety
with the following:
   907.2.7 Group M. A manual/automatic fire alarm system and an automatic fire
detection system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance
with Section 907.5 shall be installed throughout group M occupancies.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Occupancies having an occupant load less than 50 which have a direct
exit to the building exterior.
   2.   Where an automatic sprinkler system is provided throughout a building
and connected to a building fire alarm system, an automatic fire detection
system is not required unless otherwise required by law.
   907.2.8 Group R-1. Section 907.2.8 is deleted and replaced in its entirety
with the following:
   907.2.8 Group R-1. A manual/automatic fire alarm system and an automatic
fire detection system that activates the occupant notification system in
accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed throughout all occupancies
containing group R-1 occupancies.
   Exception: Where an automatic sprinkler system is provided throughout a
building and connected to a building fire alarm system, an automatic fire
detection system is not required unless otherwise required by law.
   907.2.8 Group R-2. Section 907.2.8 is deleted and replaced in its entirety
with the following:
   907.2.8 Group R-2. A manual/automatic fire alarm system and an automatic
fire detection system that activates an occupant notification system in
accordance with Section 907.5 of this code shall be installed throughout all
group R-2 occupancies.
   Exception: Where an automatic sprinkler system is provided throughout the
building and connected to the building fire alarm system, an automatic fire
detection system is not required unless otherwise specified.
   907.2.10 Group S. Section 907.2.10 deleted in its entirety.
   907.5.2 Alarm notification appliances. Alarm notification appliances shall
be provided and shall be listed for their purpose. The code requires that fire
alarm systems be equipped with approved alarm notification appliances so that
in an emergency, the fire alarm system will notify the occupants of the need
for evacuation or implementation of the fire emergency plan. Alarm notification
devices required by the code are of two general types: visible and audible. An
additional audible and visual device with a red lens, shall be located on the
exterior of the building in an approved location. Except for voice/ alarm
signaling systems, once the system has been activated, all visible and audible
alarms are required to activate. Voice/alarm signaling systems are special
signaling systems that are activated selectively in response to specific
emergency conditions.
   907.5.2.3 Visible alarms. Visible alarm notification appliances shall be
provided in accordance with Sections 907.5.2.3.1 through
907.5.2.3.4 907.5.2.3.3.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Visible alarm notification appliances are not required in alterations,
except where an existing fire alarm system is upgraded or replaced, or a new
fire alarm system is installed.
   1 2.   Visible alarm notification appliances shall not be required in exits
as defined in Chapter .
   2 3.   Visible alarm notification appliances shall not be required in
elevator cars.
   3 4.   Visual alarm notification appliances are not required in critical
care areas of Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancies that are in compliance with
Section 907.2.6, Exception 2.
   4 5.   A visible alarm notification appliance installed in a nurses’ control
station or other continuously attended staff location in a Group I-2 Condition
2 occupancies that are in compliance with Section 907.2.6, Exception 2.
   907.5.2.3.3 Group R-2. In Group R-2 occupancies required by Section 907 to
have a fire alarm system, each story that contains dwelling units and sleeping
units shall be provided with the capability to support future visible alarm
notification appliances in accordance with Chapter 11 of ICC A117.1. Such
capability shall accommodate wired or wireless equipment. Type A units as
described in the International Building Code shall be equipped with audio/
visual devices.
   907.5.2.3.4 Visible alarms in new, existing and alterations. Visible alarm
notification appliances shall be provided in the following buildings:
   1.   Where a new fire alarm system is installed;
   2.   Where an existing fire alarm system is upgraded or replaced; or
   3.   Buildings undergoing alterations in any occupancy group where a fire
alarm currently exists.
   907.6.4.3 Zone maps. Fire alarm zone maps shall be provided at all fire
alarm control panels, annunciator panels, fire command center, and any other
location as determined by the fire official. The zone maps shall provide the
locations of all fire alarm initiating devices set forth in a floor plan.
   SECTION 913 – FIRE PUMPS
   1913.2 Protection against interruption of service: The fire pump, driver and
controller shall be protected in accordance with NFPA 20 against possible
interruption of service through damage caused by explosion, fire flood,
earthquake, rodents, insects, windstorm, freezing, vandalism and other adverse
conditions. Where a building is equipped with an emergency generator, any fire
pump shall be connected to the generator.
   CHAPTER 10
   MEANS OF EGRESS
   1013.5 Internally illuminated exit signs.
   Electrically powered, self-luminous and photoluminescent exit signs shall be
listed and labeled in accordance with UL 924 and shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, Section 1203, and the latest
edition of the National Electric Code as adopted and amended by the Village of
Oak Park. Exit signs shall be illuminated at all times.
   CHAPTER 11
   CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS
   1103.2 Emergency Responder Radio Coverage in Existing Buildings. Existing
buildings other than Group R-3, that do not have an approved radio coverage for
emergency responders in the building based on existing coverage levels of the
public safety communication systems, shall be equipped with such coverage
according to one of the following:
   1.   Where an existing wired communication system cannot be repaired or is
being replaced, or where not approved in accordance with Section 510.1,
Exception 1.
   2.   Within a time, frame established by the adopting authority
   3.   Existing systems shall be maintained in accordance with Section 510.6.
   1103.5 Sprinkler Systems. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in
existing buildings in accordance with Sections 1103.5.1 through
1103.5.4 1103.5.6
   1103.5.1 Group A-2. Where alcoholic beverages or cannabis are consumed in a
Group A-2 occupancy having an occupant load of 300 100 or more, the fire area
containing the Group A-2 occupancy shall be equipped with an automatic
sprinklers system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Restaurants or
establishments where alcoholic beverages or cannabis are permitted to be
consumed shall have a manual fire alarm and an automatic fire alarm system with
notification of any size or occupant load.
   1103.5.5 Existing Basements. If occupancy is permitted in a basement within
any occupancy classification except Group R-2, R-3, S or U, the entire basement
shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
   1103.5.6 Monitoring and Notification for Existing Sprinkler Systems.
Sprinkler systems installed in commercial buildings shall have monitoring and
notification devices installed per Sections 903.4 and 907.5 where existing fire
alarms are installed within the building.
(Ord. 2014-0-62, 10-6-2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. Ord. 20-083, 9-21-2020; Ord.
23-52, 6-20-2023)
ARTICLE 6
RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION:
7-6-1: Adoption
7-6-2: Amendments
7-6-1: ADOPTION:
   A.   The 2021 international residential code (2009 IRC) as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted by the Village by reference and
is made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this section with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes set forth in section
7-6-2 of this article. To the extent that the provisions of the IRC are
inconsistent with any codes previously adopted by the Village by reference, the
provisions of the IRC shall govern unless specifically set forth in this code.
In the event of a conflict between any provisions of the IRC and any provision
of the Oak Park Village Code, the provisions of the Oak Park Village Code shall
govern.
   B.   There shall be three (3) copies of the IRC kept on file for public
inspection in the office of the Chief Building Official. (Ord. 2014-0-63, 10-6-
2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. Ord. 20-080, 9-21-2020; Ord. 23-53, 6-20-2023)
7-6-2: AMENDMENTS:
The 2021 international residential code, as adopted pursuant to section 7-6-
1 of this article, is hereby amended by adding the underlined language and
deleting the overstricken language as follows:
   CHAPTER 1
   SECTION R102 - APPLICABILITY
   R102.5 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless
specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance. The following appendices are
adopted as part of this code:
   1.   Appendix A - Sizing And Capacities Of Gas Piping;
   2.   Appendix B - Sizing Of Venting Systems Serving Appliances Equipped With
Draft Hoods, Category 1 Appliances, And Appliances Listed For Use With Type B
Vents;
   3.   Appendix C - Exit Terminals Of Mechanical Draft And Direct-Vent Venting
Systems;
   4.   Appendix D - Recommended Procedure For Safety Inspection Of An Existing
Appliance Installation;
   5.   Appendix F - Radon Control Methods, as amended hereinafter;
   6.   Appendix G - Piping Standards for Various Applications;
   7.   Appendix H - Patio Covers;
   8.   Appendix J - Existing Buildings And Structures;
   9.   Appendix K - Sound Transmission;
   10.   Appendix M - Home Day Care - R-3 Occupancy.; and
   11.   Appendix X . Electrification For New Residential Buildings.
   TABLE R302.1(1)
   EXTERIOR WALLS
EXTERIOR WALL ELEMENT MINIMUM FIRE RESISTANCE RATING MINIMUM FIRE SEPARATION
                                                     DISTANCE
                                                                                                      MINIMUM
EXTERIOR WALL ELEMENT   MINIMUM FIRE RESISTANCE RATING                                                FIRE
                                                                                                      SEPARATION
                                                                                                      DISTANCE
             Fire       1 hour—tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL263 or Section 703.3 of the
             resistance International Building Code with exposure from both sides                     0 feet
Walls        rated
             Not fire
             resistance 0 hours                                                                       3 feet
             rated
             Not        N/A                                                                           < 1 foot
             allowed
             Fire                                                                                     1 foot to
Projections  resistance 1 hour on the underside, or heavy timber, or fire-retardant-treated wood a,b  < 2 feet
             rated
             Not fire
             resistance 0 hours                                                                       2 feet
             rated
             Not        N/A                                                                           < 3 feet
             allowed
Openings in  25%
walls        maximum of 0 hours                                                                       < 5 feet
             wall area
             Unlimited  0 hours                                                                       5 feet
Penetrations All        Comply with Section R302.4                                                    < 3 feet
                        None required                                                                 3 feet
   For SI: 1 foot = 304.8mm
   NA = Not Applicable.
   a.   The fire-resistance rating shall be permitted to be reduced to 0 hours
on the underside of the eave overhang if fireblocking is provided from the wall
top plate to the underside of the roof sheathing.
   b.   The fire-resistance rating shall be permitted to be reduced to 0 hours
on the underside of the rake overhang where gable vent openings are not
installed.
   SECTION R313 - AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
   R313.2 One- And Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Systems. An automatic
residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in new construction of
one- and two-family dwellings.
      Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be
required for additions or alterations to existing buildings that are not
already provided with an automatic residential sprinkler system.
   R313.3 Existing Structures. See Section AJ101.9 below for sprinkler
requirements for existing structures.
   CHAPTER 15
   EXHAUST SYSTEMS
   SECTION M1503 . DOMESTIC COOKING EXHAUST EQUIPMENT
   M1503.6.3 Makeup Air Temperature. The temperature differential between
makeup air and the air in the conditioned space shall not exceed 10°F except
where the added heating and cooling loads of the makeup air do not exceed the
capacity of the HVAC system.
   CHAPTER 25 PLUMBING ADMINISTRATION is deleted in its entirety.
   CHAPTER 26
   GENERAL PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS
   SECTION P2601 - GENERAL
   P2601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the installation
of plumbing not specifically covered in other chapters applicable to plumbing
systems. The installation of plumbing, appliances, equipment and systems not
addressed by this code shall comply with the applicable provisions of the
international plumbing code. The provisions of the current edition of the state
of Illinois plumbing code shall govern the erection, installation, alteration,
repairs, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing
equipment and systems
   P2601.2 Connection. Plumbing fixtures, drains and appliances used to receive
or discharge liquid wastes or sewage shall be connected to the sanitary
drainage system of the building or premises in accordance with the requirements
of this code. This section shall not be construed to prevent indirect waste
systems.
   Exception: Bathtubs, showers, lavatories, clothes washers and laundry trays
shall not be required to discharge to the sanitary drainage system where such
fixtures discharge to systems complying with Sections P2910 AND 92911.
   All new one or two-family dwellings shall contain the following:
   1.   New sewer service from the principle structure to the Village sewer
main;
   2.   Over-head sewer system in buildings with basements;
   3.   New water service from the principle structure to the Village water
main;
   4.   A new water meter, which shall be purchased from the Village; and
   5.   A new buffalo box water shut off valve installed in the parkway, which
shall be purchased from the Village.
   Delete Section P2601.3 Flood Hazard Area in its entirety.
   Delete Sections P2602, Individual Water Supply and Sewage Disposal, through
section P2609 Materials Evaluation and Listing, inclusive, in their entirety.
   Delete Chapter 27 Plumbing Fixtures in its entirety.
   Delete Chapter 28 Water Heaters in its entirety.
   Delete Chapter 29 Water Supply and Distribution in its entirety.
   Delete Chapter 30 Sanitary Drainage in its entirety.
   Delete Chapter 31 Vents in its entirety.
   Delete Chapter 32 Traps in its entirety.
   Delete Chapter 33 Storm Drainage in its entirety.
   CHAPTER 34
   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
   Sections E3401.2 Scope, E3401.3 Not Covered, E3401.4 Additions and
Alterations, E3402 Building Structure Protection and, E403.1 Approval in its
entirety are deleted in their entirety.
   Section E3403.2 Inspection Required. New electrical work and parts of
existing systems affected by new work or alterations shall be inspected by the
building official to ensure compliance with the requirements of chapters 34
through 43. Work inspected and approved shall not be modified without obtaining
a subsequent approval after the modification. The chief building official may
require any equipment, component, or panelboard, or access to these elements to
be opened for inspection. The building official may require any project related
personnel to be on site for any inspection, including, but not limited to
property owners, design professionals, general contractor and/or sub-contractor
representatives or owners.
   Safe access shall be provided to all areas required for inspection. The
building official reserves the right to not perform any inspection where safe
access is not provided, including but not necessarily limited to, trenches,
ladders, temporary stairs, guardrails, areas requiring the removal of safety
equipment such as boots or hard hats, and/or manholes or vaults. Where
specialty safety equipment is required to perform an inspection, it shall be
provided for the inspector to use for the inspection, by a responsible party to
the construction project.
   The property owner shall ultimately be responsible for assuring that all the
required inspections are approved.
   Sections E3403.3 LISTING AND LABELING IN ITS ENTIRETY, E3404 - GENERAL
EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS; E3405 - EQUIPMENT LOCATION AND CLEARANCES; E3406 -
ELECTRICAL CONDUCTORS AND CONNECTIONS, E3407 CONDUCTOR AND TERMINAL
IDENTIFICATION are deleted in their entirety.
   Delete Chapter 35 Electrical Definitions in its entirety.
   Delete Chapter 36 Services in its entirety.
   Delete Chapter 37 Branch Circuit And Feeder Requirements in its entirety.
   Delete Chapter 38 Wiring Methods in its entirety.
   Delete Chapter 39 Power And Lighting Distribution in its entirety.
   Delete Chapter 40 Devices And Luminaires in its entirety.
   Delete Chapter 41 Appliance Installation in its entirety.
   Delete Chapter 42 Swimming Pools in its entirety.
   Delete Chapter 43 Class 2 Remote-Control, Signaling And Power-Limited
Circuits in its entirety.
   APPENDIX F
   RADON CONTROL METHODS
   SECTION AF101 - SCOPE
   Appendix F section AF101.1 General. This appendix contains requirements for
new construction in jurisdictions where radon resistant construction is
required. Where installed, radon control methods shall be in accordance with
this appendix unless superseded by state law.
   APPENDIX J
   EXISTING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
   SECTION AJ102 - COMPLIANCE
   Appendix J sections AJ102.10 and AJ102.11 are added as follows:
   Section AJ102.10 Conversion Into Habitable Space. When any area not
previously approved or utilized as habitable space is converted into and/or
utilized as habitable space, regardless of the amount of construction work done
in this area, it shall be considered as reconstruction and shall be subject to
the requirements of this appendix and the provisions of section R310 of this
code.
   Section AJ102.11 Conversion Into A Sleeping Room. When any area not
previously approved or utilized as a sleeping room is converted into and/or
utilized as a sleeping room, regardless of the amount of construction work that
was or was not done in this conversion or change of utilization, it shall be
subject to all requirements for new construction of a sleeping room as found in
this code.
   AJ102.12 Adding Insulation to Existing Attics
   Additional structural load of insulation in existing attics: When insulation
is added to existing attics, either at the attic floor level or under the roof
deck, winter snow will accumulate on the roof structure potentially adding load
beyond the ability of the existing structure to adequately support the added
load. Where total attic insulation exceeds R-25, calculations shall be
submitted demonstrating proof that the existing structure complies with the
requirements of Table 301.2(1) or Table 301.6 whichever is greater. Where
existing roof framing does not comply, submit drawings and calculations showing
required alterations to the structure to bring the roof structure into
compliance.
   SECTION AJ107 - REPAIRS
   AJ107.2 Water Closets 
   Where any water closet is replaced with a newly manufactured water closet,
the replacement water closet shall comply with the requirements of Section
P2903.2 the Illinois Plumbing Code.
   SECTION AJ109 - Alterations
   Add section AJ109.9 as follows:
   AJ109.9 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems in existing one- and two- family
dwellings and townhouses:
   AJ109.9.1 Additions. An automatic NFPA 13D residential fire sprinkler system
shall be installed throughout existing one- and two- family dwellings and
townhouses where the building area of an addition is more than 50% of the
existing building area. A plan clearly showing the total existing building area
and the addition building area shall be provided for approval by the Building
Official.
   AJ109.9.2 Alterations. An automatic NFPA 13D residential fire sprinkler
system shall be installed throughout one- and two- family dwellings and
townhouses where either or both of the following alterations occur:
   1.   Where a work area of more than 50% of the existing building area is
altered. Provide a plan clearly showing the total existing building area except
for covered porches and extent of the work area for approval by the Chief
Building Official and/or the Fire Official; or
   2.   Where more than 50% of plaster or drywall interior wall finishes are
removed down to the studs and replaced with new drywall or plaster wall
finishes. Provide a plan clearly showing the total wall elevation areas of wall
finishes to be removed and replaced. The work area shall be considered the
square footage area from the wall being altered to the center of the room. Work
area calculations shall include the whole house square footage and the altered
square footage and submitted for approval by the Chief Building Official and/or
the Fire Code Official.
   APPENDIX X - ELECTRIFICATION FOR NEW RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
   SECTION 0101- Administration
   X101.1 Purpose. The purpose of this appendix is to provide minimum
requirements for enhanced environmental features in all new residential
buildings regulated by this code.
   X01.2 Objectives. The objectives of this appendix are to reduce production
of greenhouse gasses.
   SECTION X201- Definition
   Definitions. The following words and terms shall for the purpose of this
appendix have the meaning set forth below.
   FOSSIL FUELS: Fossil fuels are made from decomposing plants and animals and
contain carbon and include coal, crude oil and natural gas.
   NEW RESIDENTIAL BUILDING: A new residential building/structure shall mean a
new independent or attached residential structure on a newly created
foundation.
   SECTION X301- ELECTRIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
   X301.1 Electrification requirement for New Residential Buildings. New
residential buildings shall be designed and constructed as follows:
   1.   The source of energy for the building shall be all electric and the
source of energy shall not be fossil fuels. Energy from fossil fuels may be
provided by generators for emergency backup power.
   2.   All heating and air conditioning shall be provided by cold climate air
source or ground source heat pumps.
   3.   A building shall contain an energy recovery ventilation system.
   4.   A building design shall include Manuals J and S calculations, or an
equivalent design, by a licensed design professional.
   5.   All refrigerators, dishwashers, and clothes washers shall be Energy
Star certified.
   6.   Energy for any clothes dryer shall be provided by an electric heat
pump.
   7.   A building shall contain at least one level 2 electric vehicle charging
station at one parking location if a building contains a parking space/garage.
   8.   Directly piped exterior gas fire pits and gas cooking grills whose
source of energy are fossil fuels are prohibited.
(Ord. 2014-0-63, 10-6-2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. Ord. 20-080, 9-21-2020; Ord.
23-53, 6-20-2023)
ARTICLE 7
SIGNS
SECTION:
7-7-1: Findings And Purpose
7-7-1-1: Scope
7-7-2: Relationship To Other Ordinances
7-7-3: Definitions
7-7-4: Sign Permit
7-7-5: Sign Variance
7-7-6: Master Sign Plan
7-7-7: Establishment Of Sign Overlay Districts
7-7-8: Dimension Measurement
7-7-9: General Construction And Design Standards
7-7-10: Obsolete, Abandoned Or Unsafe Signs
7-7-11: Prohibited Signs
7-7-12: Exempt Signs
7-7-13: Temporary Signs
7-7-14: Ground Sign Construction And Design Standards
7-7-15: Building Sign Construction And Design Standards
7-7-16: Electronic Sign Construction And Design Standards
7-7-17: Signs For Hospital Use
7-7-18: Classic Signs
7-7-19: Nonconforming Signs
7-7-20: Signs Projecting Into The Public Right Of Way
7-7-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
The following findings and purposes are hereby adopted:
   A.   It is necessary for the promotion and preservation of the public
health, safety and welfare of the Village that the erection, construction,
location and maintenance of all signs be regulated and controlled.
   B.   A multiplicity of signs is distracting to motorists and a hazard to
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
   C.   A proliferation of off premises signs obscures the legitimate effort of
local business establishments to reasonably identify the location and nature of
their businesses.
   D.   It is a legitimate public purpose to limit signs in the Village to
those reasonably necessary to identify local businesses. Such limitations and
all other sign regulations herein are established to accomplish the following
purposes:
      1.   To protect public safety and welfare.
      2.   To ensure adequate and appropriate identification of uses by
controlling the size and number of signs.
      3.   To enhance the economy and the business and industry of the Village
by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs, and
encouraging better communication with the public.
      4.   To protect commercial districts from sign clutter.
      5.   To protect the public's ability to identify uses and premises
without confusion.
      6.   To limit or eliminate unnecessary distractions that may jeopardize
pedestrian or vehicular traffic safety.
      7.   To assure the maintenance of signs.
      8.   To preserve and protect historic signs and signs of special
significance to the Village.
      9.   To implement the objectives expressed in the Comprehensive Plan.
      10.   To preserve and enhance the natural beauty of the landscape and
residential and commercial architecture, one of the prime assets of the
Village.
      11.   To control and abate the unsightly use of buildings or land.
      12.   To protect the property values and economic well being of the
Village. (Ord. 2009-0-019, 3-23-2009)
7-7-1-1: SCOPE:
It is unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, display or alter or cause
to be constructed, maintained, displayed or altered, a sign within the Village,
except in conformance with this article. (Ord. 2009-0-019, 3-23-2009)
7-7-2: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ORDINANCES:
   A.   Nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed to modify or
alter the provisions of any other chapter of the Village Code. In the event of
a conflict between the requirements of this article and those of any other
provision of the Village Code, the latter shall prevail and control.
   B.   If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or part of this article is,
for any reason, held invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining provisions of this article; and, the application of these
provisions to any persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord.
2009-0-019, 3-23-2009)
7-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, certain words and terms are hereby defined:
A-FRAME SIGN: A temporary advertising device ordinarily in the shape of an "A",
or some variation thereof, located on the ground, not permanently attached and
easily movable, and usually two (2) sided. Also called a "sandwich board".
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3246.jpg]
ABANDONED OR OBSOLETE SIGN: A sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts
any person, advertises a business, lessor, owner, product, activity conducted
or available on the premises where the sign is displayed.
ALLEY: A private or dedicated public way that affords only a secondary means of
access to contiguous property and is less than thirty three feet (33') in
width.
ARCHITECTURAL ELEMENT: A prominent or significant part or feature of a
building, structure, or site.
ATTENTION GETTING DEVICE: A display that utilizes motion or flashing lights to
attract attention of passers-by. Examples include strings of pennants, banners
or streamers, advertising flags, clusters of flags, strings of twirlers or
propellers, flares, balloons, strobe lights, and sequential flashing "runner"
lights.
AWNING: A structure of canvas, canvaslike or other materials extended over a
window or door or over a patio, deck, etc., as a protection from the sun or
rain.
BALLOON SIGN: Any sign that is any lighter than air or gas filled balloon
attached by means of a rope or tether to a definite or fixed location. A
display designed to inflate or move by use of a fan or blower is also
considered a balloon sign. Balloons used as temporary attention getting devices
in conjunction with another sign which are no more than eighteen inches (18")
in diameter, are not considered balloon signs.
BANNER SIGN: Any sign printed or displayed upon cloth or other flexible
material with or without frames.
BARBER POLE: A pole painted in spiral stripes used as a sign by a barbershop or
hairdresser for advertisement.
BUILDING: Any covered structure securely affixed to the land which is designed
for the support, shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, animals, chattels
or other tangible property.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The Chief Building Official or his or her designee.
BULLETIN BOARD: A sign which accommodates manually changeable copy which
displays information on activities and events on the premises.
CANOPY: Any structure, movable or stationary, attached to and deriving its
support from the side of a building or structure for the purpose of shielding a
platform, stoop or sidewalk from the elements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3248.jpg]
CONSTRUCTION FENCE WRAP: A temporary sign made of durable, weather resistant
material such as canvas, nylon or vinyl coated fabric, placed on a construction
fence to conceal a construction site and promote a building being constructed.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign which functions to denote the architect,
contractor or engineer, placed on a lot that is the construction site of such
architect, contractor or engineer.
CURB LINE: The edge of the roadway pavement for any street or alley.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: Any on premises, be it a pole, monument or other type of
sign, providing directions necessary or convenient for motorists or pedestrians
coming onto premises including signs marking entrances and exits, parking
areas, loading zones or circulation directions.
DIRECTORY SIGN: A sign which functions to identify the location of occupants of
a building or group of buildings which are divided into rooms or suites used as
offices or studios.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building having three (3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building having one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building having two (2) dwelling units.
ELECTRONIC SIGN: Signs whose alphabetic, pictographic or symbolic informational
content can be changed or altered on a fixed display screen composed of
electrically illuminated segments. For the purposes of this article, electronic
signs within ground or wall signs are regulated as one of the two (2) following
types:
Electronic Display Screen: A sign, or portion of a sign, that displays an
electronic image or video, which may or may not include text. This definition
includes television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, flat screens, LED
screens, video boards and holographic displays.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3250.jpg]
Electronic Message Sign: Any sign, or portion of a sign, that uses changing
lights to form a sign message or messages in text form wherein the sequence of
messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be
modified by electronic processes. "Time and temperature devices" are not
considered electronic message signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3252.jpg]
EXTERIOR ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign, any part of which is illuminated from an
exterior artificial light source mounted on the sign, another structure or the
ground.
FLASHING SIGN: A sign with blinking or flashing lights, or other illuminating
devices that change light intensity, brightness or color, traveling/chasing or
blinking lights, or rotating beacons are prohibited. Electronic signs are not
considered flashing signs; however, the messages or images on an electronic
sign may not imitate flashing signs.
FRONTAGE: All the property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting
streets measured along the street line, or, if the street is a dead end, then
all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the
dead end of the street.
GHOST SIGN: A painted wall sign that remains from an earlier time or advertises
the use of a building that provides evidence of the history of the use of the
building or activities of the community. A "ghost sign" is not considered an
off premises sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3254.jpg]
GRADE: Grade is measured as the average level of the finished surface of the
ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the structure. Grade is used as the
starting point to measure height. For purposes of this article, any wall
approximately parallel to and not more than twenty feet (20') from a street
line is to be considered as adjoining the street.
   A.   For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, "grade" is
defined as the elevation of the sidewalk at the midpoint of the wall adjoining
the street.
   B.   For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, "grade" is
defined as the average of the elevation of the sidewalk at the midpoints of all
walls adjoining the streets.
   C.   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, "grade" is defined
as the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building.
   D.   Where no sidewalk exists, the grade shall be established by the Village
Engineer.
GROUND FLOOR: Any floor that is not more than three feet (3') above or below
grade.
GROUND SIGN: A sign that is attached to a completely self-supporting structure.
A ground sign may be a pole or monument sign.
Sign, Ground - Monument: Any sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or
supported by the ground independently of any other structure. Ground monument
signs are typically mounted on a masonry base. As distinguished from a ground
pole sign, the sign base of any monument sign must be a minimum of seventy five
percent (75%) or more of the width of the sign face that is to be situated upon
the base. A sign base less than seventy five percent (75%) of the width of the
sign face is considered a ground pole sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3256.jpg]
Sign, Ground - Pole: A sign erected and maintained on one or more freestanding
mast(s) or pole(s) and not attached to any building, but not including a ground
monument sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3258.jpg]
HOSPITAL: A place with a full time staff of resident licensed physicians and
registered nurses and with complete facilities for the general diagnosis,
treatment, and care of inpatients suffering from illness, disease, injury,
deformity or other abnormal physical or mental condition and offering customary
outpatient services as an accessory use.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: Any sign which functions to identify an institution,
occupant, apartment, residence, school or church, and not advertising any
product or service.
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign illuminated by a light source, either
incandescent, fluorescent, neon or other light, that is enclosed by the sign
panel(s) or within the sign.
LOT: A zoning lot, except as the context herein shall indicate a lot of record.
LOT LINE: A boundary of a zoning lot.
LOT OF RECORD: A single lot which is part of a subdivision or resubdivision
which has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County,
Illinois.
LOT, ZONING: A parcel of land, at least one lot line of which is a street line,
which is located within a single block, and which is or will be used, developed
or built upon as a unit. A zoning lot may or may not coincide with a lot of
record.
MENU BOARD: A device which functions to list items for sale at a drive-through
restaurant.
MOVING SIGN: A sign or other advertising structure with moving, revolving or
rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any kind, including wind
activated signs. Clocks are not considered signs with moving parts.
MURAL: A picture or photograph painted or applied directly on a wall and which
in no way identifies a product.
NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE: A message that does not direct attention to a business
or to a service or commodity for sale, and is typically of a political,
religious, or ideological nature.
OBSCENE SIGN: A sign which is found to meet the three (3) established criteria
of obscenity: a) prurient in nature; b) devoid of scientific, political,
educational or social value; and c) a violation of local community standards.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: Any sign which directs attention to a business, service,
product or entertainment not sold or offered or only incidentally sold or
offered on the premises on which the sign is located.
PENNANT SIGN: Any geometric shaped cloth, fabric or other lightweight material
normally fastened to a stringer, which is secured or tethered so as to allow
movement of the sign.
PERMANENT SIGN: A sign attached to a structure or the ground which is made of
materials intended for long term use.
POLITICAL SIGN: A sign whose function is to draw attention to or communicate a
position on any issue, candidate or measure in any national, state or local
election.
PORTABLE SIGN: A sign which is mounted or designed to be mounted on a self-
propelled or towed vehicle, and shall include, but not be limited to, mobile
advertising signs attached to a trailer or other vehicle.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign which extends out from a building face or wall so that
the sign face is perpendicular or at an angle to the building face or wall.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3260.jpg]
ROOF SIGN: Any sign located on or attached to and extending above the roof of a
building.
SIGN: Any visual device or representation designed or used for the purpose of
communicating a message or identifying a product, service, person,
organization, business or event, with the use of words or characters, visible
from outside the premises on which such device is located. Murals are not
considered to be signs.
SIGN AREA: The area of the largest single face of the sign within a perimeter
which forms the outside shape including any frame that forms an integral part
of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which the
sign may be placed. See subsection 7-7-8A of this article for measurement of
sign area.
SIGN FACE: The visible sign proper including all characters and symbols,
excluding essential structural elements which are not an integral part of the
display.
SIGN STRUCTURE: Any structure or material which supports, has supported or is
capable of supporting or helping maintain a sign in a stationary position,
including decorative covers.
STREET: A right of way dedicated or used as a public thoroughfare or easement
that affords primary means of access to contiguous property and is thirty three
feet (33') or more in width.
STREET LINE: A lot line that is also the boundary line of the right of way of
an existing or dedicated street.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground,
or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Without
limitation on the foregoing, a structure shall include buildings, fences,
walls, billboards and signs.
TEMPORARY POLE SIGN: A freestanding sign not intended or designed for permanent
display mounted on a pole or other structure, which is also temporary in
construction.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign not intended or designed for permanent display.
TEMPORARY WALL SIGN: A temporary sign attached to a wall not intended or
designed for permanent display.
TEMPORARY WINDOW SIGN: A temporary sign attached to or placed upon a window or
door of a building intended for viewing from the exterior of such a building
and not intended or designed for permanent display.
TIME AND TEMPERATURE DEVICE: A mechanism integrated into a sign that displays
the time and/or temperature, but does not display any commercial advertising or
identification.
TRANSIT SHELTER SIGNS: Signs integrated into the design of a transit shelter
when that shelter is installed on property owned or operated by a public
transit corporation, or on the public right of way pursuant to an agreement
authorized by the Village.
UNDER AWNING SIGN: Any sign attached to and mounted under an awning.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3262.jpg]
UNDER CANOPY SIGN: Any sign attached to and mounted under a canopy.
WALL SIGN: A sign attached to, painted on or erected against the wall of a
building with the face in a parallel plane of the building wall.
WINDOW SIGN: A sign printed on, affixed to, in contact with or etched on,
intended for viewing from the exterior of such a building. Any sign within
twelve inches (12") of a window or the glass surface of a door, and is visible
from the public street. (Ord. 2009-0-019, 3-23-2009; amd. Ord. 2011-0-63, 10-3-
2011; Ord. 2014-0-66, 10-6-2014; Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015; Ord. 22-18, 3-21-2022)
7-7-4: SIGN PERMIT:
No sign shall be constructed, maintained, displayed or altered within the
Village except pursuant to an approved sign permit, unless the sign is
specifically exempt from permit requirements.
   A.   Applicability: No sign, except those identified as exempt, shall be
erected, constructed, altered or relocated without first obtaining a sign
permit.
   B.   Authority And Execution: The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible
for determining compliance with this article, and the Development Services
Department shall be responsible for issuing a sign permit.
   C.   Permit Issuance:
      1.   Upon the filing of an application with the Development Services
Department for a sign permit for erection, alteration or relocation of a sign,
the Development Services Department shall determine whether the application is
complete. If the application is not complete, the Development Services
Department shall notify the applicant of any deficiencies, and shall take no
steps to process the application until the deficiencies are remedied.
      2.   The Development Services Department shall examine the plans and
specifications, and the premises upon which the proposed sign is to be erected
to ensure compliance with the requirements of the Village's building code and
all other applicable ordinances of the Village. The Development Services
Department shall issue a sign permit if the proposed sign complies with the
requirements of this article and all other ordinances of the Village.
   D.   Approval Of Electrified Signs: A sign for which electrical wiring and
connections are to be used shall comply with the electrical code of the Village
as a condition of granting the sign permit.
   E.   Inspection: The Development Services Department may inspect, at such
times as deemed appropriate, signs regulated by this article. The purpose of
the inspection is to ascertain whether the structure is secure or not secure,
whether in need of repair or removal, or in conformance with the permit
application and the provisions of this article.
   F.   Revocation Of Permit: All rights and privileges acquired under the
provisions of this section are licenses revocable at any time by the Village
Board. Upon the termination or revocation of the sign permit, the licensee
shall remove the sign or other sign structure without cost or expense to the
Village. In the event of the failure, neglect or refusal on the part of the
licensee to do so, the Village may proceed to remove the same and charge the
expense to the licensee.
   G.   Void: If the work authorized under a sign permit is not completed
within six (6) months after the date of issuance, the permit shall be null and
void.
   H.   Enforcement: If any sign shall be unlawfully installed, erected or
maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this article, the sign
owner or other person responsible for maintaining the sign, shall, upon written
notice from the Development Services Department, bring such sign into
conformance with this article or remove the sign within ten (10) business days
of the date of such notice. (Ord. 16-070, 6-6-2016; amd. Ord. 25-111, 3-4-2025)
7-7-5: SIGN VARIANCE:
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide upon requests for variances
from this article.
   A.   Determination Of Need For A Variance: It shall be the duty of the
Zoning Administrator, after an application for any sign permit, to determine
and advise the applicant whether under the provisions of this article, a sign
variance is required.
   B.   Preliminary Conference: Any applicant for a sign permit that requires a
variance may file a written request for a preliminary conference with the
Zoning Board of Appeals. At the conference, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider preliminary exterior drawings, sketches or photographic examples,
landscape and site plans and materials on a specific project, and shall provide
the applicant with guidance in the development of a plan which would be
consistent with the requirements and purposes of this article.
   C.   Procedure:
      1.   Application; Meeting: An applicant for a sign permit that requires a
variance shall apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals for such variance and shall
submit all items as required in subsection
7-7-5 C4 of this section. Upon receipt of such application, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall schedule a meeting where the applicant shall be given an
opportunity to make a presentation and all interested parties shall be given
the opportunity to comment.
      2.   Notice Of Public Hearing: Notice of public hearings on requests for
variances shall be given no more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen
(15) days before the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village. Such notice shall include the time and place of the
hearing, a general description of the contents of the request to be heard, and
the address or location of the property to which the request applies. The
published notice may be supplemented by such additional form of notice as
provided by rule of the hearing body.
      3.   Posted Notice: Posted notice must be provided by an applicant and/or
property owner and must be located on the property that is the subject of an
application. The sign must be posted at a prominent location on the property,
near the sidewalk or public right-of-way so that it is visible to pedestrians
and motorists. Properties with more than one street frontage are required to
post one sign visible on each street frontage. The required posting period must
be no less than fifteen (15) days and no more than 30 days in advance of the
scheduled hearing date. For the purposes of this subsection, a day is a
calendar day. The sign must include the date, time, and place of the hearing/
decision, purpose of such hearing/decision, and the appropriate Village
personnel to contact for additional information. The sign must be approximately
48 inches by forty-eight (48) inches, containing one-inch minimum typeface. The
sign must be weatherproof. Failure to post a sign and/or the removal or
knocking down of a sign before a public hearing shall not invalidate, impair,
or otherwise affect any subsequent variance approval following a public
hearing. The sign must, whenever possible, remain posted until a hearing is
completed. An applicant is responsible for removal of a sign within ten days of
the issuance of a variance decision.
      4.   Submittal Requirements: At the time of the public hearing, the
applicant shall provide the Zoning Board of Appeals with the following
documents depicting exterior design features:
         a.   Drawings which shall include plans, elevations, and site plans.
         b.   Landscaping and screening plans (when appropriate).
         c.   Renderings and specifications for signs.
         d.   A statement as to kind, color and texture of materials.
      All documents shall be drawn to scale.
      5.   Decision: Based upon the findings of fact in subsection
7-7-5 D of this section, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall render its decision
within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing and shall notify the
Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, and the applicant of its decision.
The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be necessary to grant a variance. The order of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be by written resolution and contain its findings of fact.
      6.   Inspection Upon Completion: Upon the granting of a variance, the
exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans, renderings and materials
upon which the variance was granted shall be turned over to the Zoning
Administrator whose responsibility it shall be to determine that, upon
completion, there have been no deviations from the approval regarding sign
design, aesthetics, or regulations contained within this article. The
Development Services Department will be responsible for inspecting the built
sign plans and built sign to ensure that it does not deviate from this article
and other Village codes related to structural, electrical, and any other
regulations contained in this article or other Village Codes. Such deviations
shall constitute a violation of this article, in which event the Zoning
Administrator or Development Services Department may stop work on the project
in the same manner as for a violation of the Village Code. Work may not be
resumed until such deviations are corrected.
      7.   Compliance: It shall be the duty of the person to whom a variance
has been granted to comply with the requirements of the variance and to obtain
such inspections as are necessary to assure compliance. The Building Official
shall give notice to said person of any deficiencies found to exist. Failure to
correct any deficiencies within ten (10) days after receipt of notification of
such deficiency shall constitute a violation of this article.
   D.   Findings Of Fact: After hearing and considering the materials
presented, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall grant a variance if it finds that:
      1.   The applicant's plans are substantially consistent with the design
criteria of this article.
      2.   The proposed exterior design features of the sign are suitable and
compatible with the character of neighboring buildings and structures existing
or under construction and with the character of the neighborhood and the
applicable zoning district, and enhance the environment of the Village.
      3.   The exterior design features of the sign will not be detrimental to
the harmonious and orderly growth of the Village.
      4.   The exterior design features of the sign will not cause a
substantial depreciation in the property values in the neighborhood.
   E.   Appeal:
      1.   Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of a denial of a variance, the
applicant and/or his or her representative may appeal the Zoning Board of
Appeals’s decision to the Village Board. The Village Board, within forty five
(45) days of the applicant filing his or her appeal, shall affirm, reverse or
modify the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals after due consideration of
the facts contained in the record, which the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
submit to the Village Board within ten (10) working days of the filing of the
appeal. The Board of Trustees may receive comments on the contents of the
record, orally at the meeting or in writing, not less than ten (10) days prior
to the meeting at which the Board will first consider the appeal but shall not
consider any new matters that were not presented during the Zoning Board of
Appeals hearings.
      2.   The Village shall, within seven (7) days of its decision, advise the
applicants and the Zoning Board of Appeals, in writing, of its final decision
and shall direct the Village Manager to advise all affected departments of the
Village government.
      3.   The failure of the Village Board to affirm, modify or reverse the
decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals within forty five (45) days of the
applicant filing his or her appeal shall be considered as an affirmance by the
Village Board of the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals and a denial of
the appeal, and the Zoning Board of Appeals shall so notify the applicant and
the affected departments of the Village government.
   The decision of the Village Board will be the final administrative decision
of the Village.
   F.   Validity And Extension Of Time:
      1.   No order granting a variance shall be valid longer than twelve (12)
months from the date the approval was granted unless an application for
building permit is filed within such period or the sign is completely installed
within such period.
      2.   The Village Board may grant one additional extension of time not
exceeding twelve (12) months, upon written application made within the initial
twelve (12) month period, without further notice or hearing. The right to so
extend said time shall not include the right to grant additional relief by
expanding the scope of the variance.
   G.   Amendments To Approved Variances: Amendments to a variance may be
obtained by application in the same manner as provided for an original
variance. (Ord. 2009-0-019, 3-23-2009; amd. Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015; Ord. 22-18,
3-21-2022; Ord. 25-111, 3-4-2025)
7-7-6: MASTER SIGN PLAN:
For new commercial development with multiple tenants, where more than one wall
sign, awning or canopy is proposed, the applicant must submit a master sign
plan for review and approval by the Zoning Administrator. The purpose of a
master sign plan is to coordinate signs on multi-tenant buildings, and create a
plan that establishes a building or site's overall sign design, which then
provides direction to future tenants. A master sign plan must include, at a
minimum, criteria and specifications for general appearance, location,
lighting, and approved construction materials. (Ord. 2009-0-019, 3-23-09)
7-7-7: ESTABLISHMENT OF SIGN OVERLAY DISTRICTS:
   A.   Sign Overlay Districts: The following sign overlay districts are
established, and are mapped in subsection
7-7-7C of this section:
      1.   Residential Sign Overlay District: The purpose of the residential
sign overlay district is to ensure proper regulation of signs common to
residential areas for both limited nonresidential uses that need to identify
their location and services, and the variety of temporary and noncommercial
signs residents may require, provided in a manner that is not contrary to the
established predominant residential character of the district.
      2.   Downtown Sign Overlay District: The purpose of the downtown sign
overlay district is to ensure that signs within the downtown are compatible
with the character and image of the downtown, and provide businesses with a
number of alternatives for identifying their premises and the goods and/or
services sold on the premises to pedestrian and automotive patrons.
      3.   Neighborhood Commercial Sign Overlay District: The purpose of the
neighborhood commercial sign overlay district is to ensure that signs within
these areas are able to balance the needs of commercial users located within or
adjacent to residential neighborhoods to identify their premises and the goods
and/or services sold on the premises without negative impact to the character
of the surrounding residential neighborhoods. Signs within the neighborhood
commercial areas are to be primarily oriented toward the pedestrian.
      4.   Corridor Commercial Sign Overlay District: The purpose of the
corridor commercial sign overlay district is to ensure that signs located along
major arterials provide an effective means of identifying their premises and
the goods and/or services sold on the premises, as well as presenting a
positive and coordinated appearance along the roadway. Signs within the
corridor commercial areas are to be primarily oriented toward the automobile.
   B.   Hospital Use: A hospital that falls within any of the sign overlay
districts established is subject to the regulations for a "hospital", as
defined in this article, provided under section
7-7-17 of this article.
   C.   Sign Overlay District Location: The sign overlay districts are shown in
figure 7.7.7-1, as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3264.gif]
(Ord. 2009-0-019, 3-23-09)
7-7-8: DIMENSION MEASUREMENT:
   A.   Computation Of Sign Area: Sign area is calculated as described in this
section.
      1.   For signs on a background, the entire area of the background shall
be calculated for sign area, including any material or color forming the sign
face or background used to differentiate the sign from the structure against
which it is placed. Sign area does not include any supporting framework or
bracing, unless such framework or bracing is part of the message or sign face.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3266.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3268.jpg]
      2.   For signs consisting of freestanding letters or logos, the area of a
sign face ("sign area") is calculated by means of the smallest square, circle,
rectangle or triangle, or combination thereof, that will encompass the extreme
limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display. Sign area does
not include any supporting framework or bracing, unless such framework or
bracing is part of the message or sign face. Window signs printed on a
transparent film and affixed to a window pane shall be considered freestanding
letters or logos, provided that the portion of the transparent film around the
perimeter of the sign message maintains the transparent character of the window
and does not contain any items in the sign message.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3270.jpg]
      3.   The sign area of free form or sculptural (nonplanar) signs is
calculated as fifty percent (50%) of the sum of the area of the four (4)
vertical sides of the smallest cube that will encompass the sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3272.jpg]
      4.   For a double faced sign, if the interior angle between two (2) sign
faces is forty five degrees (45°) or less, the sign area is computed as the
area of one face only. If the angle between two (2) sign faces is greater than
forty five degrees (45°), the sign area is computed as the sum of the areas of
the two (2) faces.
   B.   Measurement Of Sign Height: Sign height is measured as described below.
When measuring sign height, the height of the entire structure, including
decorative elements, must be included. Sign height is measured from the
elevation of the grade at the midpoint of the sign.
      1.   Pole and monument signs: The vertical distance measured from the
grade to the highest point of the sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3274.jpg]
      2.   Signs attached to buildings: The vertical distance from the base of
the building to which a sign is attached to the highest point of the sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3276.jpg]
(Ord. 2009-0-019, 3-23-09)
7-7-9: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
The following standards apply to all signs requiring permits, unless
specifically noted otherwise:
   A.   Location:
      1.   Only signs placed by federal, state and/or local government may be
erected upon public property, unless a sign's placement has been authorized by
the Village. Any sign placed on public property without authorization may be
removed by the Village without notice.
      2.   No sign may be erected on private property without prior consent of
the owner and, when applicable, issuance of a sign permit.
      3.   No sign mounted on the exterior of a building shall cover any
windows, doors or any architectural features.
      4.   On a corner lot, no freestanding sign over two feet (2') tall may be
placed within the clear sight area. The "clear sight area", as defined in
section
25-1-8 of this code, is a triangle with one point at the intersection of the
intersecting streets' centerlines, and the other two (2) points located on each
street's centerline one hundred feet (100') away from the intersection of said
centerlines. The clear sight area is illustrated below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3278.jpg]
   B.   Sign Structure And Installation: Supports and braces shall be an
integral part of the sign design. Supports or braces shall be hidden from
public view to the extent technically feasible. All signs attached to a
building shall be installed and maintained so that wall penetrations are
watertight and the structure does not exceed allowable stresses of supporting
materials. All fasteners used to attach signs to a structure or building shall
be properly sized for the design loads and material of the support, have a
minimum cross section diameter of one-fourth inch (1/4"), and be made of
corrosion resistant material.
   C.   Design Loads (Wind, Direct, And Snow): All signs and awnings must be
designed and constructed to withstand their self-weight (dead load), a wind
pressure of no less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot, snow loads as
required by the Village Code, and ASCE/SEI minimum design loads for buildings
and other structures.
   D.   Illumination:
      1.   Any sign illumination, including gooseneck reflectors and internally
illuminated signs, and all electronic signs must be designed, located, shielded
and directed to prevent the casting of glare or direct light upon roadways and
surrounding properties, or the distraction of motor vehicle operators or
pedestrians in the public right of way. In the case of internally illuminated
signs, the sign face must function as a filter for any illumination.
      2.   No sign illumination shall exceed one (1) foot candle of
illumination at the property line, except for projecting signs and wall signs
where illumination shall not exceed one (1) foot candle at its face.
      3.   The use of neon lighting as an accent is permitted for projecting,
window and wall signs in the downtown, neighborhood commercial and corridor
commercial sign overlay districts, subject to the following:
         a.   Neon lighting shall be used as an accent material on projecting
and wall signs, such as for letters, logos and/or sign details. No projecting,
window or wall sign may be entirely illuminated with neon.
         b.   Neon lighting on projecting and wall signs shall not be
illuminated during the daylight hours. When lit, neon lighting must be
continuously illuminated. Flashing neon is prohibited.
         c.   Neon lighting on projecting and wall signs shall not be combined
with any reflective materials (e.g., mirrors, polished metal, highly glazed
tiles, or other similar materials) that would cause glare and increase the
spread of light.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3280.gif]
      4.   Any lighting, either incandescent, fluorescent, neon or other light
source, including strip lighting, for outlining buildings or elements, such as
doors and windows is prohibited.
      5.   Any sign that uses illumination shall be turned off while the
related business is not open to the public for regular distribution of goods or
services.
   E.   Landscaping: All ground signs must be landscaped at the base of the
sign in accordance with the following:
      1.   Landscaping must extend a minimum of two feet (2') from the sign
base on all sides. All landscaping must be maintained in good condition, and
free and clear of rubbish and weeds. Landscaping around the base of a sign is
included in the total amount of landscaping required on a site, if applicable.
      2.   Ground signs (monument or pole) must be landscaped with small shrubs
a minimum of eighteen inches (18") in height at planting. The remainder of the
landscaped area must be planted with perennials, turf or other ground cover. If
the ground sign is designed with a decorative base, landscaping requirements
may be waived as part of sign permit approval.
   F.   Glass: Glass forming any part of a sign must be safety glass.
   G.   Lettering: All letters, figures, characters or representations in
cutout or irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or
superimposed upon any sign must be safely and securely built or attached to the
sign structure.
   H.   Items Of Information:
      1.   All signs must limit the number of items of information on any
single sign face to no more than six (6) items to prevent traffic hazards for
passing motorists and to minimize the cluttered appearance of signs.
      2.   Each piece of information on a sign shall be defined as an item of
information. For example, each of the following would be defined as one item of
information: a telephone number, the name of the business, even if multiple
words, or the business logo. If the sign advertises products or services, each
product or service would be one item of information. The street number address
of the business is not counted as an item of information.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3282.jpg]
      3.   In the case of an electronic sign, the electronic portion of the
sign counts as one item of information. Changeable message signs, where the
items of information are changed manually, are also counted as one item of
information. For a sign that contains a time and temperature component, the
time and temperature component shall not be counted as one item of information.
      4.   All signs on a zoning lot must be related to goods and/or services
sold or offered on the premises, with the exception of noncommercial or
political signs.
      5.   Ground signs for multi-tenant commercial buildings used to advertise
which tenants are located within the development, are limited to one item of
information per tenant within the development, in addition to the name and
address of the development.
      6.   Directory signs and hospital signs are exempt from the items of
information limitation.
   I.   Maintenance: All signs shall be kept and maintained in a safe, neat and
orderly condition and appearance, and shall be repainted or otherwise
maintained periodically by the owner to prevent corrosion or deterioration
caused by the weather, age or any other condition, and to keep the same in a
safe, neat and orderly condition and appearance. All signs must be maintained
to prevent any kind of safety hazard, including faulty sign structures, a fire
hazard or an electrical shock hazard.
   J.   Design Criteria: The purpose of the design criteria set forth below is
to establish a checklist of those items relative to signs that affect the
physical aspect of Oak Park's environment. Pertinent to signs is the design of
the sign and its relation to building and structures, planting, street
furniture and miscellaneous other objects.
The following criteria are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation or
variety, but rather to assist in focusing on design principles that can result
in creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory visual appearance within
the Village, preserve property values and promote the public health, safety and
welfare:
      1.   Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its design and in
its visual relationship to buildings and surroundings.
      2.   Sign materials, size, color, lettering, location and arrangement
shall be an integral part of site and building design.
      3.   The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be restrained
and harmonious.
      4.   The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the
minimum needed to convey the sign's major message, and shall be composed in
proportion to the area of the sign face. Text should be kept to a minimum.
      5.   Lighting for signs shall be in harmony with the signs' and the
project's design. If external lighting is used, it should be arranged so the
light source is shielded from view.
      6.   Sign supports and braces shall whenever possible be an integral part
of the sign design. Necessary supports or braces shall whenever possible be
hidden from public view. (Ord. 2009-0-019, 3-23-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-0-11, 2-
18-2014; Ord. 22-18, 3-21-2022)
7-7-10: OBSOLETE, ABANDONED OR UNSAFE SIGNS:
   A.   Obsolete Or Abandoned Signs: Any sign, whether existing on or erected
after the effective date of this article, which advertises a business no longer
being conducted or a product no longer being sold in or from the premises to
which the sign relates, shall be taken down and removed by the owner or agent
of the building, structure or premises upon which such sign is found. Removal
shall be effected within twenty (20) days after written notice from the Permits
and Development Division of the Development Services Department. If such a sign
is not removed after such twenty (20) day period, the Permits and Development
Division of the Development Services Department is authorized to have the sign
removed. Any reasonable cost incident thereto shall be filed as a lien against
the property where the sign was located.
   B.   Unsafe Signs: When any sign becomes insecure, in danger of falling, or
otherwise unsafe, or if any sign shall be unlawfully installed, erected or
maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this article or any other
provisions of this code, the owner thereof or the person or firm maintaining
same shall, upon written notice of the Permits and Development District of the
Development Services Department, forthwith in the case of immediate danger, and
in any case within no more than ten (10) days, make such sign conform to the
provisions of this article or remove it. (Ord. 2009-0-019, 3-23-2009; amd. Ord.
15-183, 11-2-2015; Ord. 25-111, 3-4-2025)
7-7-11: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
It is unlawful to erect or maintain any of the following signs:
   A.   Signs with flashing or blinking lights or other means not providing
constant illumination including strobe lights, moving or fixed spotlights and
floodlights.
   B.   Moving signs. No sign or part of any sign shall move or give the
illusion of movement in any manner.
   C.   Illegally affixed signs.
   D.   Permanent banners and pennants. This does not include temporary banners
and pennants permitted in accordance with this article.
   E.   Roof signs.
   F.   Projecting signs in the residential sign overlay district.
   G.   Portable signs.
   H.   Signs of an obscene nature.
   I.   Signs placed or painted on parked vehicles where the primary purpose is
to advertise a product or service, or to direct the public to a business or
activity located on or off the premises are prohibited. Signs displayed on
trucks, buses or other vehicles, which are being operated and stored in the
normal course of a business, such as signs indicating the owner or business
that are located on delivery trucks, moving vans and rental trucks, are
permitted, provided that the primary purpose of such vehicles is not the
display of signs, and that they are parked or stored in areas appropriate to
their use as vehicles. Vehicle for sale signs are also permitted in accordance
with subsection
7-7-13B4 of this article.
   J.   Signs which constitute a traffic hazard, including those signs that:
      1.   Obstruct free and clear vision at any street, intersection, parking
lot entrance or exit, or driveway.
      2.   Interfere with, obstruct the view of, or may be confused with any
authorized traffic sign, signal or device because of its position, shape or
color, including signs illuminated in red, green or amber color to resemble a
traffic signal.
      3.   Make use of the words "stop", "look", "detour", "danger" or any
other word, phrase, symbol or character in a manner that misleads, interferes
with, or confuses traffic.
   K.   Signs which obstruct any ingress or egress, including doors, windows or
fire escapes.
   L.   Off premises signs, except for transit shelter signs.
   M.   Any strip lighting, such as but not limited to, incandescent,
fluorescent, or neon lighting visible from, or applied to, the exterior
outlining buildings, doors or windows or other architectural elements is
prohibited. (Ord. 2009-0-019, 3-23-2009; amd. Ord. 2011-0-63, 10-3-2011; Ord.
22-18, 3-21-2022)
7-7-12: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following signs shall be allowed without a sign permit:
   A.   Bulletin Board: One bulletin board not more than twelve (12) square
feet in surface area for a place of worship, library, school or other public
building, provided such sign shall be located on the same zoning lot as the
principal building.
   B.   Temporary Construction Sign: Temporary construction signs, subject to
the regulations of subsection
7-7-13B7 of this article.
   C.   Warning Sign: Warning signs, such as "no trespassing", "beware of dog",
etc., each not more than one square foot in size and not to exceed four (4) per
zoning lot.
   D.   Official Flags, Banners, Emblems Or Historical Markers: Official
federal, state or local government flags, banners, emblems or historical
markers.
   E.   Official Traffic, Directional And Informational Signs And Notices:
Official federal, state or local government traffic, directional and
informational signs and notices issued by any court, person or officer in
performance of a public duty or any other sign that is required to be posted by
any government agency.
   F.   Hazard Signs: Signs warning of construction, excavation or similar
hazards so long as the hazard exists.
   G.   Holiday Decorations: Holiday decorations.
   H.   Political And Noncommercial Signs: These signs are permitted on private
property only and require consent of the property owner.
   I.   Temporary A-Frame Signs: Temporary A-frame signs, subject to the
regulations of subsection
7-7-13B1 of this article.
   J.   Temporary Banner Signs: Temporary banner signs, subject to the
regulations of subsection
7-7-13B2 of this article.
   K.   Temporary Vehicle For Sale Signs: Temporary vehicle for sale signs,
subject to the regulations of subsection
7-7-13B4 of this article.
   L.   Temporary Window Signs: Temporary window signs, subject to the
regulations of subsection
7-7-13B6 of this article.
   M.   Miscellaneous Information Signs: The following types of miscellaneous
information signs shall be exempt from sign permit requirements:
      1.   Matter appearing on gasoline pumps, and service station rate signs,
including the names of grades of fuel and prices and conditions relating to
prices such as full or self-service.
      2.   Matter appearing on newspaper vending boxes.
      3.   Matter appearing on or adjacent to entry doors such as "push",
"pull", "open" and/or "closed".
      4.   Matter appearing on display windows or doors denoting hours of
operation, credit cards accepted, and similar information.
      5.   Information pertaining to the operating instructions of vending
machines and automatic teller machines, including bank logos on the face of ATM
machines.
   N.   Signs Showing Location Of Public Telephones And Underground Facilities:
Signs showing the location of public telephones and signs placed by utilities
to show the location of underground facilities.
   O.   Directory Signs: Directory signs no more than six (6) square feet in
surface area.
   P.   Real Estate Signs: In all sign overlay districts, one real estate sign
no more than sixteen (16) square feet in surface area for condominium multiple-
family dwellings, and in the downtown, neighborhood commercial and corridor
commercial sign overlay districts, one commercial real estate sign no more than
sixteen (16) square feet in surface area per street frontage, which advertises
the sale or rental of the premises on the lot upon which the sign is located.
   Q.   Traffic Control Signs: Traffic control signs and other such signs,
other than advertising signs, designed for the public safety and convenience,
may be authorized by the Board of Trustees of the Village.
   R.   Accessibility Signs: All signs required for compliance with
accessibility acts and codes.
   S.   Directional Sign: Any on premises sign, be it a pole, monument or other
type of sign, providing directions necessary or convenient for motorists or
pedestrians coming onto premises including signs marking entrances and exits,
parking areas, loading zones or circulation directions. Except when for
hospital use, directional signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet and, if a
pole or monument sign type, shall not be higher than four feet (4') in height.
   T.   Barber Pole: A pole painted in spiral stripes used as a sign by a
barbershop or hairdresser for advertisement. One pole sign no more than two
feet (2') in length and projecting no more than twelve inches (12") from a
building wall to which it is attached.
   U.   Construction Fence Wrap Signs: Construction fence wrap signs, subject
to the regulations of subsection
7-7-13B7 of this article.
   V.   Murals: Murals as defined in section
7-7-3 above. (Ord. 2014-0-66, 10-6-2014; amd. Ord. 22-18, 3-21-2022)
7-7-13: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
   A.   General Regulations For All Temporary Signs:
      1.   Any sign listed in section
7-7-11, "Prohibited Signs", of this article is prohibited.
      2.   Temporary signs must be related to goods and/or services sold on the
premises, except for noncommercial or political messages. Temporary off
premises signs are prohibited.
      3.   No temporary sign may be illuminated.
      4.   All temporary signs must remain in good condition during the display
period. Throughout the display period, corrective action must be taken
immediately should there be any problems with the appearance, condition or
maintenance of the sign and/or support hardware.
      5.   Certain types of temporary signs are controlled by the provisions of
section
7-7-12, "Exempt Signs", of this article. Those temporary signs not listed in
section
7-7-12 of this article are controlled by these provisions.
   B.   Regulations By Temporary Sign Type: Temporary signs must comply with
the regulations contained in subsection
7-7-13A, "General Regulations For All Temporary Signs", of this section and the
following:
      1.   Temporary A-Frame Signs:
         a.   Temporary A-frame signs are permitted only within the downtown
and neighborhood commercial sign overlay districts.
         b.   Temporary A-frame signs are limited to six (6) square feet in
area and four feet (4') in height.
         c.   The use of temporary A-frame signs is limited to business hours
only. Signs must be stored indoors at all other times. Temporary A-frame signs
must not be used outdoors when high winds or heavy snow conditions exist.
         d.   Only one temporary A-frame sign is permitted per business. A
minimum twenty foot (20') separation is required between all temporary A-frame
signs.
         e.   A temporary A-frame sign must be placed within fifteen feet (15')
of the primary entrance of the business, and must not interfere with pedestrian
traffic or violate standards of accessibility as required by the ADA or other
accessibility codes. Placement of temporary A-frame signs must maintain a five
foot (5') sidewalk clearance at all times.
         f.   Temporary A-frame signs are exempt from sign permit requirements
and fees. However, the Village shall monitor compliance with this section for
temporary A-frame signs placed in the public right of way.
If an A-frame sign is not maintained in accordance with this article, the
Village may serve a notice of noncompliance to the owner of the A-frame sign
that the owner must bring the A-frame sign into compliance within five (5) days
of service of the notice.
If an owner fails to bring an A-frame sign into compliance within five (5) days
after service of a notice, the Village is authorized to remove the A-frame sign
to a secure location. The Village shall notify the A-frame sign owner that it
must collect the A-frame sign from the secure location within ten (10) days
following service of the notice. If the A-frame sign owner does not collect the
A-frame sign from its secure location within ten (10) days following notice,
the Village is authorized to dispose of the A-frame sign. The A-frame sign
owner shall be liable for the Village's reasonable costs of removal and
disposal.
      2.   Temporary Banners:
         a.   Temporary banners are permitted for any nonresidential use in any
nonresidential district.
         b.   Temporary banners are limited to thirty two (32) square feet in
area.
         c.   Only one banner is permitted per zoning lot.
         d.   No temporary banner may be located higher than the roofline of
the building to which it is attached or, if attached to a permanent sign,
higher than the sign. There must be no encroachment into the public right of
way.
         e.   Temporary banners require a sign permit.
         f.   Temporary banners are limited to a display of seven (7) days when
not related to a date specific or, if date specific, may be erected no earlier
than five (5) days prior to the event plus the duration of the event and must
be removed within two (2) days after the event. Temporary banners may be
erected on a zoning lot no more than four (4) times in a year.
         g.   Temporary banners mounted on light poles or Village owned
structures within the Village are subject to the following requirements.
Temporary banners mounted on light poles or Village owned structures do not
include "local government banners" as described in subsection
7-7-12D of this article.
            (1)   No banner shall be affixed to any light pole or structure
except by authorization of the Department of Public Works. A sign permit and an
obstruction permit are required.
            (2)   Banners may not block any public signs or lighting.
            (3)   No banner shall exceed a maximum size of thirty inches (30")
in width and seventy two inches (72") in length.
            (4)   All banners must serve a legitimate public interest and shall
not contain any advertising other than that which is directed toward the
specific event. Sponsorship logos may only take up to twenty five percent (25%)
of the space on the banner.
            (5)   Banners shall not be in place earlier than two (2) weeks
before the event and must be removed within three (3) days after the event.
Seasonal banners may remain in place for up to three (3) months as long as they
are still in serviceable condition. Business district banners may remain in
place for up to one year.
            (6)   Banner material shall be of a durable, weather resistant
material like canvas, nylon or vinyl coated fabric. Grommets must be installed
in the top and bottom corners of the banner one inch (1") above the bottom rod
pocket and one inch (1") below the top rod pocket. Grommets shall be of brass
construction and installed in a minimum of four (4) layers of fabric.
            (7)   If the Village must remove a banner or perform maintenance
work on a banner, the cost for such work will be billed to the organization for
which the banners are being installed.
            (8)   The applicant shall submit the following information to the
Village as part of the sign permit application:
               (A)   The name of company that will perform the installation
work.
               (B)   A sketch or copy of artwork that will appear on the
banners.
               (C)   A copy of an insurance certificate naming the Village as
additionally insured on the liability policy of the organization for which the
banners are installed. Minimum coverage must be one million dollars
($1,000,000.00). This insurance coverage is independent of the insurance
required by the contractor installing the banners.
               (D)   The name, address and phone number of contact person for
maintenance of banners or emergency relating to banners.
               (E)   A timetable for the installation and removal of banners,
which must comply with the above time limits.
      3.   Temporary Pole Signs:
         a.   Temporary pole signs are permitted for any nonresidential use in
any nonresidential district.
         b.   Temporary pole signs are limited to thirty two (32) square feet
in area and six feet (6') in height.
         c.   All temporary pole signs must be set back ten feet (10') from any
property line.
         d.   Temporary pole signs require a sign permit.
         e.   Temporary pole signs are limited to a display of seven (7) days
when not related to a date specific or, if date specific, may be erected no
earlier than five (5) days prior to the event plus the duration of the event
and must be removed within two (2) days after the event. Temporary pole signs
may be erected on a zoning lot no more than four (4) times in a year.
      4.   Temporary Vehicle For Sale Signs:
         a.   Vehicles are permitted to display a "for sale" or similar sign in
sales lots where the sale of new or used vehicles is permitted.
         b.   A vehicle may be parked and displayed for sale, with a "for sale"
sign, by a private individual at that individual's home, including in the
driveway, as well as driven and parked throughout the normal daily routine.
Once the vehicle is sold, the sign must be removed.
         c.   The vehicle must remain drivable with the "for sale" sign in
place. Any "for sale" sign over four (4) square feet in sign area requires a
sign permit.
         d.   There are no time limit restrictions on vehicle "for sale" signs.
Vehicle "for sale" signs are not counted toward the number of temporary signs
permitted on a zoning lot.
      5.   Temporary Wall Signs:
         a.   Temporary wall signs are permitted for any nonresidential use in
any nonresidential district.
         b.   Temporary wall signs are limited to thirty two (32) square feet
in area.
         c.   No temporary wall sign may be located higher than the roofline of
the building to which it is attached. There must be no encroachment into the
public right of way. No temporary wall sign may cover windows, doors or
architectural features.
         d.   Temporary wall signs require a sign permit.
         e.   Temporary wall signs are limited to a display of seven (7) days
when not related to a date specific or, if date specific, may be erected no
earlier than five (5) days prior to the event plus the duration of the event
and must be removed within two (2) days after the event. Temporary wall signs
may be erected on a zoning lot no more than four (4) times in a year.
      6.   Temporary Window Signs:
         a.   Temporary window signs are permitted for any nonresidential use
in any nonresidential district.
         b.   Temporary window signs are limited to twenty five percent (25%)
of the window area. Window area is counted as a continuous surface until
divided by an architectural or structural element. Mullions are not considered
an element that divides window area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3284.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3286.jpg]
         c.   A sign attached to, placed upon or printed on the interior of a
window or door of a building intended for viewing from the exterior of such a
building is considered a temporary window sign.
         d.   Temporary window signs are exempt from sign permit requirements.
         e.   There is a thirty (30) day time limit restriction on temporary
window signs.
         f.   Temporary solid window coverings intended to block interior
construction activities are permitted. If a sign is printed on, affixed to, in
contact with or etched on the window and intended for viewing from the exterior
of a window, the sign shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total
window area.
      7.   Temporary Construction Signs:
         a.   Construction Signs: One construction sign no more than sixteen
(16) square feet in surface area in the residential sign overlay district and
no more than sixty four (64) square feet in surface area in the downtown,
neighborhood commercial and corridor commercial sign overlay districts, which
denotes the architect, contractor or engineer, when placed on the zoning lot
which is a construction site of such architect, contractor or engineer.
         b.   Construction Fence Wrap Signs: Construction fence wrap signs are
permitted.
            (1)   Temporary construction fence wrap signs require approval by
the Zoning Administrator.
            (2)   The text for a temporary construction fence wrap is limited
to twenty five percent (25%) of the surface area of the construction fence.
Renderings of the building under construction shall not be included in the area
calculation.
            (3)   Temporary construction fence wrap signs are limited to a
display of eighteen (18) months after initial approval by the Zoning
Administrator for the sign. If construction of an applicable building begins
within the eighteen (18) month display period, a sign may continue to be
displayed for an additional nine (9) months after the expiration of the
eighteen (18) month period. If construction does not commence within eighteen
(18) months, the sign shall be removed within seven (7) calendar days after the
expiration of the eighteen (18) month display period. If a sign is continued to
be displayed after said period, the property shall be subject to a five hundred
dollar ($500.00) fine for every seven (7) calendar days that the sign is
displayed.
            (4)   The wrap material shall be of a durable, weather resistant
material like canvas, nylon, or vinyl coated fabric.
            (5)   Temporary construction fence wrap signs shall not be
displayed at the same time as a construction sign.
            (6)   Construction fence wrap signs may include the following
content:
               (A)   A rendering, elevation drawing of building, or zoning
diagram of the building exterior;
               (B)   Anticipated project completion date;
               (C)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of
the property;
               (D)   The name and telephone number of the general contractor;
and
               (E)   General information regarding the price and size of units
and other similar information.
         c.   Construction Window Signs: Temporary solid window coverings
intended to block interior construction activities are permitted. If a sign is
printed on, affixed to, in contact with or etched on the window and intended
for viewing from the exterior of a window, the sign shall not exceed twenty
five percent (25%) of the total window area.
      8.   Temporary Attention Getting Devices: Attention getting devices are
permitted for special events and for new business openings subject to the
following:
         a.   Attention getting devices for special events may be erected on a
zoning lot no more than four (4) times in a year beginning on the first date
that a permit is issued for an attention getting device.
         b.   Attention getting devices are limited to a display of thirty (30)
days when not related to a date specific or, if date specific, may be erected
no earlier than five (5) days prior to an event plus the duration of the event
and must be removed within two (2) days after the event.
         c.   Attention getting devices are limited to a display of sixty (60)
days in conjunction with a new business opening. (Ord. 16-110, 9-19-2016; amd.
Ord. 22-18, 3-21-2022)
7-7-14: GROUND SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
Ground signs are permitted subject to the following:
   A.   Ground signs are permitted only in the districts listed in tables 1 and
2 of this section, subject to the regulations of tables 1 and 2 of this section
and this article.
   B.   One ground sign is permitted per street frontage of a zoning lot,
whether a monument or pole sign. In addition to a ground sign, drive-through
establishments are permitted one menu board sign, whether constructed as a pole
or monument sign, no more than forty (40) square feet in sign area, no more
than six feet (6') in height and no less than twenty feet (20') from any lot
line.
   C.   The primary support of a pole sign must be erected in such a manner
that at least forty two inches (42") of the length of the support is
underground. The Development Services Department may require proper
documentation from a structural engineer or manufacturer that indicates proper
installation instructions for the sign, as well as the sign's ability to
withstand wind pressures.
   D.   No part of any ground sign may be located within the public right of
way.
   E.   Time and temperature devices are permitted as part of ground pole and
monument signs. Such devices are included in all calculations of sign area.
   TABLE 1
   GROUND SIGNS - MONUMENT SIGNS
 
Sign Overlay     Maximum Sign Maximum Sign Minimum Setback Additional
Districts        Area         Height                       Regulations
                                                           Permitted for
Residential sign 32 sq. ft.   6 ft.        18 in.          multi-family and
overlay district                                           nonresidential
                                                           uses only
Downtown sign    32 sq. ft.   6 ft.        18 in.          n/a
overlay district
Neighborhood
commercial sign  32 sq. ft.   6 ft.        18 in.          n/a
overlay district
Corridor
commercial sign  48 sq. ft.   8 ft.        18 in.          n/a
overlay district
 
   TABLE 2
   GROUND SIGNS - POLE SIGNS
 
Sign Overlay     Maximum Sign Maximum Sign Minimum Setback Additional
Districts        Area         Height                       Regulations
                                                           Permitted for
Residential sign 24 sq. ft.   5 ft.        18 in.          multi-family and
overlay district                                           nonresidential
                                                           uses only
Downtown sign    Prohibited   Prohibited   Prohibited      Prohibited
overlay district
Neighborhood
commercial sign  Prohibited   Prohibited   Prohibited      Prohibited
overlay district
Corridor
commercial sign  50 sq. ft.   20 ft.       18 in.          n/a
overlay district
 
(Ord. 2009-0-019, 3-23-09; amd. Ord. 22-18, 3-21-2022; Ord. 25-111, 3-4-2025)
7-7-15: BUILDING SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Maximum Surface Area; All Exterior Signs:
      1.   The surface area of all exterior signs, including permanent window
signs, shall not exceed, in the aggregate, three (3) square feet per linear
foot of width of lot for the first one hundred (100) linear feet, and one
square foot per linear foot of width of lot for each linear foot in excess of
one hundred (100).
      2.   Width of lot shall be measured at the front lot line; provided,
however, for lots having more than one street line, width of the lot shall be
measured at the street line of the greatest dimension lying in a frontage which
is wholly within a commercial or industrial district; or, in the street line of
the shortest dimension if the lot has no street line lying in a frontage which
is wholly within a commercial district.
   B.   Projecting Signs: Projecting signs are permitted in the downtown,
neighborhood commercial and corridor commercial sign overlay districts, subject
to the following. Projecting signs are prohibited in the residential sign
overlay district.
      1.   The maximum area of a projecting sign is as follows:
         a.   Downtown sign overlay district: Twenty four (24) square feet.
         b.   Neighborhood commercial sign overlay district: Twenty four (24)
square feet.
         c.   Corridor commercial sign overlay district: Thirty two (32) square
feet, except for lots fronting on Madison Street and Garfield Street, where the
maximum allowable area is twenty four (24) square feet.
      2.   One projecting sign per ground floor establishment with frontage on
a public street is permitted. In the case of a multi-tenant building, one
additional projecting sign identifying the name of the multi-tenant development
is permitted.
      3.   A projecting sign must be pinned away from the wall at least six
inches (6"). Projecting signs shall not project more than six and one-half feet
(6.5') from the face of the building to which they are attached, including the
area between the sign and the face of the building, and in no event more than
within two feet (2') of the curb line of any street or alley. Provided,
however, where more than one-half (1/2) of the frontage in a block is located
in a residence district, no sign, other than a sign permitted in a residence
district, shall project more than twelve inches (12") beyond the face of the
building or structure, unless a yard is provided, the depth of which is in
excess of that required in the business district, in which case, a sign may
project into the nonrequired portion of such yard, but in no event shall such
sign be closer to the street line than:
         a.   The required residential setback; or
         b.   The actual average setback, for the residentially zoned portion
of the frontage, whichever is less. Unless such sign is one hundred feet (100')
or more from the residentially zoned property, then said sign shall project not
more than six feet six inches (6'6") into the public right of way and in no
event more than within two feet (2') of any street or alley.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3288.jpg]
      4.   The bottom of any projecting sign must be at least eight feet (8')
above the sidewalk or thoroughfare. The top of a projecting sign may be no
higher than twenty feet (20') above the sidewalk or thoroughfare; providing
that no projecting sign affixed to a building may project higher than the
building height, including the sign support structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3290.jpg]
 
      5.   Projecting signs, including frames, braces, and supports must be
designed by a licensed structural engineer or manufacturer. No projecting sign
may be secured with external wire, chains, cables, strips of wood or nails nor
may any projecting sign be hung or secured to any other sign. Any removable
part of a projecting sign, such as the cover of a service opening, must be
securely fastened internally by chains or hinges.
      6.   External illumination, such as gooseneck type lighting, is permitted
on projecting signs provided that illumination is concentrated on the area of
the sign face only. Projecting signs may be internally illuminated in the
downtown and corridor commercial sign overlay districts only, provided
internally illuminated signs are constructed with an opaque background with
only letters, logos and/or details as translucent features.
      7.   Time and temperature devices are permitted as part of projecting
signs. Such devices must be included in all calculations of sign area.
   C.   Window Signs (Permanent): Permanent window signs are permitted in the
downtown, neighborhood commercial and corridor commercial sign overlay
districts and for nonresidential uses in the residential sign overlay district,
subject to the following:
      1.   Permanent window signs affixed to or painted on the inside of a
window shall be considered to be wall signs subject to all such regulations and
shall occupy no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the surface of each
window area. Window area is counted as a continuous surface until divided by an
architectural or structural element. Mullions are not considered an element
that divides window area.
      2.   The total area of all temporary and permanent window signs must not
occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the total window area. Temporary window
signs are subject to the regulations of subsection
7-7-13B6b of this article.
      3.   Neon window signs are considered a window sign and must be included
in the twenty five percent (25%) limitation. However, no more than fifteen
percent (15%) of total window area may be comprised of neon window signs. Neon
window sign area is measured by the height and width of the sign. Neon window
signs are prohibited in all residential sign overlay districts.
      4.   All ground floor street-side building facades must allow pedestrians
to view goods and activities inside and encourage walking and browsing.
Substantially opaque, frosted, etched, tinted, black, and reflective mirror
glass are prohibited.
   D.   Wall Signs: Permanent wall signs are permitted in the downtown,
neighborhood commercial and corridor commercial sign overlay districts and for
nonresidential uses in the residential sign overlay district, subject to the
following:
      1.   Within the downtown, neighborhood commercial and corridor commercial
sign overlay districts, the maximum size of a wall sign shall be established at
one square foot per linear foot of zoning lot frontage. Within residential
districts, wall signs are permitted at a size of one square foot per linear
foot of zoning lot frontage up to a maximum size of forty (40) square feet.
         a.   For an interior lot, the maximum size of a wall sign shall be
established at one square foot per linear foot of zoning lot frontage as
measured along the front lot line.
         b.   For a corner lot, the maximum size of a wall sign located on each
building wall shall be established at one square foot per linear foot of zoning
lot frontage as measured along the front or corner side lot line of that
building wall. The size of a wall sign on each side of the building shall be
limited to the square footage calculated on that side only. In no case shall
the square footage permitted for the building wall located along the front lot
line and the square footage permitted for the building wall located along the
corner side lot line be combined to create a larger sign on a wall other than
that permitted on each individual wall.
         c.   In a multi-tenant structure, each tenant shall be permitted a
wall sign of one square foot per linear foot of business frontage, with a
minimum of twenty five (25) square feet permitted for a wall sign for each
tenant. In no case shall the total amount of wall signs on the structure exceed
one square foot per linear foot of business frontage or the sum total of twenty
five (25) square feet per tenant, whichever is greater. If a multi-tenant
structure is located on a corner lot, the maximum size of the wall sign located
on the wall along the corner lot line shall be limited to one square foot per
linear foot of zoning lot frontage as measured along the front lot line, with a
minimum of twenty five (25) square feet per tenant permitted.
      2.   If there is a secondary entrance, an additional wall sign is
permitted but shall be limited to no more than sixteen (16) square feet and
shall only indicate the name of the business and the words "Entrance", "Enter"
or similar term.
      3.   Wall signs must be safely and securely attached to the building
wall. Wall signs must be affixed flat against the building wall and must not
project more than twelve inches (12") from the building wall. No aesthetic sign
elements may be affixed or painted directly on a building's exterior facade.
All signs must be mounted in such a way that they may be removed with minimal
impact on the building's exterior wall.
      4.   No wall sign affixed to a building, including sign support
structure, may project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is
attached. On existing buildings, a parapet wall must not be constructed for the
sole purpose of increasing the allowable height of a wall sign. For new
buildings, when a sign is to be mounted on a parapet wall, that parapet wall
must be consistent with the architectural design of the building, including
building materials. Wall signs may not be attached to unreinforced masonry
parapets. Wall signs shall not cover windows, doors or architectural features.
      5.   Wall signs should be located on the sign frieze or the sign band of
the building immediately above the first floor window and below the second
floor windowsills in the case of a two-story building. No wall sign shall be
permitted to rise above the second story sill line. On one-story buildings, the
top of the sign shall be no more than five feet (5') above the top of the main
display window on the first floor.
      6.   Gooseneck reflectors are permitted on all wall signs provided the
reflectors must concentrate the illumination upon the area of the sign face
only. Internally illuminated signs shall be constructed with an opaque
background with only letters, logos and/or details as translucent features. A
white or light-colored background is prohibited.
      7.   Within a multi-tenant commercial development, all wall signs must be
located at a generally uniform height on the building wall.
      8.   Time and temperature devices are permitted as part of wall signs.
Such devices are included in all calculations of sign area.
      9.   Ghost signs are considered wall signs. Existing ghost signs are
exempt from these requirements and are considered conforming. No new wall signs
may be painted on buildings or structures.
   E.   Awnings And Canopies: Awnings and canopies that are considered an
architectural feature of a building and are not used for identifying the
premises or the goods and/or services sold are not considered a sign. Awnings
and canopies used as signs are considered to be wall signs subject to all such
regulations and are further subject to the following regulations:
      1.   Awnings and canopies are permitted in any sign overlay district for
multi-family residential and nonresidential uses.
      2.   All awnings or canopies must maintain a minimum seven foot (7')
clearance above grade at all points along the awning. Awnings and supports for
canopies must not extend beyond a point two feet (2') from the curb line.
      3.   Printing on any individual awning or canopy is limited to thirty
percent (30%) of the surface of any side of an awning or canopy.
      4.   An awning and canopy sign may be maintained in combination with a
wall sign at a particular premises subject to the following requirements:
         a.   The awning and canopy sign shall only have printing on its
valance; and
         b.   The awning and canopy sign shall not contain the name of the
establishment located at the premises or any other business.
      5.   Awnings and canopies shall be constructed out of canvas or
canvaslike material treated for fire resistance. Backlit and metal awnings and
canopies are prohibited.
      6.   Awnings and canopies must be securely attached to and supported by a
building. All frames and supports must be made of metal or similar material.
Frames and supports may not be made of wood or plastics.
      7.   Under awning and under canopy signs are permitted subject to the
following:
         a.   Under awning and under canopy signs must be attached to the
underside of an awning or canopy. Under awning and under canopy signs must not
project beyond the awning.
         b.   Under awning and under canopy signs must maintain a minimum eight
foot (8') clearance above the grade directly below the sign.
         c.   Maximum of one under awning and under canopy sign per frontage
per tenant.
         d.   Under awning and under canopy signs may not exceed two (2) square
feet.
         e.   Under awning and under canopy signs are to be securely fixed with
metal supports.
      8.   All awnings or canopies shall comply with the following design
standards:
         a.   Awnings and canopies shall be compatible in material and
construction to the style and character of the building. The color of the
awning or canopy shall be compatible with the overall color scheme of the
facade.
         b.   When feasible, awnings and canopies shall be generally aligned
with others nearby in order to maintain a sense of visual continuity.
         c.   Awnings and canopies shall fit the facade of the building and
positioned so that distinctive architectural features remain visible.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3292.jpg]   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/IMAGES/0-0-0-3294.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3296.jpg]   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/IMAGES/0-0-0-3298.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2009-0-019, 3-23-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-0-20, 4-7-2014; Ord. 22-18, 3-21-
2022)
7-7-16: ELECTRONIC SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
Electronic display screens are permitted in the downtown and neighborhood
commercial sign overlay districts only. Electronic message signs are
prohibited. Electronic display screens must comply with the following:
   A.   Electronic display screens are limited to six (6) square feet.
   B.   Electronic display screens must be mounted such that the highest
portion of the sign is no higher than seven feet (7') above grade and shall not
cover prominent architectural features. Electronic display screens that are
mounted on, in front of, or inside transparent window areas shall be included
in the calculation of window sign area.
   C.   Electronic display screens are permitted as wall or window signs only.
      1.   When an electronic display screen is used as a window sign, the
electronic display screen shall be included in the twenty five percent (25%)
window sign area maximum for permanent window signs.
      2.   When an electronic display screen is used as a wall sign, the
electronic display screen shall be included in the maximum permitted amount of
wall sign area.
   D.   Only one electronic display screen is permitted per zoning lot.
   E.   No electronic display screen shall display messages or images of off
premises advertising.
   F.   Each message or image displayed on an electronic display screen must be
static or depicted for a minimum of eight (8) seconds. Animation, streaming
video and images which move or give the appearance of movement are prohibited.
No text message may blink, flash or mimic strobe lighting effects.
   G.   No illumination from any electronic display screen may glare into any
residential premises or interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicles on
public thoroughfares.
   H.   No electronic display screens may have audio speakers or any audio
component.
   I.   Electronic display screens must comply with the light trespass
requirements of subsection
7-7-9D2 of this article. (Ord. 2009-0-019, 3-23-09)
7-7-17: SIGNS FOR HOSPITAL USE:
Signs for a hospital use shall comply with the following regulations for the
corridor commercial sign overlay district and this article, except as follows:
   A.   Directional Signs (Permanent):
      1.   Such signs may designate hospital entrances, parking, walkways,
emergency room locations, and other hospital related facilities, as well as
entrances or exits, by means of symbols or words. There is no limitation on the
items of information.
      2.   One directional sign is permitted for each driveway access from a
public street. One additional directional sign is permitted for each
intersection of drives within a site, to identify traffic routing, entrances
and services, such as drive-in lanes. Additional directional signs may be
permitted subject to Zoning Administrator approval.
      3.   Directional signs shall be located entirely on the property to which
they pertain. Directional signs shall not project beyond the property line.
      4.   Directional signs may have a maximum height of twelve feet (12') and
a maximum surface area of fifty (50) square feet.
      5.   Directional signs may be illuminated. (Ord. 2009-0-019, 3-23-09;
amd. Ord. 22-18, 3-21-2022)
7-7-18: CLASSIC SIGNS:
   A.   Eligibility:
      1.   Any person of the Village may apply for designation of an existing
sign, as of the date of adoption of this article, as a classic sign. Classic
signs are exempt from area, setback, height, lighting, movement, flashing,
placement, type, content, and construction materials requirements of this
article.
      2.   To qualify for designation as a classic sign, the sign must:
         a.   Be at least twenty five (25) years old or a duplicate of an
original sign where the combined age of the duplicate and original sign is at
least twenty five (25) years.
         b.   Possess unique physical design characteristics, such as
configuration, message, color, texture, etc.
         c.   Be of extraordinary significance to the Village, regardless of
the use identified by the sign.
   B.   Application:
      1.   An application for classic sign status must include plans for sign
maintenance, renovation or possible reconstruction, acceptable to the Zoning
Administrator.
      2.   Application for classic sign status must be made to the Village
Planner, or his/her designee, who schedules a public hearing of the Zoning
Board of Appeals and presents his/her recommendations to the Zoning Board of
Appeals at a public hearing.
      3.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall approve or deny the application.
      4.   The applicant may appeal a decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals
to the Village Board within thirty (30) days of notification of the decision.
   C.   Maintenance: The owner of a classic sign must ensure that the sign is
not structurally dangerous, a fire hazard, an electrical shock hazard, or any
other kind of hazard. Classic signs may be rebuilt if damaged.
   D.   Designated Classic Signs: The following are deemed to be signs of
special significance in the Village and are, therefore, exempted from the
provisions of this article:
      1.   Marshall Field marquee and clock.
      2.   Lake Theater marquee and sign.
      3.   Oak Park Federal clock/temperature sign (Forsyth Building).
      4.   Oak Park Trust clock/temperature sign (Oak Park Trust And Savings
Bank Building).
      5.   Petersen's Ice Cream sign (1100 Chicago Avenue). (Ord. 2009-0-019,
3-23-2009; amd. Ord. 25-111, 3-4-2025)
7-7-19: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Nonconforming signs may be maintained subject to the following regulations:
   A.   No nonconforming sign shall be expanded or altered to prolong the life
of the sign. No nonconforming sign shall be changed to another nonconforming
sign.
   B.   The copy, message or graphic of a nonconforming sign may be changed. A
nonstructural component of the sign on which the copy, message or graphic is
displayed, such as a plastic or metal panel or insert, may be replaced to the
extent necessary to accommodate this change.
   C.   If the copy, message or graphic of a nonconforming sign cannot be
changed without altering a structural component, then such change is not
permitted. Structural components include any part of a sign attached directly
to the ground or to a building or structure, any part of the supporting
structure of a sign without which the sign fails to maintain its structural
integrity, or support any part of a sign's electrical or lighting equipment.
   D.   No nonconforming sign shall be relocated in whole or in part unless,
when relocated, it conforms to all of the provisions of this article.
   E.   Signs which do not conform to the provisions of this article but which
lawfully existed and were maintained prior to the adoption hereof shall be
removed or made to conform within sixty (60) days after written notice by the
Development Services Department when:
      1.   The use of the establishment changes and the exterior of the
building or other site conditions are to be altered; or
      2.   A sign is damaged by any cause resulting in replacement or repair
cost equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) of its replacement value at the
time the damage occurs; or
      3.   The maximum cost to bring a sign into conformance with this article
is five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less, which shall include the removal of
neon, wall and window signs and the removal of neon lighting outlining
buildings, doors and windows. If a property owner or agent claims that the cost
to bring a sign into conformance with this article is more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), the property owner or agent shall provide a written cost
estimate from a reputable sign business to the Village to be exempt from the
requirements of this section; or
      4.   A new business is proposed to be located at the applicable property
where the nonconforming sign is maintained and the new business owner or agent
proposes to alter the sign at the location and the proposed alteration requires
a sign permit pursuant to this article. (Ord. 2013-0-59, 10-21-2013; amd. Ord.
15-183, 11-2-2015; Ord. 22-18, 3-21-2022; Ord. 25-111, 3-4-2025)
7-7-20: SIGNS PROJECTING INTO THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
Any person who installs and maintains a sign projecting into the public right
of way by more than twelve inches (12") shall be required to provide a general
liability insurance policy with limits of not less than five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limit or five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) per occurrence and per aggregate, and shall submit a certificate
or policy of insurance as evidence of such coverage, issued by an insurance
company licensed to do business in the state of Illinois and having a "Best"
rating acceptable to the Village. The effective period of such insurance
coverage shall coincide with the period the projecting sign pursuant to this
section continues to be in place. (Ord. 15-068, 3-2-2015)
ARTICLE 8
FEES
SECTION:
7-8-1: Annual Fee Ordinance
7-8-2: Administration
7-8-3: Waiver Of Fees
7-8-1: ANNUAL FEE ORDINANCE:
The Village Board shall annually adopt an ordinance setting forth the
applicable fees and charges due for the various permits, and services
authorized by this chapter, including building and construction permit fees and
zoning application fees. Whenever reference is made to the "annual fee
ordinance", such reference shall mean the most current annual fee ordinance
adopted pursuant to this section. By this reference, the annual fee ordinance,
as the same may, from time to time, be adopted or amended, is hereby
incorporated as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 15-086, 4-20-2015)
7-8-2: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Plan Review Fee Conditions: Plan review fees shall be nonrefundable.
Accessory buildings under five hundred (500) square feet and repairs to one-,
two- and three-family homes are exempt from plan review fees. If plans are sent
out for review by agencies outside the Village, the plan review fee paid by the
Village shall be passed on to the applicant with a two hundred dollar ($200.00)
add on fee or ten percent (10%) above Village costs, whichever is greater.
   B.   Refunds: No fees shall be refunded when a permit has lapsed after work
is started. When a permit is revoked at the request of the applicant prior to
lapsing due to time limits, and no work has been done, all but the basic fee
and the plan review fee may be refunded.
   C.   Plan Self-Certification Program: Illinois licensed architects and
structural engineers may apply for annual registration in the Village's plan
self-certification program.
      1.   Plan Program Description: The self-certification program ("program")
allows design professionals to self-certify their drawings for code compliance
on projects of limited scope as set forth hereinbelow.
      2.   Plan Program Participation Requirement: To qualify for annual
participation in the program, Illinois licensed architects and/or structural
engineers must meet the following requirements: (Ord. 15-086, 4-20-2015)
         a.   Complete and file a program application with the Development
Customer Services Department;
         b.   Maintain a copy of the applicant's current state of Illinois
professional license on file with the Development Customer Services Department;
(Ord. 15-086, 4-20-2015; amd. Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015)
         c.   Maintain professional licensure in good standing; (Ord. 15-086,
4-20-2015)
         d.   Maintain a copy of a current certification of professional
liability insurance on file with the Development Customer Services Department;
         e.   Attend all required building code training sessions conducted by
the Development Customer Services Department;
            (1)   The Director of the Development Customer Services Department
will be responsible for determining all training program requirements and
content; (Ord. 15-086, 4-20-2015; amd. Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015)
         f.   Pay an annual administrative fee in the amount set forth in the
annual fee ordinance.
         g.   Once an applicant has satisfied all of the above program
requirements, the applicant will be provided with a registration number and
certificate that must be presented when submitting project plans.
      3.   Requirements For Maintenance Of Existing Certification: To maintain
their existing certification on an annual basis, program participants shall
satisfy the following requirements: (Ord. 15-086, 4-20-2015)
         a.   Maintain minimum levels of performance as established by the
Director of the Development Customer Services Department with regard to: (Ord.
15-086, 4-20-2015; amd. Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015)
            (1)   Accuracy and completeness of permit submittal packages;
            (2)   Fulfilling annual recertification training requirements;
            (3)   Earning a minimum of four (4) continuing education credits or
eight (8) contact hours annually in areas related to design or construction of
one- and two-family residential structures; and
            (4)   Accuracy and completeness of work in accordance with plans
and code during on site inspections.
      4.   Projects Eligible For Plan Self-Certification Program: Projects
which may be processed through the plan self- certification program shall be
limited to the following scopes of work on one- and two-family residential and
accessory structures which do not require either a zoning variance or review by
the Historic Preservation Commission:
         a.   Single-story additions at grade level up to five hundred (500)
square feet in floor area;
         b.   Interior renovations not requiring structural modifications
including bathrooms, kitchens, resurfacing walls and ceilings and relocation or
removal of nonstructural walls but excluding all basement renovations; (Ord.
15-086, 4-20-2015)
         c.   Interior renovations requiring structural modifications only if
plans for same are signed and sealed by an Illinois licensed structural
engineer or an Illinois licensed architect, if the architect demonstrates his
or her qualification in the area of structural design by passing a structural
design proficiency examination for residential construction as developed and
administered by the Director of the Development Customer Services Department;
(Ord. 15-086, 4-20-2015; amd. Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015)
         d.   One-story porches, decks, stairs and railings;
         e.   One-story detached garages up to five hundred seventy six (576)
square feet in area;
         f.   Foundation repairs only if plans for same are signed and sealed
by an Illinois licensed structural engineer or an Illinois licensed architect
if the architect demonstrates his or her qualifications in the area of
structural design in the same manner set forth in subsection 7-8-2C4c of this
section;
         g.   Window and door replacement;
         h.   Accessibility upgrades. (Ord. 15-086, 4-20-2015)
      5.   Plan Self-Certification Program Oversight: The Director of the
Development Customer Services Department shall be responsible for oversight of
the plan self-certification program. The Director shall establish internal
program oversight procedures which shall be carried out by department
management and plan review staff to ensure the completeness and accuracy of
plans subject to the self-certification process. Such internal procedures may
include, but shall not be limited to, checklist reviews of all such submitted
plans and complete plan review of a periodic random sampling of all such
submitted plans. (Ord. 15-086, 4-20-2015; amd. Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015)
      6.   Plan Self-Certification Program Annual Fee: The annual fee for
participation in the plan self-certification process shall be three hundred
fifty dollars ($350.00). (Ord. 15-086, 4-20-2015)
7-8-3: WAIVER OF FEES:
Fees required pursuant to section
7-8-1 of this article (except cost for plan review, bonds, licenses and
construction water) are waived for construction on all property entitled to a
real estate tax exemption pursuant to article 15 of the Illinois property tax
code, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 200/15-5 et seq., as amended. When property
is entitled to a partial exemption, then said fees shall be reduced in the same
ratio as the estimated value of the exempt portion bears to the estimated value
of the taxable portion of the property. Said fees shall also be waived insofar
as they are applicable to that portion of any work undertaken to make building
accessible to the handicapped.
The board may also waive permit fees for any governmental or quasi-governmental
agency, charitable organization, or for construction where grant loan funds of
the Village of Oak Park are to be used. (Ord. 15-086, 4-20-2015)
ARTICLE 9
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
SECTION:
7-9-1: Purpose Of Article
7-9-2: Definitions
7-9-3: Historic Districts
7-9-4: Criteria For Designation Of Historic Landmarks And Interior Historic
Landmarks
7-9-5: Nomination And Preliminary Determination Of Eligibility For Designation
As An Historic Landmark Or Interior Historic Landmark
7-9-6: Designation Hearing
7-9-7: Designation Of Historic Landmarks And Interior Historic Landmarks
7-9-8: Work Requiring The Issuance Of A Certificate Of Appropriateness, A
Certificate Of Economic Hardship Or A Certificate Of Advisory Review
7-9-9: Zoning And Subdivision Actions Affecting Any Nominated, Eligible Or
Designated Historic Landmarks Or Designated Historic Districts
7-9-10: Acquisition Or Use Of Public Property
7-9-11: Review Criteria For Certificate Of Appropriateness; Certificate Of
Advisory Review; Noncontributing Resources
7-9-12: Procedures For Certificate Of Appropriateness
7-9-13: Procedures For Certificate Of Economic Hardship
7-9-14: Appeals
7-9-15: Advisory Review Procedures
7-9-16: Prevention Of Demolition By Neglect
7-9-17: Hazardous Structures And Public Nuisances
7-9-18: Handicapped Accessibility Provisions
7-9-19: Enforcement And Penalties For Violation
7-9-20: Judicial Review Of Final Decision
7-9-1: PURPOSE OF ARTICLE:
The purpose of this Article is to promote the economic, educational, cultural
and general welfare of Oak Park by:
   A.   Providing a municipal process to identify, preserve, protect and
enhance the distinctive historic and architectural heritage of Oak Park
representing elements of the Village's cultural, social, economic, political
and architectural history;
   B.   Conserving and improving the value of properties designated as historic
landmarks or located within historic districts;
   C.   Enhancing the attractiveness of the Village to homeowners, visitors,
tourists, and shoppers and, thereby, supporting business, commerce and industry
in the Village and providing economic benefits to the Village;
   D.   Fostering civic pride in the accomplishments of the past as manifested
in properties, structures, improvements and areas of historical and
architectural significance within the Village;
   E.   Fostering and encouraging the preservation, restoration and
rehabilitation of properties, structures, improvements and areas and, thereby,
preventing deterioration, dilapidation and blight. (Ord. 1999-0-7, 3-15-1999;
amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022)
7-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings and words and phrases used in the context of this
Article but not defined below shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
section
1-1-2 of this code and this chapter, other than this Article, including the
building, mechanical, electrical and plumbing codes adopted by reference in
this Code. All other words and phrases used in the context of this Article
shall have the commonly understood meanings normally ascribed to them.
ADVISORY REVIEW: The process of examining the documents prepared by an owner of
property and/or an improvement within a historic district that is not a
historic landmark which describe proposed construction on such property and/or
improvement, which will lead to a certificate of advisory review.
ALTERATION: Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior
architectural features of property which has been designated as a historic
landmark under this Article, or any interior architectural feature of any
structure when such interior has been specifically designated as an interior
historic landmark.
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMITTEE: A Committee of no less than three (3) members
of the Commission, of which one member need not possess the demonstrated
expertise required under subsection
2-23-1C of this Code for at least eight (8) members of the full Commission,
appointed by the chairperson to review documents for certificates of advisory
review which shall be issued by the Commission, based upon the Committee's
review of the documents and recommendations to the owner. Subsection
7-9-11C of this Article authorizes the Commission to recommend and the Village
Board to adopt amended rules and regulations which would expand Committee and/
or Commission staff liaison authority to minimal types of construction and
alteration work requiring a certificate of appropriateness.
BUILDING PERMIT: Any permit required by the Development Customer Services
Department of the Village of Oak Park.
CERTIFICATE OF ADVISORY REVIEW: A certificate issued by the Commission after
advisory review of plans for construction on, or relocation of, property and/or
improvements located within a historic district which have not been designated
as historic landmarks, indicating that the Commission has conducted a review of
the plans and has made recommendations to the owner with regard to same.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: A certificate issued by the Commission
indicating its approval of plans for the alteration, or construction, or
relocation of a historic landmark, or the removal or demolition of a historic
landmark or a building, structure or improvement within a historic district.
CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP: A certificate issued by the Commission, after
denying a certificate of appropriateness, which authorizes the performance of
alterations, construction or relocation with regard to historic landmarks, or
the removal or demolition of a historic landmark or a building, structure or
improvement within a historic district when such historic landmarks, or
properties within a historic district, cannot be put to a reasonably beneficial
use or the owner will suffer a substantial economic loss thereon without the
proposed alteration, construction, relocation, removal or demolition; and the
owner is not responsible in any way for the hardship from which he or she is
seeking relief.
COMMISSION: The Oak Park Historic Preservation Commission as established
pursuant to Article 23 ("Historic Preservation") of Chapter 2
("Administration") of this Code.
COMMISSION STAFF LIAISON: An employee of the Village assigned by the Village
Manager or the Village Manager's designee as staff liaison to the Commission.
CONSTRUCTION: Any act or process which requires a building permit, including
the act of adding to a structure by an addition, or the erection of a new
principal or accessory structure on a lot or property.
CONTRIBUTING RESOURCE: A property and/or improvement located within a historic
district that represents the significant historical and/or aesthetic
characteristics which qualified that district as a historic district under this
Article.
DAY: A calendar day, except where otherwise specified in this Article.
DEMOLITION: The razing or destruction, whether entirely or in significant part
of a building, structure, site or object. Demolition includes the removal of a
building, structure or object from its site or the removal or destruction of
its facade or surface.
ELIGIBLE HISTORIC LANDMARK: Any property and/or improvement nominated for
designation as an historic landmark which has been determined by the
Commission, after notice and an opportunity to be heard for the owner(s),
nominators and other interested parties in accordance with Section
7-9-4 of this Article, to be eligible for designation by resolution and
recommendation of the Commission to the Village Board, but which has not yet
been so designated by the Village Board.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES: The architectural character and general
composition of the exterior of a structure or improvement, including the kind
and texture of all the building materials and the type, design and character of
all architectural details, including, but not limited to, windows, walls,
roofs, doors, light fixtures, fences, signs and appurtenant elements.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: A historic district is an area with geographically definable
boundaries, possessing a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of
properties and/or improvements united by past events or aesthetically by plan
or physical development that has been designated as an Oak Park historic
district pursuant to Village ordinance. A district may include properties and/
or improvements which are individually designated as historic landmarks under
this Article and may also contain other properties and/or improvements which,
while not of such individual historical and/or architectural value to be
designated historic landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall special
character or value of the landmark or landmarks located within the district.
HISTORIC LANDMARK: Any property and/or improvement which has special character
or significant historical, cultural, architectural, archeological, community or
aesthetic value as part of the heritage of the Village of Oak Park, the State
of Illinois, or the United States which has been designated as an Oak Park
historic landmark pursuant to this Article and shall include all designated
interior historic landmarks.
IMPROVEMENT: Any visible built feature constituting a physical addition or any
part of such addition to a property, including any building, structure,
fixture, bridge, work of art, place, parking facility, fence, gate, wall,
landscaping or paving.
INTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES: The architectural character and general
composition of the interior of a structure, including the room design and
configuration, color and texture of materials, and the type, pattern and
character of all architectural details and elements, including, but not limited
to, staircases, doors, hardware, moldings, trim, plaster work, light fixtures
and wall coverings.
INTERIOR HISTORIC LANDMARK: An interior, or part thereof, which is normally
open or accessible to the public and which has a significant historical or
aesthetic interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural
characteristics of the Village, State of Illinois or United States and which
has been designated as an interior landmark pursuant to the provisions of this
Article.
NOMINATED HISTORIC LANDMARK: A property and/or improvement nominated by an
interested party for consideration by the Commission for designation as a
historic landmark prior to determination by the Commission that it is eligible
for historic landmark designation.
NONCONTRIBUTING RESOURCE: A property and/or improvement located within a
historic district that does not represent significant historical and/or
aesthetic characteristics which qualified that district as a historic district
under this Article.
OWNER: Owner of record as determined by the tax rolls except where otherwise
specified herein in this Article.
PROPERTY: Land and improvements identified as a separate lot for purposes of
the zoning regulations of the Village of Oak Park.
PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT: Work carried out by the Village of Oak Park for public
use or service, including, but not limited to, the installation, major repair
or improvements to streets, curbs and gutters, alleys, sidewalks, public
utilities, streetlights, signs, banners and traffic signals.
RELOCATION: Any repositioning of an improvement on the same property upon which
it is located.
REMOVAL: Any moving of an improvement from the property upon which it was
originally located.
REPAIR: Minor work which does not require a building permit and which does not
affect the architectural features of an improvement.
REVIEW: The process of examining the plans and documents prepared by an owner
of property and/or an improvement designated as a historic landmark which
describes proposed work on the landmark, which will lead to the decision to
grant or deny a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of economic
hardship.
SITE: The location of an event, activity, building, structure or improvement.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent
or semi-permanent location on or in the ground.
THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS: The "Secretary Of The Interior's
Standards For Rehabilitation And Guidelines For Rehabilitating Historic
Buildings", revised U.S. 1990, Department of the Interior, National Park
Service, Preservation Assistance Division, Washington, D.C.
WORK: Any construction, alteration, repair, relocation, removal or demolition
of an improvement.
(Ord. 1999-0-7, 3-15-1999; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022)
7-9-3: HISTORIC DISTRICTS:
   A.   Historic districts shall be designated, amended and removed only upon
by an ordinance adopted by the Village Board.
   B.   Frank Lloyd Wright-Prairie School of Architectural Historic District:
      1.   On February 7, 1972, the Oak Park Historic District, renamed the
Frank Lloyd Wright-Prairie School of Architecture Historic District, was
recognized and affirmed as a locally designated historic district within the
Village of Oak Park.
      2.   On December 6, 1973, the Oak Park Historic District, renamed the
Frank Lloyd Wright-Prairie School of Architecture Historic District, was listed
in the National Register of Historic Places where such district remains
officially registered as the Frank Lloyd Wright-Prairie School of Architecture
Historic District.
      3.   On May 22, 2009, a newly expanded Frank Lloyd Wright-Prairie School
of Architecture Historic District was listed in the National Register of
Historic Places.
      4.   On February 12, 2012, a newly expanded Frank Lloyd Wright-Prairie
School of Architecture Historic District was recognized and affirmed as a
locally designated historic district within the Village of Oak Park.
      5.   The Village hereby designates the area set forth on the map attached
to Ordinance 1972-O-8 as Exhibit A which is incorporated in this Article by
reference, as amended, historic district within the Village known as the Frank
Lloyd Wright-Prairie School of Architecture Historic District. Such designation
shall be reflected in the official zoning map of the Village.
   C.   Ridgeland/Oak Park Historic District:
      1.   On July 20, 1983, the Ridgeland/Oak Park Historic District was
listed in the National Register of Historic Places where such district remains
officially registered as the Ridgeland/Oak Park Historic District.
      2.   On February 26, 1993, the Ridgeland/Oak Park Historic District was
recognized and affirmed as a locally designated historic district within the
Village of Oak Park.
      3.   The Village hereby designates the area set forth on the map on file
in the office of the Village Clerk attached to Ordinance 1993-O-12 as Exhibit A
which is incorporated in this Article by reference, as amended, as a historic
district within the Village known as the Ridgeland/Oak Park Historic District.
Such designation shall be reflected on the official zoning map of the Village.
   D.   Gunderson Historic District:
      1.   On March 1, 2002, the Gunderson Historic District was listed in the
National Register of Historic Places where such district remains officially
registered as the Gunderson Historic District.
      2.   On June 17, 2002, the Gunderson Historic District was recognized and
affirmed as a locally designated historic district within the Village of Oak
Park.
      3.   On May 19, 2003, a newly expanded Gunderson Historic District was
recognized and affirmed as a locally designated historic district within the
Village of Oak Park.
      4.   The Village hereby designates the area set forth on the map on file
in the office of the Village Clerk attached to Ordinance 2003-0-28 as Exhibit A
which is incorporated in this Article by reference, as amended, as a historic
district within the Village known as the Gunderson Historic District. Such
designation shall be reflected on the official zoning map of the Village. (Ord.
2012-0-08, 2-21-2012; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022) (Ord. 2012-0-08, 2-21-2012;
amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022)
7-9-4: CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS AND INTERIOR HISTORIC
LANDMARKS:
   A.   The Commission, in determining whether to recommend for designation,
and the Village Board, in determining whether to approve designation of
particular sites, structures, or improvements as historic landmarks and/or
interiors of structures or parts thereof as interior historic landmarks, shall
consider the following criteria:
   B.   Historical And/Or Cultural Importance:
      1.   Significance as an example of the architectural, cultural, economic,
historic or social development or heritage of the Village of Oak Park, the
state, or the United States;
      2.   Location as a site of a historic event, with a significant effect on
the Village of Oak Park, the state, or the United States; and
      3.   Identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the architectural, cultural, economic, historic or social
heritage, or other aspect, of the Village of Oak Park, the State, or the United
States.
   C.   Architectural And/Or Engineering Importance:
      1.   Existence on the National Register of Historic Places;
      2.   Embodiment of those distinguishing characteristics of significant
architectural type, or style, or engineering specimen;
      3.   Identification as the work of a builder, designer, architect,
craftsperson, engineer or landscape architect whose individual work is
significant in the development of the Village of Oak Park, the State, or the
United States;
      4.   Contains design elements, detail, materials or craftsmanship that
make the property or building structurally or architecturally innovative, rare
or unique; and
      5.   Representation of an architectural, cultural, economic, historic or
social theme, style or period, expressed in distinctive areas, districts,
places, buildings or structures that may or may not be contiguous.
   D.   Any site, structure or improvement that meets one or more of the above
criteria shall also be at least fifty (50) years old and shall have sufficient
integrity of location, design, materials and workmanship to make it worthy of
preservation or restoration.
   E.   It shall be within the discretion of the Village Board to deny
designation of any historic landmark, irrespective of whether or not the
proposed landmark satisfies one or more of the above listed criteria. (Ord.
1999-0-7, 3-15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022)
7-9-5: NOMINATION AND PRELIMINARY DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY FOR DESIGNATION
AS AN HISTORIC LANDMARK OR INTERIOR HISTORIC LANDMARK:
   A.   Submission Of Nominations: Historic landmark and interior historic
landmark nominations may be submitted to the Commission by any person, group of
persons, or association, including any member of the Commission, on a
nomination form provided by the Commission. The nomination form shall include,
or be accompanied by, the following:
      1.   The name and address of the owner of the property proposed for
designation, including the names of the beneficial owners of property held in a
land trust, where possible.
      2.   The legal description and common street address of the property
proposed for designation.
      3.   An indication of whether or not the owner is in favor of the
proposed designation.
      4.   A written statement describing the property and setting forth
reasons in support of the proposed designation.
      5.   Photographs of the property or selected properties within a
district.
      6.   Such other information as may be required by the Commission.
   B.   Commission Action:
      1.   The Commission staff liaison shall, upon receipt of a properly
completed nomination, immediately the Director of the Development Customer
Services Department or the Director's designee of the Commission's receipt of
such nomination and shall deliver copies of same to the and Development
Customer Services Department as soon thereafter as is possible and shall make a
preliminary determination of eligibility within fifteen (15) days of the
receipt of the nomination, or by the Commission's next regularly scheduled
meeting, whichever occurs later. A determination by the Commission of
preliminary eligibility must be based upon a finding by the Commission that
there is a likelihood that a nominated historic landmark will meet one or more
of the "Criteria for Designation" set forth in Section
7-9-4 of this Article.
      2.   If a majority of the Commission members determine that there is not
a likelihood that the nominated historic landmark may meet at least one of the
criteria for designation, it shall enter a formal denial of the nomination and
so notify the party making the nomination in writing. Such a denial shall be
the final administrative decision. The Commission may not reconsider the
preliminary eligibility of such a historic landmark for at least one year
following the submission of the original nomination and, then, only upon
further evidence of qualification. If a preliminary determination is made that
there is a likelihood that the nominated historic landmark may meet one or more
criteria, the Commission shall schedule a designation hearing to be held within
forty five (45) days of the preliminary determination and shall send the owner
of record written notice of same no less than fifteen (15) days in advance of
such hearing by regular and electronic mail, properly addressed to the owner of
record as shown in the records of the Recorder of Deeds or Registrar of Titles,
whichever is appropriate, and with sufficient postage affixed thereto. Failure
to receive notice shall not invalidate the proceedings of the Commission. (Ord.
1999-0-7, 3-15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022)
7-9-6: DESIGNATION HEARING:
   A.   Following a preliminary determination by the Commission that there is a
likelihood that a proposed historic landmark may be eligible for designation,
the Commission shall conduct a hearing and shall notify the party making the
nomination, the owner(s) of record of the proposed historic landmark and the
owners of record of any property within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the
proposed historic landmark, by regular mail as to the date, time, place and
purpose of the public hearing. Notice shall also be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Village. The notice shall be sent and published not
less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of
the hearing. Such notice shall include the date, time and place of the hearing,
a general description of the request to be heard, and the address or location
of the property to which the request applies. If the owner(s) of record is not
the party making the nomination, the Commission's notice to the owner(s) of
record of the proposed historic landmark shall also include a copy of the
nominating petition, any supporting documentation submitted therewith and a
form for use by the owner entitled the "Owner(s) of Record Statement of
Position" form indicating the owner's support for or opposition to the proposed
designation and a brief statement of the owner's position. The form shall
provide a return address for the Commission and shall direct the owner to
return the completed form to the Commission no less than seven (7) days prior
to the scheduled hearing. The form shall further indicate that the owner's
failure to respond shall be presumed by the Commission to indicate the owner's
support for the proposed designation. The owner may rebut this presumption by
appearing at the hearing and testifying in opposition to the proposed
designation. The Commission shall make every reasonable effort to contact
personally or by telephone owner(s) of record who have not returned an executed
owner's form to explain the designation process and to encourage the return of
the signed form.
   B.   At the hearing the Commission shall take testimony and receive evidence
from the nominators, owner(s) of record, and any other interested parties who
wish to be heard and/or present evidence on the application of the criteria for
designation, set forth in Section 7-9-4 of this Article, to the proposed
historic landmark. The Commission shall hear testimony and receive evidence in
accordance with such procedural rules that are not inconsistent with this
Article as the Commission may, from time to time, propose and the Village Board
may, from time to time, adopt for the purpose of governing the conduct of such
hearings before the Commission. (Ord. 1999-0-7, 3-15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-
2022)
7-9-7: DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS AND INTERIOR HISTORIC LANDMARKS:
   A.   Within forty five (45) days following completion of the public hearing
(s), the Commission shall determine, based on the criteria set forth in Section
7-9-4 of this Article whether to recommend designation of an historical
landmark to the Village Board and shall deliver to the nominator, the Village
Board, the Village Clerk or the Village Clerk's designee, the Development
Customer Service Department and to the owner(s) of record, a resolution and
report recommending designation if such a determination has been made by the
Commission. The resolution shall require an affirmative vote of a majority of
the full members of the Commission to recommend designation to the Village
Board. The resolution shall include or be accompanied by a written report
summarizing the evidence presented at the hearing, setting forth findings of
fact based thereon, and explaining the basis for the Commission's
recommendation. A decision by the Commission not to recommend designation is
final and will terminate the designation process. The Commission shall notify
the owner and nominators of its decision not to recommend designation within
forty-five (45) days of the completion of the public hearing. The Commission
shall not consider the re-nomination of the same or a substantially similar
historic landmark for at least one year following submission of the original
nomination and the nominated property shall not be considered an eligible
historic landmark during that time.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days after receiving the resolution and report
containing the recommendation for designation from the Commission, the Village
Board shall either designate the historic landmark or reject the nomination by
a simple majority vote of the full Village Board, unless the owner is opposed
to the nomination, in which case designation of the historic landmark may only
occur upon a unanimous vote of the Village Board. In making this determination,
the Village Board shall apply the designation criteria set forth in Section
7-9-4 of this Article and shall give due consideration to the record of the
public hearing(s), and findings and recommendations of the Commission set forth
in the Commission's resolution and report and may take public testimony with
regard to same. Upon a majority vote of the Village Board to approve
designation, the Village Board shall enact an ordinance designating the
historic landmark, which ordinance shall provide that the newly designated
historic landmark shall be subject to the provisions of this Article.
   C.   Upon designation of a historic landmark by the Village Board, the
Commission shall provide written notification by regular and electronic mail to
the owner(s) of record of the designated historic landmark which notification
shall include a copy of the ordinance designating same. Failure to receive
electronic notice shall not invalidate the proceedings of the Commission. The
Village shall file a copy of the designation ordinance with the Cook County
Clerk for each historic landmark designated. A copy of the designation
ordinance shall be sent to the Village Development Customer Services Department
and the Village Clerk.
   D.   If the Board of Trustees does not approve a designation, then a
nomination for the same or a substantially similar historic landmark may not be
considered by the Commission for at least one year from the date of the Village
Board action and the nominated property shall not be considered an eligible
historic landmark during that time.
   E.   Designations may be amended or rescinded by the same procedure and
according to the same criteria set forth in this Article for an original
designation.
   F.   The following properties and/or improvements have been designated as
Oak Park historic landmarks (including interior landmarks) pursuant to this
Article:
 Landmark Properties Designation Date
    Landmark Properties                                      Designation Date
1.  Frank Lloyd Wright Home & Studio                         June 17, 1996
   428 Forest and 951 Chicago Avenue                         
   Interior, exterior and improvements                       
                                                            
2.  John Farson Home                                         June 17, 1996
   217 Home Avenue                                           
   Exterior, walk and fence                                  
                                                            
3.  Pilgrim Congregational Church                            June 17, 1996
   460 Lake Street                                           
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
4.  Unity Temple                                             June 17, 1996
   875 Lake Street                                           
   Interior and exterior                                     
                                                            
5.  Ernest Hemingway Birthplace Home                         June 17, 1996
   339 N. Oak Park Avenue                                    
   Interior and exterior                                     
                                                            
6.  The Plaza Hotel                                          March 16, 1998
   123 S. Marion Street                                      
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
7.  The Plaza Hotel                                          March 16, 1998
   123 S. Marion Street                                      
   Interior                                                  
    The lobby or foyer area including: the four-story atrium
    with a turned spindle latticework stairway, the
   ornamental stained and beveled glass door surround        
    between the foyer of the original building and the
    former dining area in the addition, and the two (2)
    brick archways leading off from the foyer area.
                                                            
8.  The Hills-DeCaro House                                   January 7, 2002
   313 Forest Avenue                                         
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
9.  The Rollin Furbeck House                                 January 7, 2002
   515 Fair Oaks Avenue                                      
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
10. The Harry S. Adams House                                 January 7, 2002
   710 Augusta Street                                        
   Exterior - house and coach house                          
                                                            
11. The George Furbeck House                                 November 18, 2002
   223 N. Euclid Avenue                                      
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
12. The Thomas Gale House                                    November 18, 2002
   1027 Chicago Avenue                                       
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
13. The Oak Park and River Forest Day Nursery                November 18, 2002
   1139 Randolph Street                                      
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
14. Charles Roberts House                                    December 2, 2002
   321 N. Euclid Avenue                                      
   Exterior - house and garage                               
                                                            
15. Roberts Building                                         December 2, 2002
   300-304 N. Grove Avenue/818 Erie Street                   
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
16. Odd Fellows Hall                                         November 17, 2003
   812-818 Harrison Street                                   
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
17. The Albert and Kittie Ernst House                        November 17, 2003
   1023 Wenonah Avenue                                       
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
18. Oak Park Conservatory                                    June 21, 2004
   615 Garfield Street                                       
   Exterior - original structure                             
                                                            
19. Park Grove and Park View Manor                           June 21, 2004
   173-181 N. Grove Avenue                                   
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
20. Bishop Quarter School Addition                           June 21, 2004
   605 Lake Street                                           
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
21. C.A. Sharpe House (Dole/Cheney Mansion)                  July 6, 2004
   220 N. Euclid Avenue                                      
   Exterior - house, greenhouse, coach house, fence          
                                                            
22. Andreas Brisch House                                     December 6, 2004
   701 S. East Avenue                                        
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
23. Harold C. Lewis House                                    December 6, 2004
   950 Columbian Avenue                                      
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
24. George and James Tough House                             December 6, 2004
   1045 Wesley Avenue                                        
   Exterior - house and garage                               
                                                            
25. Poley Building                                           December 6, 2004
   408-410 S. Austin Boulevard                               
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
26. Margaret Morse House                                     February 22, 2005
   1036 Fair Oaks Avenue                                     
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
27. Albert Schneider House                                   February 22, 2005
   553 N. Marion Street                                      
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
28. Dorothy Manor Apartments                                 June 20, 2005
   424-426 S. Austin Boulevard                               
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
29. Maze Branch Library                                      November 7, 2005
   845 Gunderson Avenue                                      
   Exterior, interior (main floor, foyer)                    
                                                            
30. First United Methodist Church                            November 7, 2005
   324 N. Oak Park Avenue                                    
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
31. Howard Jenkins House                                     May 1, 2006
   500 Linden Avenue                                         
   Exterior - house and garage                               
                                                            
32. Dr. Harry Bernhardt Cottage                              May 1, 2006
   705 S. East Avenue                                        
   Exterior - house and garage                               
                                                            
33. Charles W. Eils House                                    November 6, 2006
   625 S. Oak Park Avenue                                    
   Exterior - house and garage                               
                                                            
34. Boulevard Arcade Building                                June 4, 2007
   1033 South Boulevard                                      
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
35. Cicero Fire House No. 2                                  June 16, 2008
   129 Lake Street                                           
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
36. Gustaf and Fride Benson House                            July 20, 2009
   1139 Woodbine Avenue                                      
   Exterior - house and garage                               
                                                            
37. Robert Parker House                                      July 20, 2009
   1019 Chicago Avenue                                       
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
38. Linden Apartments                                        October 6, 2009
   175-181 Linden Avenue/643-645 Ontario Street              
   Exterior - building and garage                            
                                                            
39. Charles Schwerin House                                   March 15, 2010
   639 Fair Oaks Avenue                                      
   Exterior - house and garage                               
                                                            
40. Edward and Caroline McCready House                       March 15, 2010
   231 N. Euclid Avenue                                      
   Exterior - house, garage, and retaining wall              
                                                            
41. Russell Wallace House                                    March 15, 2010
   178 N. Euclid Avenue                                      
   Exterior - house and garage                               
                                                            
42. Charles S. Castle House                                  March 15, 2010
   647 Linden Avenue                                         
   Exterior - house and garage                               
                                                            
43. Joseph D. Everett House                                  May 17, 2010
   228 Forest Avenue                                         
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
44. Chester Flitcraft House                                  June 21, 2010
   845 Chicago Avenue                                        
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
45. Paul Blatchford House No. 1                              June 21, 2010
   250 Forest Avenue                                         
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
46. William A. Douglass House                                September 20, 2010
   317 N. Kenilworth Avenue                                  
   Exterior, coach house                                     
                                                            
47. Nineteenth Century Club                                  September 20, 2010
   178 Forest Avenue                                         
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
48. Rutherford-Dodge House                                   January 3, 2011
   308 N. Oak Park Avenue                                    
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
49. Vernon W. Skiff House                                    January 3, 2011
   633 N. East Avenue                                        
   Exterior, coach house, fence                              
                                                            
50. Charles E. Matthews House                                February 22, 2011
   432 N. Kenilworth Avenue                                  
   Exterior, garage                                          
                                                            
51. Harlem Office Building                                   March 7, 2011
   1515 N. Harlem Avenue                                     
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
52. John D. Caldwell House                                   July 5, 2011
   130 S. East Avenue                                        
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
53. Charles W. Helder House                                  July 5, 2011
   629 Fair Oaks Avenue                                      
   Exterior, garage                                          
                                                            
54. Freeman Landon House                                     September 19, 2011
   700 S. Lombard Avenue                                     
   Exterior, garage                                          
                                                            
55. George and Mary Sheppard House                           October 3, 2011
   217 S. Humphrey Avenue                                    
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
56. Rankin-Hemingway House                                   November 28, 2011
   639 N. Oak Park Avenue                                    
   Exterior, garage                                          
                                                            
57. William J. Ehlers Flats                                  July 2, 2012
   241 S. Elmwood Avenue                                     
   Exterior, garage                                          
                                                            
58. Edwin H. Ehrman House                                    July 2, 2012
   410 N. Kenilworth Avenue                                  
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
59. George L. Smith House                                    November 5, 2012
   743 Columbian Avenue                                      
   Exterior, garage                                          
                                                            
60. Charlton H. Catlin Flats                                 April 1, 2013
   209 - 211 S. Elmwood Avenue                               
   Exterior, garage                                          
                                                            
61. Andreas Brisch House no. 1                               July 1, 2013
   745 S. East Avenue                                        
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
62. Purcell-Yager House                                      May 5, 2014
   300 Forest Avenue                                         
   Exterior, garage                                          
                                                            
63. Walter S. Gerts House                                    October 6, 2014
   200 S. East Avenue                                        
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
64. Edward B. Kittle House                                   October 6, 2014
   636 Fair Oaks Avenue                                      
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
65. I.M. and Fannabell Fixman House                          December 8, 2014
   1010 Fair Oaks Avenue                                     
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
66. Charles Roberts Stables                                  November 21, 2016
   317 North Euclid Avenue                                   
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
67. James T. Hayden House                                    June 5, 2017
   209 Forest Avenue                                         
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
68. Edgar Rice Burroughs House no. 1                         December 11, 2017
   414 Augusta Street                                        
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
69. John J. Schmidt House                                    May 7, 2018
   400 North Kenilworth Avenue                               
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
70. Robbins-Chapmen House                                    November 4, 2019
   408 North Kenilworth Ave                                  
   Exterior                                                  
                                                            
71. Telfer MacArthur House                                   February 1, 2021
   609 Linden Ave                                            
   Exterior, coach house                                     
72. Swenson-Gottlieb House                                   May, 15, 2023
   1201 Fair Oaks Avenue                                     
   Exterior, garage                                          
 
(Ord. 1999-0-7, 3-15-1999; amd. Ord. 2012-0-60, 11-5-2012; Ord. 2013-0-29, 4-1-
2013; Ord. 2013-0-50, 7-1-2013; Ord. 2014-0-25, 5-5-2014; Ord. 2014-0-71, 10-6-
2014; Ord. 2014-0-72, 10-6-2014; Ord. 2014-0-109, 12-8-2014; Ord. 16-152, 11-
21-2016; Ord. 17-215, 6-5-2017; Ord. 17-315, 12-11-201; Ord. 18-367, 5-7-2018;
Ord. 19-102, 11-4-2019; Ord. 21-4, 2-1-2021; Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022; Ord. 23-24,
5-15-2023)
7-9-8: WORK REQUIRING THE ISSUANCE OF A CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS, A
CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP OR A CERTIFICATE OF ADVISORY REVIEW:
   A.   No building permit or demolition permit shall be issued and no
alteration authorized by the Development Customer Services affecting any site,
building, structure or improvement designated in this Article until such time
as the corresponding requirement or requirements set forth in this Article for
each such designated site, building, structure or improvement shall first have
been satisfied:
      1.   In the case of the construction on, and/or the alteration,
relocation, demolition or removal of an eligible historic landmark, the
building or demolition permit shall be issued or the alteration authorized upon
the denial of designation of historic landmark status by the Village Board;
provided, however, that if the site, building, structure or improvement which
has been denied landmark status is located within a designated historic
district, then the issuance of a building or demolition permit shall also be
contingent upon satisfying the requirements set forth in this Article for
property located within a designated historic district; or
      2.   In the case of a demolition or removal of:
         a.   An eligible or designated historic landmark;
         b.   Any site, building, structure or improvement within a designated
historic district; or
         c.   A site, building, structure or improvement located in a
designated historic district or listed in the National Register of Historic
Places, which is wholly or partially financed by the Village or by one or more
Federal, State or Village funding sources which are dispersed through or
administered by the Village, the demolition permit shall be issued upon the
authorization of such a permit by formal resolution of the Village Board as
being necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare; or
      3.   In the case of:
         a.   The construction on, and/or the alteration, relocation,
demolition or removal of an eligible or designated historic landmark;
         b.   The alteration, demolition or removal of a site, building,
structure or improvement located in a designated historic district or listed in
the National Register of Historic Places which is wholly or partially financed
by the Village or by one or more Federal, State or Village funding sources
which are dispersed through or administered by the Village; or
         c.   The removal or demolition of any building, structure or
improvement located within a designated historic district for which demolition
has not been authorized under subsection
7-9-8A2 of this section, the building or demolition permit shall be issued or
the alteration shall be authorized upon the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness in accordance with Section
7-9-12 of this Article or a certificate of economic hardship in accordance with
Section
7-9-13 of this Article.
   B.   No building permit for construction shall be issued by the Development
Customer Services Department affecting any non-landmark property or structure
within a designated historic district unless a certificate of advisory review
is issued in accordance with Section
7-9-15 of this Article.
   C.   The Development Customer Services Department shall provide written
authorization for alteration work affecting eligible or designated historic
landmarks, which does not require a building permit, upon receipt of the
certificate of appropriateness or certificate of economic hardship for such
alteration work. Such authorization must be given prior to commencement of such
alteration work.
   D.   No work requiring the issuance of a building or demolition permit or
the authorization of an alteration by the Development Customer Services
Department, shall commence prior to such issuance or authorization in
accordance with this Section.
   E.   Public works projects within designated historic districts or affecting
eligible or designated historic landmarks shall require a certificate of
advisory review. The Director of Public Works or the Director's designee shall
report such projects to the Commission as they are proposed by the Director or
Director's designee in a timely fashion. In emergency situations, or where time
constraints otherwise require the immediate commencement of such projects, work
may commence prior to the issuance of the certificate of advisory review. (Ord.
1999-0-7, 3-15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022)
7-9-9: ZONING AND SUBDIVISION ACTIONS AFFECTING ANY NOMINATED, ELIGIBLE OR
DESIGNATED HISTORIC LANDMARKS OR DESIGNATED HISTORIC DISTRICTS:
   A.   The Director of the Development Services Department or applicable
Village staff, in the case of applications before the Zoning Board of Appeals
or Plan Commission, shall notify the applicable staff liaison, within a
reasonable time of submission to the Department, of all applications for zoning
amendments, variances, special use permits, design review applications,
subdivision or planned unit developments affecting:
      1.   Property in any designated historic district;
      2.   Any eligible or designated historic landmarks; or
      3.   Any property located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of such
landmark.
   B.   In furtherance of its duties as set forth in subsection 2-23-2F of the
Village Code, the Commission, or applicable staff liaison when appropriate,
shall evaluate the anticipated effect of the zoning action requested in the
application on the designated historic district or nominated, eligible or
designated historic landmark(s) and shall consider the long-term compatibility
of the proposed zoning action with the character of the affected historic
resources and the effect of any proposed zoning action on the long-range
preservation of these resources. In its review, the Commission shall also
consider the criteria specified in Section
7-9-11  of this Article.
   C.   The Commission may present its evaluation or opinion on the effects of
such anticipated zoning action on a historic district or nominated, eligible or
designated landmark to the board or commission hearing such zoning action.
   D.   In no event shall the provisions of this Section preclude the necessity
of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of economic
hardship when required under Section
7-9-12  or
7-9-13  of this Article. (Ord. 1999-0-7, 3-15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022;
Ord. 25-112, 3-4-2025)
7-9-10: ACQUISITION OR USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   The Village Manager shall advise the Commission, in a timely manner, of
all proposed or pending acquisitions, sales or changes in use by the Village or
by any other public agency, including any other unit of local government, when
known to the Village, of any property designated as a historic landmark, or
located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of a landmark, or located in an
historic district. The Commission shall advise the Village Board, other
appropriate public agency or other units of local government, as to the effects
of such actions on the special historic, architectural, community or aesthetic
interest or value of such properties to Oak Park.
   B.   The Commission shall request that other public agencies serving the
community agree to advise the Commission of pending acquisition, sales or
changes by such agencies in use of property designated as an historic landmark
or located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of a landmark, or located in an
historic district, in order that the Commission may advise such agencies as to
the impact of such actions on the historic, architectural, community or
aesthetic interest or value of such properties to Oak Park. The Commission
shall take appropriate steps to notify all public agencies which own or may
acquire property in the Village about the existence and character of designated
historic landmarks and historic districts, and the Commission shall provide a
current record of such landmarks and districts to such public agencies for
their maintenance. (Ord. 1999-0-7, 3-15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022)
7-9-11: REVIEW CRITERIA FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS; CERTIFICATE OF
ADVISORY REVIEW; NONCONTRIBUTING RESOURCES:
   A.   Guidelines For Construction, Alteration And Relocation Work: In making
a determination to issue or deny a certificate of appropriateness for
construction, alteration or relocation work affecting an eligible or designated
historic landmark, or a determination to conduct an advisory review and either
approve or make recommendations with regard to construction or relocation work
on property located in a designated historic district, either the Commission or
the Village Board, when considering an appeal, shall consider the effect of the
proposed construction, alteration, or relocation on the architectural features
and on the historic, aesthetic or architectural value, characteristics and
significance of the eligible or designated historic landmark or designated
historic district
   B.   In determining whether to issue a certificate of appropriateness or a
certificate of advisory review, the Commission, or the Village Board when
considering an appeal, shall follow the "Secretary of the Interior's
Standards", revised 1990, as amended in this Article, and such other criteria
and guidelines as the Commission may recommend, and which the Village Board may
adopt, for use by the Commission, or the Village Board when considering an
appeal. Such criteria shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a
new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the
building and its site and environment.
      2.   The significant original qualities and/or historic character of a
property shall be retained and preserved. The removal or alteration of historic
or distinctive architectural materials or features and spaces that characterize
a property shall be avoided.
      3.   Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development,
such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other
buildings, shall not be undertaken.
      4.   Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired
historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.
      5.   Distinctive features, finishes and construction techniques or
examples of craftsmanship that characterize an historic property shall be
preserved.
      6.   Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, inherent
and not renewable color, texture and other visual qualities and, where
possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by
documentary, physical or pictorial evidence.
      7.   Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause
damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of
structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means
possible.
      8.   Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be
protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation
measures shall be undertaken.
      9.   The historic and architectural integrity of the property and its
environment shall be protected by making the new work compatible with the
existing structures, surrounding structures, streetscape or the character of
the historic district, whenever one or more of these elements is affected by
such work, with respect to the following design criteria:
         a.   The height of the alteration, addition or construction;
         b.   Proportions between the width and height of structure's front
façade;
         c.   The proportions and relationships between doors and windows;
         d.   Relationship of building masses and the open space around them,
including setbacks and placement on the lot;
         e.   The design of the roof shapes, forms and materials;
         f.   Landscaping and appurtenances which should also be sensitive to
the individual structure, its occupants and their needs;
         g.   The scale of the proposed structure;
         h.   Dominant horizontal or vertical directional expression of front
elevation.; and
         i.   Architectural style, design, details and materials, including
textures and patterns, but not necessarily color.
      10.   New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
   C.   Guidelines For Removal Or Demolition Of Historic Landmarks, Or
Buildings, Structures Or Improvements Located Within An Historic District:
Guidelines to be used by the Commission, or by the Village Board when
considering an appeal, in determining of appropriateness of the removal or
demolition of a landmark or a building, structure or improvement in an historic
district shall include, but not be limited to, the guidelines set forth in
subsection
7-9-11A of this Section
   D.   Noncontributing Resources: A property or improvement shall be
considered to be a noncontributing resource if it is contained as a
noncontributing resource in the National Register Historic District nomination
form for the historic district. A noncontributing resource is not subject to
the requirements of this Article, except for advisory reviews pursuant to
Section
7-9-15 of this Article or if the resource is listed as an Oak Park Landmark.
(Ord. 1999-0-7, 3-15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022)
7-9-12: PROCEDURES FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS:
   A.   Preapplication: Any owner of an historic landmark may, at any time,
request the Commission to make a preliminary review of proposed work in order
to determine whether the proposed work will meet the criteria set forth in this
Article. The Commission or Committee may, on the basis of documents and other
material presented, make a preliminary finding of acceptability which may then
be used by the Commission to expedite the processing of a certificate of
appropriateness after the owner has applied for a building permit and/or a
certificate of appropriateness. The certificate of appropriateness will be
issued by the Commission only if the work described on the permit documents
submitted by the owner to obtain the permit are found to be substantially the
same as that which was preapproved. If, during the preapplication review, the
Commission or Committee finds that the proposed work does not meet the
criteria, the Commission or Committee may advise the owner on possible ways to
meet the criteria.
   B.   Application: Any application for a building permit and/or certificate
of appropriateness for construction, alteration or relocation affecting an
eligible or designated historic landmark or for the removal of an eligible or
designated historic landmark or the removal of a building, structure or
improvement from a property within a designated historic district and any
application for a demolition permit for the demolition of an eligible or
designated historic landmark or for the demolition of a building, structure or
improvement in a designated historic district shall be sent by the Development
Customer Services Department, within three (3) working days of receipt, to the
Commission. At the time of receipt of the application(s), the Development
Customer Services Department shall issue to the applicant an historic
preservation guidelines pamphlet prepared by the Commission which summarizes
the preservation requirements and preservation assistance available in the
Village with regard to the historic landmarks and historic districts. The
Development Customer Services Department shall not issue a building permit and
shall not authorize any alterations until a certificate of appropriateness or
certificate of economic hardship has been issued.
   C.   Architectural Review Committee And Commission Staff Liaison Review And
Issuance Of Certificate of Appropriateness: The Commission may propose, and the
Village Board may adopt rules, procedures and criteria under which a committee
of the Commission and/or Commission staff liaison may approve applications for
certificates of appropriateness when the proposed work involves:
      1.   Restoration to original conditions;
      2.   No changes in materials;
      3.   Changes not visible from the street and not affecting an interior
landmark; or
      4.   Other types of activities determined by the Commission to have
limited effect on the historic, architectural or aesthetic qualities of
landmarks or districts.
Such rules, procedures and criteria for the above-mentioned limited activities
only, if adopted, shall provide that Commission staff liaison shall act within
five (5) working days from receipt of the application to review, approve and
issue a certificate of appropriateness, refer the application to the
Architectural Review Committee, or refer the application to the full Commission
for its consideration.
   D.   Commission Review: If rules, procedures and criteria are adopted
providing for committee and/or staff issuance of certificates of
appropriateness under certain limited circumstances, applications which would
not meet the criteria for committee or staff review under subsection
7-9-12C of this Section, shall be referred to the Commission by such committee
or Commission staff liaison, or applications which have been denied a
certificate of appropriateness by committee or Commission staff liaison shall
be referred to the Commission. Except as otherwise provided for in rules and
procedures adopted in accordance with subsection
7-9-12C of this Section, all applications for certificates of appropriateness
shall be referred directly to the full Commission for review. The Commission
shall review the completed application and supporting information within forty-
five (45) days of receiving same, either from a committee or directly from the
Development Customer Services Department. The applicant shall be notified, in
writing, of the date, time and place of the meeting at which Commission review
on the proposed work shall take place. The applicant shall be requested to
submit such plans, drawings, photographs or other information the Commission
may request to complete its review. Requested information shall not delay the
meeting. The notice shall be sent no less than five (5) days before the meeting
at which the proposed work is to be reviewed. The requirement for this five (5)
day advance notice may be waived by the applicant. A final vote, as to approval
or denial, shall be made within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of a
complete application. If a decision is not made within forty-five (45) days, it
will constitute an automatic withdrawal of the application and the Commission
staff liaison will reschedule the application if appropriate.
   E.   Acceptance Of Proposed Work And Issuance Of Certificate Of
Appropriateness: If, upon review, a quorum of the Commission finds the proposed
work is in accordance with the applicable criteria set forth in Section
7-9-11 of this Article and the purposes of this Article, it may issue a
certificate of appropriateness, with or without conditions reasonably related
to the review guidelines. Notice of the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness shall be provided to the applicant and the Development Customer
Services Department within five (5) working days after the decision. A
certificate of appropriateness shall expire one year after the date of
issuance. Any change in the proposed work after issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness shall require inspection by the Commission staff liaison to
determine whether the work is still in substantial compliance with the
certificate of appropriateness. If staff determines that the change in work is
not in substantial compliance with the certificate of appropriateness, then the
owner must immediately cease work upon notification and submit a revised
application to the Commission for review. The owner may be required to revise
plans and redo work to comply with the certificate of appropriateness. The
owner may dispute conditions regarding a certificate of appropriateness at a
public hearing as set forth below.
   F.   Failure To Issue A Certificate Of Appropriateness: If the Commission
finds that the proposed work does not meet the established criteria and,
therefore, will adversely affect or destroy any significant historic, aesthetic
or architectural feature or value of an eligible or designated historic
landmark, or that the demolition or removal of a building, structure or
improvement in a designated historic district will adversely affect the
historic, aesthetic or architectural character or value of the historic
district or is inappropriate or inconsistent with the spirit and purposes of
this Article, it shall not take action on the application and shall so advise
the applicant and the Development Customer Services Department, in writing,
within five (5) working days of the determination not to act on the application
and shall further indicate to the applicant at that time that the applicant may
submit an amended application for expedited review or may request a public
hearing.
   Within the same five (5) working day time frame, the Commission shall send a
letter to the applicant explaining any changes recommended by the Commission
before an amended application may be considered. The letter will address the
appropriate review criteria and other points deemed pertinent by the
Commission. The applicant may either amend the application and resubmit same
for expedited review, or the applicant may request a public hearing on the
application. If the applicant submits an amended application and it is
determined to conform to Commission recommendations, a certificate of
appropriateness may be issued by a quorum of the Commission.
   G.   Public Hearing Following Denial Of A Certificate Of Appropriateness Or
Disputed Conditions: Within fifteen (15) days of notice to the applicant of
either an approval of a certificate of appropriateness with conditions or to
file an amended application or request a public hearing, the applicant may
request that the Commission hold a public hearing where additional evidence and
testimony may be heard regarding the application for a certificate of
appropriateness. The Commission shall hold such a public hearing within forty-
five (45) days of receipt of the written request.
      1.   Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing
shall be sent by regular and electronic mail to the applicant and by regular
mail to property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property
for which the application has been made, and said notice shall also be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village of Oak Park. The
notice shall be sent and published not less than fifteen (15) days nor more
than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing. Such notice shall
include the date, time and place of the hearing, a general description of the
request to be heard, and the address or location of the property to which the
request applies. Failure to receive electronic notice shall not invalidate the
proceedings of the Commission.
      2.   At the public hearing, the Commission shall take testimony presented
by the applicant and any other interested parties concerning the effect of the
proposed alteration, construction, relocation, removal or demolition of an
eligible or designated historic landmark upon an eligible or designated
historic landmark and the surrounding neighborhood or the effect of the
proposed removal or demolition of any structure, building or improvement within
an historic district upon the district, and shall conduct such hearings in a
manner consistent with the Rules of Procedure for Hearings before the Historic
Preservation Commission, as amended from time to time, which are, adopted
pursuant to this Article and made a part hereof and as may be amended, from
time to time, by action of the Commission and the Village Board. The hearing
may be continued to a date certain, with the concurrence of the applicant.
      3.   Within fifteen (15) days following the completion of the public
hearing, the Commission shall issue or deny the certificate of appropriateness
or modify or keep intact conditions of approval related thereto. Notice of the
Commission's decision will be sent to the applicant and owner and the
Development Customer Services Department within five (5) working days of
rendering the decision. Notification procedures outlined under Sections
7-9-6 and
7-9-7 of this Article will apply.
   H.   Appeal To The Village Board: Upon denial of the application for a
certificate of appropriateness by the Commission or denial of a request to
modify conditions related thereto, the applicant may either appeal the denial
to the Village Board or may request a certificate of economic hardship. (Ord.
1999-0-7, 3-15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022; Ord. 24-163, 12-3-2024)
7-9-13: PROCEDURES FOR CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP:
   A.   Application: Following denial of a certificate of appropriateness by
the Commission or by the Village Board on appeal, the owner or designated
representative may apply for a certificate of economic hardship by submitting
to the Commission a completed application for a certificate of economic
hardship, which form shall be available in the Village Hall and in particular,
at Development Customer Services Department.
   B.   Public Hearing Process: The Commission shall hold a public hearing
within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a completed application for a
certificate of economic hardship. Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by
regular and electronic mail to the applicant and by regular mail to property
owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property for which
application has been made. Notice also shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Village of Oak Park. The notice shall be sent not
less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of
the hearing. Such notice shall include the date, time and place of the hearing,
a general description of the contents of the request to be heard and the
address or location of the property to which the request applies. Failure to
receive electronic notice shall not invalidate the proceedings of the
Commission.
At the public hearing, the Commission shall take testimony presented by the
owner(s) and any other interested parties concerning the effect of the proposed
alteration, construction, relocation, removal or demolition of an eligible or
designated historic landmark or removal or demolition of a building, structure
or improvement within a designated historic district based upon the criteria
set forth in Section
7-9-11 of this Article and shall conduct such hearing in a manner consistent
with the rules of procedure for hearings before the Commission. The hearing may
be continued to a date certain. A record shall be kept of all proceedings.
   C.   Standards For Commission Decision And Factors To Be Considered: The
Commission shall issue a certificate of economic hardship only if the
Commission finds that the subject property cannot be put to any reasonably
beneficial use or that the owner/applicant will suffer a substantial economic
loss thereon without the alteration, construction, relocation, removal or
demolition being sought by the owner/applicant and that the owner/applicant is
not responsible in any way for the hardship from which he or she is seeking
relief. The factors to be considered by the Commission and the Village Board on
the issue of economic hardship shall include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      1.   A substantial decrease in the fair market value of the property as a
result of the denial of the certificate of appropriateness;
      2.   A substantial decrease in the pretax or after-tax return to owners
of record or other investors in the property as a result of the denial of the
certificate of appropriateness;
      3.   The cost of the proposed construction, alteration, relocation or
demolition, and an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to
comply with the recommendations of the Commission for changes necessary for the
issuance of a certificate of appropriateness;
      4.   The structural soundness of any structures on the property and their
suitability for rehabilitation;
      5.   The economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing
structure or improvement on the property in the case of a proposed demolition.
      6.   The owner/applicant's purchase of the subject property after the
enactment of the relevant provisions of this Article without making said
purchase contingent upon the owner/applicant first obtaining necessary Board
and/or Commission approvals under the this Article shall be deemed to be
conclusive evidence of the fact that the applicant is responsible for the
applicant's own economic hardship, if any.
   D.   Evidence: The Commission may solicit expert testimony. The applicant
may be required to submit evidence at the hearing to support any of the
factors, including those listed above, which the applicant believes to have
contributed to the economic hardship which the applicant alleges he or she
would suffer if the applicant is not granted a certificate of appropriateness.
Specific information and documentation which should be presented by the
applicant as competent evidence at the hearing shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      1.   The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase and the party
from whom purchased (including description of the relationship, if any, between
the owner and the person from whom the property was purchased);
      2.   The assessed value of the land and improvements thereon according to
the two (2) most recent assessments;
      3.   Real estate taxes for the previous two (2) years;
      4.   Annual debt service, if any, for the previous two (2) years;
      5.   All appraisals obtained within the previous two (2) years by the
owner or applicant in connection with the owner or applicant's purchase,
financing or ownership of the property;
      6.   Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers
received, if any;
      7.   Any consideration by the owner as to profitable adaptive uses for
the property;
      8.   If the property is income-producing, the annual gross income from
the property for the previous two (2) years, itemized operating and maintenance
expenses for the previous two (2) years, and annual cash flow, if any, during
the same period;
      9.   Executed construction agreements or proposals;
      10.   Engineering or architect reports on the structural integrity of the
building or structure upon which work is being proposed.
In the event that any of the required information is not reasonably available
to the applicant and cannot be obtained by the applicant, the applicant shall
provide to the Commission a statement of the information which cannot be
obtained and describe the reasons why such information cannot be obtained.
   E.   Issuance Or Denial Of Certificate of Economic Hardship:
      1.   If the Commission finds that the owner/applicant has not established
that the owner/applicant will suffer a demonstrable economic hardship as a
result of the denial of a certificate of appropriateness, then the Commission
shall deny the applicant's application for a certificate of economic hardship.
      2.   If the Commission makes an initial determination that the applicant
has presented a case which may establish that without approval of the proposed
work all reasonable use of, or return from, a designated historic landmark or
building, structure, or improvement within a designated historic district will
be denied a property owner, but the Commission finds that reasonable
alternatives may exist which should be addressed by the applicant, then the
application shall be delayed for a period of no more than sixty (60) days
following the finding. During the first thirty (30) days of this period, the
Commission shall investigate plans and make recommendations to the owner and
Village Board which are intended to provide for reasonable use of, or return
from the property, or to otherwise preserve the subject property. During the
second thirty (30) days of this period, the applicant will investigate the
proposal of the Commission and provide the Commission with written response
thereto.
      3.   If, at the end of this sixty (60) day period, after reviewing its
initial finding and its subsequent proposals and the applicant's response
thereto, the Commission finds that without approval of the proposed work the
property cannot be put to any reasonable use or the owner cannot obtain a
reasonable economic return, then the Commission shall issue a certificate of
economic hardship approving the proposed work. If the Commission finds
otherwise, it shall deny the application for a certificate of economic
hardship. Within fifteen (15) days following the completion of the public
hearing and within fifteen (15) days of the sixty (60) day delay period
provided for in subsection
7-9-13E of this Section, if applicable, the Commission shall render its
decision on the certificate of economic hardship by adopting a resolution which
shall set forth the findings of fact and decision of the Commission either
granting or denying the certificate of economic hardship.
      4.   An executed copy of the resolution shall be sent to the applicant
and property owner and the Development Customer Services Department within five
(5) working days after the decision. (Ord. 1999-0-7, 3-15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8,
2-7-2022)
7-9-14: APPEALS:
   A.   Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of a final denial of a certificate
of appropriateness or a certificate of economic hardship by the Commission, the
applicant and/or the applicant's representative may appeal the Commission's
decision to the Village Board. The Village Board, within forty-five (45) days
of the applicant filing an appeal, shall affirm, reverse or modify the decision
of the Commission after due consideration of the facts contained in the record,
which the Commission shall submit to the Village Board within ten (10) working
days of the filing of the appeal. The Village Board may receive comments on the
contents of the record, orally at the meeting or in writing, not less than ten
(10) days prior to the meeting at which the Board will first consider the
appeal but shall not consider any new matters that were not presented during
the Commission hearings.
   B.   The Village Board shall, within ten (10) days of its decision, advise
the applicants and the Commission, in writing, of its final decision and shall
direct the Village Manager or the Village Manager's designee to advise all
affected departments of the Village government.
   C.   The failure of the Village Board to affirm, modify or reverse the
decision of the Commission within forty-five (45) days of the applicant filing
an appeal shall be considered as an affirmance by the Village Board of the
decision of the Commission and a denial of the appeal, and the Commission shall
so notify the applicant and the affected departments of the Village government
The decision of the Village Board will be the final administrative decision of
the Village. (Ord. 1999-0-7, 3-15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022)
7-9-15: ADVISORY REVIEW PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application For Advisory Review:
      1.   Advisory review is provided by the Commission as a service to the
public. Any owner may, at any time, consult with the Commission to determine
whether intended work on a structure may comply with the review guidelines and
seek the Commission's advice on how best to accomplish the work to comply with
them.
      2.   Except as otherwise provided by rules and procedures adopted in
accordance with subsection 7-9-15B of this Section, any application for a
building permit for construction or relocation work on a property within a
historic district other than historic landmarks, government-funded projects and
structures intended to be demolished (which receive certificate of
appropriateness reviews as outlined above), shall be sent to Commission staff
by the Development Customer Services Department. The Development Customer
Services Department shall not issue a building permit until the Commission,
Architectural Review Committee, and/or Commission staff, have reviewed the
permit application and acted, or until the passage of thirty (30) days from the
filing of the said application, whichever occurs first.
   B.   Architectural Review Committee And Commission Liaison Staff Review And
Approval: The Commission may propose and the Village Board may approve rules,
procedures and criteria under which a committee of the Commission, or the
Commission staff liaison, may review applications for advisory review when the
proposed work involves: 1) restoration to original conditions, or 2) no changes
in materials, or 3) changes not visible the street, or 4) other types of
activities determined by the Commission to have limited effect on the historic,
architectural or aesthetic qualities of the structure. Such committee or
Commission staff liaison shall take one of the following actions within five
(5) days from receipt of the application from the Development Customer Services
Department:
      1.   Review the permit application return to the Development Customer
Services Department marked: "approved";
      2.   Request that the owner meet with the review committee to receive
suggestions concerning revisions to the proposed work which will bring it in
line with review criteria. As soon as possible, but no later than ten (10) days
after the meeting, staff will provide a review summary and confirmation to the
applicant and will mark the permit as "approved" for historic review. At this
point the applicant is free to either revise the applicant's plans in
accordance with the suggested changes and proceed with the permit process
without changes.; and
      3.   Meet with the owner and/or submit the permit application and project
description to the full Commission to review at its next regularly scheduled
meeting.
   C.   Commission Review: Applications which have been referred to the
Commission either directly from the Development Customer Services Department or
indirectly through the committee or Commission staff, liaison shall be reviewed
by the full Commission within thirty (30) days of receipt of the complete
application. The applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the date, time and
place of the meeting at which a review of the proposed work shall take place.
The applicant may be requested to submit plans, drawings, photographs or other
information to enable the Commission to conduct a more complete review. The
Commission may, at that meeting, make recommendations concerning revisions to
the proposed work which will bring the work into conformity with review
criteria set forth in Section
7-9-11 of this Article. These recommendations will be forwarded, in writing, to
the applicant as soon as possible after this meeting, but no later than ten
(10) days after the meeting, and the application for permit will be marked as
"approved" for historic review. At this point, the applicant is free to either
revise the plans in accordance with the suggested changes and submit them to
the Development Customer Services Department, or to submit them without change,
and the permit will be issued if the application is otherwise in compliance
with Village Code. The Commission may delay issuance of the permit by a period
of no longer than thirty (30) days from time of its receipt of the complete
permit application in an attempt to resolve nonconformity issues with regard to
the review criteria. (Ord. 1999-0-7, 3-15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022)
7-9-16: PREVENTION OF DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT:
The Commission, on its own initiative, may file a petition with the Development
Customer Services Department requesting that the Department require correction
of defects or repairs to eligible or designated historic landmarks or
buildings, structures or improvements in designated historic districts so that
such landmarks, buildings, structures or improvements shall be preserved and
protected in accordance with the purposes of this Article. (Ord. 1999-0-7, 3-
15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022)
7-9-17: HAZARDOUS STRUCTURES AND PUBLIC NUISANCES:
   A.   This Article shall not prohibit the demolition of any structure which
poses an immediate hazard to human health and safety. When an eligible or
designated historic landmark or building, structure or improvement in a
designated historic district requires immediate demolition due to its imminent
threat to human health and safety and an authorized Village official, pursuant
to ordinance, has made the determination that the landmark, building, structure
or improvement should be demolished immediately, then nothing in this Article
shall prohibit the demolition of such landmark, building, structure or
improvement. The Village official ordering the demolition shall, prior to
causing the demolition, attempt notification of the Commission and Commission
staff liaison, of the imminent threat posed by the landmark, building,
structure or improvement if such notice may be given without jeopardizing human
health and safety.
   B.   If the Village has, pursuant to official action, declared a building,
structure or improvement that is an eligible or designated landmark or is
located in a designated historic district as a public nuisance and has
authorized its demolition, the Village Manager or the Village Manager's
designee shall have a copy of the declaration of public nuisance delivered to
the chairperson of the Commission and Commission staff liaison, who shall place
the matter on the agenda of the next meeting of the Commission. The Commission
shall be authorized to review the building, structure or improvement and
determine if the owner or some other person can commence rehabilitation of it
immediately. The Commission shall ensure that whoever will rehabilitate the
building, structure or improvement shall have either public or private
financing, or both, to make sure that the building, structure or improvement is
promptly rehabilitated in accordance with the criteria set forth in this
Article. If the Commission is unable to secure the rehabilitation of the
building, structure or improvement within ninety (90) days of the date that it
was declared a public nuisance by the Village or by the date the Village
obtains judicial authorization to demolish it, whichever is later, then the
Village may proceed with the demolition of the building, structure or
improvement.
   C.   An owner of a building, structure or improvement eligible or designated
as a landmark or located within a historic district shall not be authorized to
demolish such building, structure or improvement without filing an application
for and obtaining a certificate of appropriateness or certificate of economic
hardship, except when an authorized Village official, pursuant to ordinance, or
has made the determination that the building, structure or improvement poses an
imminent threat to human health and safety and should be demolished
immediately.
   D.   If the Village has declared an eligible or designated landmark or a
building, structure or improvement in a designated historic district to be a
public nuisance and, after such declaration, the owner of the building,
structure or improvement files an application for a certificate of
appropriateness so the building, structure or improvement may be rehabilitated,
the Commission may exercise jurisdiction over the application and the structure
until such time as the Village obtains judicial authorization to demolish the
structure. Once the Village has obtained such judicial authorization, then the
rehabilitation of the structure may proceed only if the Village Board consents
to withholding its authority to demolish the structure in abeyance while the
structure is rehabilitated. (Ord. 1999-0-7, 3-15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022)
7-9-18: HANDICAPPED ACCESSIBILITY PROVISIONS:
Nothing in this Article shall exempt owners from complying with applicable
Federal, State or Village laws concerning handicapped accessibility. In
providing for handicapped accessibility as may be required by such laws or
desired by an owner, every effort shall be made to visually integrate such
physical devices as may be necessary to accomplish accessibility with the
architectural design of the historic landmark or building, structure or
improvement in a historic district. Emphasis shall be placed on providing
readily removable physical accessibility provisions such as ramps or chair
lifts, with no permanent damage to the historic fabric of the building. (Ord.
1999-0-7, 3-15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022)
7-9-19: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, relocate, remove or
demolish any historic landmark or to do construction work on, relocate, remove
or demolish any building, structure or improvement within an historic district,
or attempt to take any of these actions without complying with the provisions
of this Article. Persons violating any provision of this Article other than
mandatory advisory review shall also be subject to the institution of
proceedings by the Village to prevent, restrain, abate or correct such
violations of this Article, including restoration of the building or structure
and its site to its appearance prior to the violation if such appearance is
integral to the significance of the site or structure as determined by the
Commission. Any action to enforce this Section shall be brought by the Village
Attorney, the Village Attorney's designee or by designated representatives of
the Village Manager. This civil remedy shall be in addition to and not in lieu
of any criminal prosecution and penalty contained in this Section.
   B.   If construction, alteration, relocation, removal or demolition of an
eligible or designated historic landmark or of any building, structure or
improvement, located in a designated historic district occurs without a permit
or without proper authorization as set forth in this Article, then the Village
may seek to revoke the license of the company, individual, principal owner, or
its or his/her successors' interest in performing such construction,
alteration, relocation, removal or demolition for a period of one year.
   C.   If demolition of an historic landmark occurs without a permit, the
person causing such demolition shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor offense punishable by incarceration in the County jail for a term
not to exceed six (6) months.
   D.   Any person violating any provision of this Article shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Each day during which any violation hereof is committed shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 1999-0-7, 3-15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-2022)
7-9-20: JUDICIAL REVIEW OF FINAL DECISION:
Any final decisions rendered by the Village Board under this Article shall be
subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the Administrative
Review Law, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., as amended, and
rules adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 1999-0-7, 3-15-99; amd. Ord. 22-8, 2-7-
2022)
ARTICLE 10
VACANT BUILDINGS
SECTION:
7-10-1: Declaration Of Policy
7-10-2: Other Ordinances
7-10-3: Definitions
7-10-4: "Vacant Building" Determination
7-10-5: Appeal Of Director's Determination Of "Vacant Buildings"
7-10-6: Obligation To Register Vacant Buildings And Unoccupied Buildings
Acquired Through Mortgage Foreclosure
7-10-7: Approval Of Plan
7-10-8: Authority To Modify Plan, Right To Appeal
7-10-9: Failure To Comply With Plan
7-10-10: Other Enforcement
7-10-11: Real Estate Transfer Stamps
7-10-12: Certification
7-10-13: Time Restrictions; Vacant Buildings
7-10-14: Enforcement And Penalties
7-10-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare by enactment of this article which:
   A.   Establishes a program for identification, registration, and regulation
of buildings which are or become "vacant" as defined herein on and after the
effective date of this article;
   B.   Determines the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings; and
   C.   Provides for administration, enforcement, including abatement of public
nuisances, and imposition of penalties.
This article shall be liberally construed to affect its purposes. (Ord. 15-183,
11-2-2015)
7-10-2: OTHER ORDINANCES:
This article shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other
applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations which prescribe
standards other than are provided herein, and in the event of conflict, the
most restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015)
7-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or clearly indicated by the context, the
following terms shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings
indicated in this section:
BUILDING: Any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering any
occupancy.
DANGEROUS BUILDING: A structure defined as "unsafe" in article 13 of this
chapter, as it may be amended. Such buildings are public nuisances.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Development Customer Services Department or the
Director's designee.
OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON: Includes a corporation, a partnership, or other entity as well as an
individual.
PREMISES: A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structure thereon.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Includes the following:
   A.   The physical condition, or uses of any premises regarded as a public
nuisance at common law, under the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or under this
code; or
   B.   Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not
limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences
or structures; or
   C.   Any building which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities; or
   D.   Any building designated by the Director as unsafe for human habitation
or use; or
   E.   Any building which constitutes a fire hazard, or is unsafe or insecure
to a degree that endangers life, limb or property; or
   F.   Any premises which is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish or
garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
   G.   Any building that is: dangerous; in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration or decay; improperly constructed; unsecured; vacant with the
doors, windows, or other openings boarded up or secured by any means other than
conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new
construction of similar type; damaged by fire to the extent that it no longer
provides shelter; in danger of collapse or structural failure; and dangerous to
anyone on or near the premises; or
   H.   Any building defined as a "dangerous" or "unsafe structure" by article
13 of this chapter, as it may be amended.
SECURED BUILDING: A building which has had, in a manner intended to be
temporary or permanent, any or all openings, which openings are windows or
doors which were present for the purpose of light, ventilation or egress, some
material whether opaque, solid or transparent, affixed to such openings, from
the interior or exterior of the building, for the purpose of securing or
preventing access or damage to the building or its components.
UNOCCUPIED BUILDING: A building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual
presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises,
including buildings ordered vacated by the Director pursuant to authority
granted to him by this code.
In determining whether a building is "unoccupied", the Director may consider
these factors, among others:
   A.   A building at which substantially all lawful residential or business
activity has ceased.
   B.   The percentage of the overall square footage of occupied to unoccupied
space or the overall number of occupied and unoccupied units shall be
considered.
   C.   The building is substantially devoid of contents. The condition and
value of fixtures or personal property in the building are relevant to this
determination.
   D.   The building lacks utility services, i.e., water, sewer, electric or
natural gas.
   E.   The building is the subject of a foreclosure action.
   F.   The building is not actively for sale as part of a contractual
agreement to sell the building.
   G.   The presence or recurrence of uncorrected code violations.
UNSECURED BUILDING: A building that is not secured as defined herein at which
any or all openings are locked, including windows or doors.
VACANT BUILDING: A building or portion of a building which is:
   A.   Unoccupied and unsecured; or
   B.   Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means for more than
three (3) months; or
   C.   Unoccupied and a dangerous structure; or
   D.   Declared unsafe for occupancy by the Director pursuant to applicable
provisions of this code; or
   E.   Unoccupied and containing multiple Village Code violations; or
   F.   Unoccupied with the building or its premises having been used for
unlawful activity at any time while unoccupied or at any time during the
previous six (6) months whether occupied or not; or
   G.   Declared unsafe for occupancy by the Director and unlawfully occupied;
or
   H.   Unoccupied for over three (3) months and during which time the Director
has issued an order to correct public nuisance conditions and same have not
been corrected in a code compliant manner; or
   I.   Unoccupied for over six (6) months.
But not including:
Unoccupied buildings which are undergoing construction, renovation, or
rehabilitation and which are in compliance with all applicable ordinances,
codes, legislation, and regulations, and for which construction, renovation or
rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to completion. (Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015)
7-10-4: "VACANT BUILDING" DETERMINATION:
   A.   Within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this article, the
Director shall evaluate all buildings in the Village which he or she believes
to be unoccupied on or after the effective date of this article and make a
determination for each as to whether the building is a "vacant building" within
the meaning of section
7-10-3 of this article. The Director may determine that a building which meets
any of the criteria set forth in the definition of "vacant building" in section
7-10-3 of this article is not to be regulated under this article for a stated
period, if upon consideration of reliable, substantiated and sufficient
evidence, he or she determines that the circumstances which give rise to the
building being eligible for regulation hereunder are clearly temporary in
nature and are either in the process of being addressed or will soon be
addressed by the owner and that therefore regulation of the building under this
article would not serve the public health, welfare, and safety and makes
written findings in support of his or her decision. The determination shall be
in writing and shall state the factual basis for the determination. For
buildings the Director determines to be "vacant buildings", he or she shall,
within seven (7) days of making that determination, send notice of his/her
written determination with the factual findings to the name and address of the
last taxpayer of record for such parcel listed on the most recent Cook County
tax roll. Said notice of determination shall be sent first class United States
mail, with proper postage prepaid. Failure of delivery shall not excuse a
person from complying with this article. The Director may personally serve or
cause personal service of the notice of determination. Any person making such
service shall execute an affidavit attesting to the facts of service. The
Director shall maintain an affidavit of such mailing for each notice of
determination sent.
   B.   The Director shall cause a comprehensive inspection of the interior of
all "vacant buildings" to determine compliance with Village property
maintenance, building, health, fire, water and sewer codes.
   C.   The notice of determination shall set a tentative date and time for the
code compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant building to determine
the extent of compliance with Village property maintenance, building, health,
fire, water and sewer codes. After receipt of the notice of determination, if
the owner does not appeal the determination, the owner shall either confirm the
tentative date for the inspection or shall schedule a new date and time for
same. If the owner fails to confirm the tentative date and time for the
inspection or refuses to schedule or permit the inspection it shall be the
responsibility of the Village to obtain an administrative search warrant to
accomplish the inspection.
   D.   The Village shall charge the owner a fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00) to offset the cost to the Village of said inspection. The owner shall
pay the inspection fee to the Village within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
bill for same.
   E.   Village real estate transfer stamps will not be issued by the Village
for the sale of such property until such inspection has taken place and the fee
therefor has been paid and, if necessary, an administrative search warrant for
same has been timely obtained. Such stamps shall be issued if the Village is
required to obtain an administrative search warrant and fails to obtain same in
a timely manner.
   F.   The notice of determination shall contain a statement of the
obligations of the owner of a building determined to be a vacant building, a
copy of the registration form the owner is required to file pursuant to section
7-10-6 of this article, and a notice of the owner's right to appeal the
Director's determination. (Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015)
7-10-5: APPEAL OF DIRECTOR'S DETERMINATION OF "VACANT BUILDINGS":
   A.   An owner of a building determined by the Director to be a vacant
building as provided for in this article may appeal that determination to the
Village Manager. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Village Manager within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing of the notice
of determination. The filing of an appeal stays the owner's obligation to
register his or her building as required by section
7-10-6 of this article. The appeal shall contain a complete statement of the
reasons the owner disputes the Director's determination, shall set forth
specific facts in support thereof, and shall include all evidence the owner
relies upon to support the appeal. The Village Manager shall decide the appeal
on the basis of facts presented by the owner in his or her written appeal and
the Director's written determination.
   B.   The burden is upon the owner to present sufficient evidence to persuade
the Village Manager that it is more likely than not that the subject building
is not a "vacant building" within the meaning of this article.
   C.   The Village Manager shall send written notice of his or her decision to
the owner within ten (10) days of his or her receipt of the appeal. The Village
Manager may, but is not required to, seek additional information from the
owner. The Village Manager may, upon written notice thereof to the owner, take
no more than ten (10) additional days, to decide the appeal if he or she
determines that such additional time is required for consideration of the
appeal.
   D.   An owner who wishes to challenge applicability of this article to his/
her building without the Director's determination having been made, shall set
forth specific facts to support nonapplicability in a writing to the Director.
In the event the Director determines that the subject building is a "vacant
building", the owner shall have the right to appeal the Director's
determination to the Village Manager as provided for herein. (Ord. 15-183, 11-
2-2015)
7-10-6: OBLIGATION TO REGISTER VACANT BUILDINGS AND UNOCCUPIED BUILDINGS
ACQUIRED THROUGH MORTGAGE FORECLOSURE:
Owners of "vacant buildings" and mortgage lenders who acquire title to
unoccupied buildings shall be required to register same with the Director of
Development Customer Services as prescribed below:
   A.   Owner's Obligation To Register Vacant Buildings: The owner of a
building who knows, or from all the facts and circumstances should know, that
his or her building is or has become a "vacant building" within the meaning of
this article after the effective date of this article or the owner of a
building, which the Director determines at any time to be a "vacant building",
or the owner of a building whose appeal from the Director's determination has
been denied by the Village Manager, shall take the actions provided for in this
section within fifteen (15) days after either the date of Director's notice of
determination or occurrence of the facts which would cause a reasonable person
to believe that the building was a "vacant building", or denial of the appeal,
whichever is applicable.
      1.   Registration Of Building: Register the building with the Director of
Development Customer Services, on a form provided by the Director and pay the
two hundred dollar ($200.00) annual nonprorated vacant building registration
fee.
         a.   The form shall include, as a minimum, the name, street address,
and telephone number of the owner; the case name and number of any litigation
pending concerning or affecting the building, including bankruptcy cases; and
the name, street address, and telephone number of all persons with any legal
interest in the building or the premises. The form shall require the owner to
identify a natural person twenty one (21) years of age or older who maintains a
permanent address in Cook County, Illinois, to accept service on behalf of the
owner with respect to any notices the Director sends pursuant to this article
or service of process in any proceeding commenced to enforce any provision of
this article, and file with the Director on the registration form, the name,
address, telephone number, of said person. A street address is required. A post
office box is not an acceptable address.
         b.   The form shall state that the owner, by affixing his or her
signature, is advised that the Village will not issue real estate transfer tax
stamps without Village inspectors having first conducted an interior inspection
for code compliance and, if necessary, having first timely obtained an
administrative search warrant for same.
         c.   (1) The form shall require the owner to indicate his or her
"acceptance of notice by posting" consenting to service of notices sent or
required to be sent, pursuant to this article, by posting on the building if
the owner fails to renew the registration if required, or maintain as current
with the Director the information required regarding the person designated to
accept notice and service of process;
            (2)   Renew the vacant building registration each year on the
anniversary date of the first filing for the time the building remains vacant
and pay the required two hundred dollar ($200.00) annual fee; and
            (3)   File an amended registration within fifteen (15) days of any
change in the information contained in the annual registration. A new
registration is required for any change in ownership whatsoever.
         d.   Registration does not exonerate the owner from compliance with
all applicable codes and ordinances, including this article, nor does it
preclude any of the actions the Village is authorized to take pursuant to this
article or elsewhere in this code.
      2.   Inspection Conducted: The Village shall conduct a comprehensive code
compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant building and the owner
shall pay a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fee to the Village to defray the
Village's cost of same within thirty (30) days of the inspection. Such
inspection will determine the extent of compliance with Village property
maintenance, building, health, fire, water and sewer codes. The Village shall
send the inspection report to the owner within thirty (30) days. Periodic
reinspections shall take place, as necessary, until code compliance is
achieved. Timely code compliance is required.
      3.   Insurance Required: Obtain liability insurance and maintain such
insurance for as long as the building is vacant, and file evidence of such
insurance with the Director, as follows: five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for a vacant residential building of one to three (3) units;
seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000.00) for a vacant residential
building of four (4) to eleven (11) units; one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
for a vacant residential building of twelve (12) to forty eight (48) units; two
million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for a vacant residential building of more than
forty eight (48) units; and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for a vacant
manufacturing, industrial, storage, or nonresidential commercial building.
      4.   Vacant Building Plan: At the time a building is registered as
required herein, the owner shall submit a vacant building plan. The Director
may prescribe a form for the plan. If the owner fails to submit the plan as
provided for by this article, the Director may determine the plan. The plan
shall contain the following as a minimum:
         a.   A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings
which are boarded up or otherwise secured or covered by any means other than
conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new
construction or similar type. The proposed repair shall result in openings
being secured by conventional methods used in the design of the building or by
methods permitted for new construction of similar type with board removed.
Boarding shall be accomplished with materials and methods described by the
Director and available from the Director. The owner shall maintain the building
in an enclosed and secure state until the building is reoccupied or made
available for immediate occupancy. If the owner demonstrates that securing of
the building will provide adequate protection to the public, the Director may
waive the requirement of an enclosure.
         b.   For buildings and/or premises which are determined by the
Director as being or containing public nuisances, as defined in section
7-10-3 of this article, then the vacant building/premises plan shall contain a
plan of action to remedy such public nuisance(s).
         c.   A time schedule identifying a date of commencement of repair and
date of completion of repair for each improperly secured opening and nuisance
identified by the Director.
         d.   When the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, then the
owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition.
         e.   A plan of action to maintain the building and/or premises thereof
in conformance with this article.
         f.   A plan of action, with a time schedule, identifying the date the
building will be habitable and occupied or offered for occupancy or sale. The
time schedule shall include date(s) of commencement and completion of all
actions required to achieve habitability. No plan which fails to provide for
compliance with this article or, which will not, as determined by the Director,
achieve such compliance, within three (3) months, in the case of a vacant
boarded building, and two (2) years, in the case of a vacant, unboarded, and
code compliant building will be approved, except that the Director may approve
an extension of the time during which the building will be unoccupied beyond
two (2) years to a date certain but then only based upon clear and documented
evidence of good cause shown by the owner as determined by the Director.
         g.   All premises upon which unoccupied or vacant buildings are
located and the exteriors shall at all times be maintained in compliance with
this code.
         h.   Exterior lighting shall be maintained according to standards
established by the Director and available from the Director.
         i.   All ground floor windows facing street frontage, including, but
not limited to, all display windows in unoccupied or vacant commercial
buildings shall be kept in a well maintained and clean condition and shall be
covered on the interior side in a professionally finished manner with an opaque
window covering material manufactured for that purpose and approved by the
Village Business Services Manager, or in the case of display windows, such
windows shall be kept in a well maintained and clean condition and the display
area shall be enclosed with a professionally finished backdrop, floor, side
walls and ceiling all of which shall be kept in a well maintained and clean
condition and shall be well lighted from ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. each day. Photographs, paintings and other works of art or
other tasteful forms of decoration may be professionally displayed in these
properly enclosed clear glass display windows. If opaque window covering
material is used, a one foot by one foot (1' x 1') clear glass opening through
which the interior space is clearly visible shall be maintained at standing eye
level along one edge of one such window.
      5.   Security Guard Service: On written notice of the Director, provide
bonded, licensed, and insured security guard service at the building between
the hours of three o'clock (3:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. Such
service to remain in place until the Director gives written notice that the
service is no longer required. Such service shall be required when the Director
makes a written determination that the vacant building constitutes a fire
hazard, is otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, involves
illegal or improper use, occupancy, or maintenance, under such conditions that
securing the building is insufficient to prevent the actual or threatened harm.
      6.   Additional Information Posted: Affix to any building which is
boarded, a two foot by two foot (2' x 2') sign compliant with the Village's
sign regulation ordinance, and which otherwise provides the following
information: the name, address, and telephone number of the owner, and in
addition, for buildings which are the subject of a foreclosure action, the
name, address, and telephone number of the plaintiff and the plaintiff's
attorney, if any, in the foreclosure action. The sign must be placed so that
its message is legible from the public way.
   B.   Mortgage Lender's Obligation To Register Unoccupied Buildings Acquired
Through Mortgage Foreclosure: The obligation to register buildings shall extend
to mortgage lenders that have obtained title to unoccupied buildings through a
mortgage foreclosure action.
      1.   Mortgage lenders shall register unoccupied buildings with the
Director within fifteen (15) days of obtaining title to same.
      2.   The registration obligation of mortgage lenders under subsection
7-10-6B of this section shall be limited to providing the Director with the
same information required under subsection
7-10-6A1 of this section on the registration form prescribed by the Director.
      3.   Mortgage lenders shall not be responsible for paying the two hundred
dollar ($200.00) registration fee and shall not be required to comply with
subsections
7-10-6A2 through A6 of this section.
      4.   An amended registration form shall be filed in accordance with
subsection
7-10-6A1c(3) of this section within fifteen (15) days of any change in the
information provided in any registration form provided hereunder.
      5.   If such unoccupied, registered building is later determined to have
become a "vacant building" as defined in section
7-10-3 of this article then such building and building owner shall be required
to comply with all of the provisions of subsection
7-10-6A of this section. (Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015)
7-10-7: APPROVAL OF PLAN:
   A.   Review Of Building Plan: The Director shall review the proposed vacant
building plan in accordance with the standards below. The Director shall send
notice to the owner of the vacant building of his or her determination.
   B.   Standards For Plan Approval: In considering the appropriateness of a
vacant building plan, the Director shall include the following in his or her
consideration and shall make written findings as to each:
      1.   The purposes of this article and intent of the Village Board to
minimize the time a building is boarded or otherwise vacant.
      2.   The effect of the building and the proposed plan on adjoining
property.
      3.   The length of time the building has been vacant.
      4.   The presence of any public nuisances on the property.
      5.   The likelihood that the plan or portion(s) thereof will prevent or
ameliorate the condition it is designed to address. (Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015)
7-10-8: AUTHORITY TO MODIFY PLAN, RIGHT TO APPEAL:
The Director shall, upon notice to the vacant building owner, have the right to
modify the vacant building plan by modifying the dates of performance, the
proposed methods of action, or by imposing additional requirements consistent
with this article he or she deems necessary to protect the public health,
safety, or welfare. (Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015)
7-10-9: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH PLAN:
Failure to have an approved plan within thirty (30) days of filing the
registration form or failure to comply with the approved plan shall constitute
a violation of this article subjecting the owner of the building to penalties
as provided in this article and to any remedies the Village may avail itself of
as provided for herein and elsewhere in this code, including, but not limited
to, an action to compel correction of property maintenance violations. (Ord.
15-183, 11-2-2015)
7-10-10: OTHER ENFORCEMENT:
The registration of a vacant building shall not preclude action by the Village
to demolish or to take other action against the building pursuant to other
provisions of this article, this code, or other applicable legislation. (Ord.
15-183, 11-2-2015)
7-10-11: REAL ESTATE TRANSFER STAMPS:
A premises upon which is situated a vacant building for which inspection fees
or registration fees imposed pursuant to this article have not been paid in
full or which is not otherwise eligible under this article for the Village real
estate transfer tax stamps shall not be permitted to acquire same until the
fees are paid and/or the eligibility issues are addressed. Unpaid fees shall be
a lien upon the property. (Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015)
7-10-12: CERTIFICATION:
A certificate of code compliance for vacant buildings issued by the Development
Customer Services Department and payment in full of all fees imposed pursuant
to this article are required prior to any occupancy of a vacant building. (Ord.
15-183, 11-2-2015)
7-10-13: TIME RESTRICTIONS; VACANT BUILDINGS:
It is the policy of the Village that boarding is a temporary solution to
prevent unauthorized entry into a vacant building and that boarded buildings
are a public nuisance. A vacant building may not remain boarded longer than
three (3) months unless an extension of that time is part of a plan approved by
the Director.
A vacant building which is otherwise code compliant and secure as determined by
the Director on the basis of police reports, citizen complaints, and other
information considered reliable by reasonable persons, may not remain vacant
for more than two (2) years and must have an approved plan for occupancy, sale,
demolition, or other disposition of the building in place within the time
frames established in this article, except as otherwise provided for in
subsection 7-10-6A4 of this article. (Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015)
7-10-14: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person found to have violated any provision of this article shall
be subject to a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day per
violation to a maximum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day per
violation, in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies available to
the Village. Such other remedies include, but are not limited to, injunctive
relief, application to a court of competent jurisdiction for a receiver,
demolition, or condemnation, contracting for the repair or purchase of the
premises, or foreclosure of any lien the Village may have thereon.
   B.   A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day on which
such person or persons shall violate the provisions of this article.
   C.   The Village may enforce this article in its administrative adjudication
system or through the court system.
   D.   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the Village from immediately
condemning as provided for in this code a building or taking other immediate
action upon a determination that the building is a public nuisance or poses an
imminent danger to the occupants of the building, or the public health, safety
and welfare. (Ord. 15-183, 11-2-2015)
ARTICLE 11
FUEL GAS CODE
SECTION:
7-11-1: Adoption
7-11-2: Amendments
7-11-1: ADOPTION:
   A.   The 2021 international fuel gas code (IFGC) as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted by the Village by reference and
is made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this section with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes set forth in section
7-11-2 of this article. To the extent that the provisions of the IFGC are
inconsistent with any codes previously adopted by the Village by reference, the
provisions of the IFGC shall govern unless specifically set forth in this code.
In the event of a conflict between any provisions of the IFGC and any provision
of the Oak Park Village Code, the provisions of the Oak Park Village Code shall
govern.
   B.   There shall be three (3) copies of the IFGC kept on file for public
inspection in the office of the Chief Building Official. (Ord. 2014-0-64, 10-6-
2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. Ord. 20-078, 9-21-2020; Ord. 23-54, 6-20-2023)
7-11-2: AMENDMENTS:
The 2021 international fuel gas code, as adopted pursuant to section
7-11-1 of this article, is hereby amended by adding the underlined language and
deleting the overstricken language as follows:
   CHAPTER 1
   SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
   PART 1 - SCOPE AND APPLICATION
   SECTION 101 (IFGC) - GENERAL
   Section 101.1 Title. These regulations, as amended and adopted by the
Village, shall be known as the fuel gas code of the Village of Oak Park,
hereinafter referred to as "this code."
   PART 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
   CHAPTER 1, PART 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT, is deleted in its
entirety with the exception of the following sections to remain:
   1.   Section 105 (IFGC) Approval,
   2.   Section 107 (IFGC) Inspections And Testing,
   3.   Section 108 (IFGC) Violations, sections 108.7 through 108.7.3
inclusive, and
   4.   Section 110 (IFGC) Temporary Equipment, Systems And Uses.
   Administration and enforcement of this code shall be governed by the
sections set forth above and by applicable provisions of chapter 1 of the
international building ode as amended and adopted by the Village.
(Ord. 2014-0-64, 10-6-2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. Ord. 20-078, 9-21-2020; Ord.
23-54, 6-20-2023)
ARTICLE 12
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
7-12-1: Adoption
7-12-1: ADOPTION:
   A.   The current edition of the state of Illinois plumbing code, pursuant to
77 Illinois administrative code 890, as amended, is hereby adopted by the
Village by reference and is made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this
section.
   B.   There shall be three (3) copies of the current edition of the state of
Illinois plumbing code kept on file for public inspection in the office of the
Village Clerk.
   C.   All new and replacement plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers
shall bear the WaterSense label as designated by the United States
environmental protection agency WaterSense program and shall be in compliance
with section 2.5(g) of the Illinois plumbing license law, 225 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 320/2.5(g), as amended. (Ord. 15-179, 11-16-2015)
ARTICLE 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
7-13-1: Adoption
7-13-2: Amendments
7-13-1: ADOPTION:
   A.   The international property maintenance code, 2024 edition ("IPMC"), as
published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by the Village
by reference and is made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this section
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes set forth in section
7-13-2  of this article. To the extent that the provisions of the IPMC are
inconsistent with any codes previously adopted by the Village by reference, the
provisions of the IPMC shall govern unless specifically set forth in this code.
In the event of a conflict between any provisions of the IPMC and any provision
of the Oak Park Village Code, the provisions of the Oak Park Village Code shall
govern.
   B.   There shall be three (3) copies of the international property
maintenance code, 2024 edition, kept on file for public inspection in the
office of the Village Clerk. (Ord. 15-181, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015; amd. Ord.
25-135, 3-18-2025)
7-13-2: AMENDMENTS:
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2024 edition, as adopted pursuant
to section
7-13-1 of this article is hereby amended by adding the underlined language and
deleting the overstricken language as follows:
   Section 101.1 Title. These regulations, as amended and adopted by the
Village shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the Village of Oak
Park, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
   Section 102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations
to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the International Existing Building Code,
International Energy Conservation Code, International Fire Code, International
Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, International Residential, State
of Illinois Plumbing Code and NFPA 70. Nothing in this code shall be construed
to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the International Zoning Code.
   SECTION 103 Department of Neighborhood Services
   Section 103.1 Creation of agency. The Neighborhood Services Department is
hereby assigned to enforce this code and the official in charge thereof, the
Neighborhood Services Director or the Director's designee, shall be known as
the code official. The function of the agency shall be the implementation,
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code.
   Section 105.3.2 Obligation. A property owner shall allow a code official,
upon proper request, to inspect a dwelling unit in association with the
provisions of the Village Code Article 12-2-6 Inspections of Buildings;
Violations; Suspension and Revocation of License.
   is deleted in its entirety and is replaced with a new Section 106 Board of
Appeals, as follows:
   Section 106.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions or determinations made by the code official relative to the
application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby
created a board of appeals which shall be the Village's Building Codes Advisory
Commission.
   Section 106.2 Limitations on Authority. An application for appeal shall be
based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do
not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed.
The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code.
   Section 106.3 Application for Appeal. Any person directly affected by a
decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall
have the right to appeal to the board of appeals, provided that a written
appeal is filed within twenty (20) calendar days after the day the decision,
notice or order was served. An appeal filed or received by the Village shall
not be eligible to be heard after a citation has been issued which is the
subject of the appeal.
   Section 106.4 Board Decision. The board of appeals shall modify or reverse
the decision of the code official or the code official's designee or a notice
or order issued under this code upon a concurring vote of a majority of the
total number of appointed board members. The board of appeals shall have the
discretion to allow a variance from the provisions of the code if, after having
received a written report, certified by a licensed architect or engineer, the
board of appeals determines that strict compliance with the code is impractical
from an engineering, architectural or structural standpoint, that the spirit
and intent of the code has been met and life safety has not been materially
compromised as a result of the variance. The decision of the board of appeals
shall be in writing and shall be furnished to the appellant and to the building
official.
   Section 106.5 Administration. The code official shall take immediate action
in accordance with the decision of the board of appeals. Appeals of decisions
of the building official or a notice or order issued under this code (other
than those of immediate threat to life safety) shall stay the enforcement of
the decision, notice or order until the appeal is heard by the board of appeals
and a decision is rendered.
   Section 106.6 Stays of Enforcement. Appeals of notices and orders (other
than imminent danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and
order until the appeal is heard by the board of appeals.
   Section 107.4 Violation Penalties.. Any person who violates a provision of
this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements
thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state law or the
Village Code. Any person who violates any provision of this code shall upon
conviction be punished by a fine of not less than twenty dollars ($20.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. No fine shall be
levied for a day upon which a written appeal is filed with the Village through
the date the board of appeals issues its written decision on the appeal.
   Section 109.6.1 Pre-Sale Inspection of Buildings Containing Four Or More
Units. No building containing four (4) or more dwelling units shall be sold
unless the seller furnishes the buyer with a report of presale inspection no
more than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the closing and no later than
the day of the closing on the sale of the property. Said report of presale
inspection shall be based on an inspection of all dwelling units by the Village
and shall be issued by same. The report shall provide that the building is in
compliance with all applicable building and zoning regulations of the Village,
or, in the alternative, set forth the building and/or zoning violations present
at the building. The request for a presale inspection must be made at least two
(2) weeks prior to the scheduled date of the closing. An inspection made
pursuant to this section satisfies the annual inspection requirement of section
12-2-6A of the Village Code. A sale for purposes of this section includes
contract sales, exchanges, conversions to condominiums and transfers of
possession or control of a building. A person participating in such a sale in
violation of this section, either as a seller or by receipt of a sales
commission in connection therewith, shall be subject to the applicable
penalties as provided in this code. Any contract executed in violation of this
section shall be voidable by a buyer. Nothing herein shall relieve the buyer
from compliance with section
12-2-6A of the Village Code.
   Section 111.1 General. The code official shall order the owner of any
premises upon which is located any structure, which in the code official
judgment after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of
repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the
structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is
capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or
to board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the owner's
option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any
structure for a period of more than two years, the code official shall order
the owner to demolish and remove such structure, or board up until future
repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend beyond
three months, unless approved by the building official.
   CHAPTER 2 
   DEFINITIONS
   Add the following definitions to Section 202 General Definitions:
   Cultivated Garden. An area of land in which plants, other than turf grasses,
are intentionally grown and receive care such as mulching, watering, pruning,
or the removal of noxious plants. Plants within a cultivated garden may be
installed or naturally recruited, as may occur with native plants.
   Days. Unless otherwise stated, "days" shall mean calendar days.
   Parking Area. A parking area is any parcel of land used for the parking of
motor vehicles and having a capacity of one to four (4) motor vehicles and
excluding places where motor vehicles are parked within a building.
   Responsible Party. Except as may otherwise be specified herein, the owner or
the owner's designated agent shall be considered a responsible party for
ensuring compliance with this code. In addition, any other person or entity
that may be reasonably considered to have a role or responsibility in the
creation, continuation, or correction of any violation of this code shall be
considered a responsible party or additional responsible party for such
violation. A licensed real estate agent or broker whose sole authority is to
show and lease property for rent shall not be considered a responsible party
subject to penalties under this code.
   The definition for "Rooming House" shall be modified as follows:
   Rooming House. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without
meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling. A
primary or accessory building or structure or part thereof, in which living and
sleeping quarters (but not meals or cooking facilities) are provided by
prearrangement for compensation on a weekly or longer basis for three (3) or
more persons who are not members of the keeper's family.
   CHAPTER 3
   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
   Section 302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained
free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight (8) inches in height. All
noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses,
annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however,
this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
   Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and
destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to
prosecution in accordance with Section 108.3 and as prescribed by the authority
having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any
duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the
jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and
cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall
be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property.
   Section 302.8.1 Parking. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a property to
allow parking of a motor vehicle upon any unimproved surface. As used in this
section, the term "unimproved surface" includes, but is not limited to, grass
and dirt surfaces or any other surface not in compliance with the pavement
design standards in Oak Park's Zoning Ordinance.
   Section 302.10 Surface of Parking Areas And Driveways. The surface of
parking areas and driveways serving as access to parking areas shall consist of
a minimum five-inch (5") thick unreinforced concrete slab or standard blacktop
or other equivalent material approved by the Building Official, or shall be
constructed by excavating the parking or driveway area to a six-inch (6")
(152.4 mm) depth and placing six inches (6") (152.4 mm) of compacted gravel or
crushed stone thereupon. Compacted gravel surfaces may not be used in areas or
pathways required for ingress and egress to and from a building or structure.
   Section 302.11 Security Gates. Metal security gates and bars on the exterior
or interior of doors or windows of commercial establishments are prohibited.
Metal security gates or bars on doors or windows not facing a public street or
sidewalk are permitted.
   Section 302.12 Landscaping.
   A.   Duty to prune. Trees, bushes or other shrubbery on private property
adjacent to a street right-of-way shall be pruned in such a manner so as to not
obstruct or shade street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on
sidewalks or vehicles in the street, obstruct the ability to see traffic signs,
obstruct the view of any intersection or create a public safety hazard in
general.
   B.   Yard maintenance. Yards shall be maintained without ruts caused by
pedestrian or vehicle use.
   Section 304.3 Premises Identification. Buildings shall have approved address
numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street
or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their
background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
Numbers shall be not less than 3 inches ( 76 mm) in height with a minimum
stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) and be permanently affixed. If a garage is
built adjacent to an alley, the rear address number shall be placed in a
conspicuous location on the side of the garage facing the alley. A rear address
number shall not be required where the rear of the property is not adjacent to
an alley.
   CHAPTER 4
   LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
   Section 403.1 Habitable Spaces. Every habitable room shall have one or more
of the following ventilation systems:
   A.   At least one window which can be easily opened, with the total of all
such openable window area in such room at least 45 percent of the minimum
window area size required by section 402.1; or
   B.   A ventilator or similar device, leading directly to outside air, with
effective opening area equivalent to openable window area required under
subsection 403.1(A) of this section; or
   C.   A forced air ventilation system, properly installed, maintained in safe
and good working condition, supplying outside air to such room, which meets the
requirements of the current International Property Maintenance Code. A forced
air ventilation system may not substitute for natural ventilation in sleeping
rooms.
      Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are
ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining
room shall be not less than 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or
space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The ventilation openings to
the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated.
   Section 404.4.6 Basement Occupancy. No basement space shall be used as a
habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
   A.   The minimum clear ceiling height is 6 feet 8 inches (2033 mm), as
permitted in section 404.3.
   B.   The minimum glazed area is 8 percent of the floor square footage for
habitable rooms.
   C.   The minimum ventilation area is 50 percent of the glazed area or is 4
percent of the square footage for habitable rooms.
   D.   The basement complies with the 2021 International Residential Code for
emergency escape.
   E.   The floors and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water or measures have been taken to mitigate the effects of
water penetration and are insulated against dampness; and
   F.   The dwelling unit meets the other requirements of this code.
   Section 404.4.7 Basement and Third Floor Occupancy for Rooming Houses. No
license required by this article shall be issued to any person proposing to use
a basement or any part thereof as a habitable room for rooming house purposes.
Third floor occupancy of any frame dwelling shall not be permitted without the
written approval of the Neighborhood Services Director, Fire Chief and the
Public Health Director.
   Section 404.5.3 Age Limit. For purposes of this section, children under
three (3) years of age shall not be counted in determining the occupancy of any
dwelling unit.
   CHAPTER 6
   MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
   Section 602.3 Heat Supply. Every owner and operator of any building who
rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms,
either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall
supply heat during the period from September 15 of each year to May 15 of the
succeeding year to maintain a temperature in all habitable rooms, bathroom and
toilet rooms as follows:
   1.   A minimum temperature of sixty-eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) from six
thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and
   2.   A minimum temperature of sixty-five degrees Fahrenheit (65°F) from
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M.
   The minimum temperature shall be averaged throughout any dwelling unit or
rooming unit and shall be maintained without undue restriction of ventilation
as to interfere with proper healthful conditions.
   Exception:
   When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature
for the Village, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be
required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design
capacity.
   Section 605.2 Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain
not less than two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area
shall contain not less than one grounding-type receptacle or a receptacle with
a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain not less than
one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault
circuit interrupter protection. All receptacle outlets shall have the
appropriate faceplate cover for the location. Existing electrical systems shall
be maintained to the same standards as required by the applicable code under
which it was originally installed unless the system is altered or there is some
known defect or unsafe condition in the system.
   CHAPTER 7
   FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
   Section 703.3.4 Occupancy Above Garages. Where a habitable room, rooming
unit or dwelling unit is located above an area used for parking or storage of
motor vehicles, a fire stop of one- hour fire resistant materials, approved by
the Board Of Fire Underwriters Laboratory, shall be provided above such area
and below the floor of such room or unit.(Ord. 15-181, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-
2015; amd. Ord. 25-135, 3-18-2025)
ARTICLE 14
ENERGY AND WATER BENCHMARKING
SECTION:
7-14-1: Purpose
7-14-2: Definitions
7-14-3: Benchmarking Schedule
7-14-4: Collecting And Entering Benchmarking Data
7-14-5: Benchmarking Reporting
7-14-6: Benchmarking Exemptions
7-14-7: Maintenance Of Records
7-14-8: Penalty
7-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish energy and water benchmarking
reporting requirements for certain buildings within the Village. (Ord. 23-18,
2-6- 2023)
7-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases whenever used in this article shall have the
following meanings and are defined as follows:
AGGREGATED
WHOLE-        Energy or water data that has been totaled for an entire property, which may include
BUILDING      a single occupant or a group of separately metered tenants.
DATA:
              To input and submit the total energy and water consumed by a property, as well as
              other descriptive information of such Property, during the previous calendar year,
BENCHMARK:    as required by the Village. Total energy and water consumption shall not include
              separately metered uses that are not integral to building operations, as determined
              by the Director.
BENCHMARKING  A subset of information input into the benchmarking tool and benchmarking
REPORT:       information generated by the benchmarking tool as determined by the Director.
              The United States Environmental Protection Agency's ENERGY STAR® Portfolio Manager®
BENCHMARKING  tool, or any additional or alternative tool adopted by the Director, used to track
TOOL:         and assess the energy and water use of certain properties relative to similar
              properties.
CONDOMINIUM:  A property that combines separate ownership of individual units with common
              ownership of other elements such as common areas.
              A property that:
COVERED       A.   Exceeds ten thousand (10,000) square feet in gross floor area; and
VILLAGE       B.   Is owned by the Village; or
PROPERTY:     C.   A property for which the Village regularly pays all or most of the annual
              energy and/or water bills.
COVERED NON-  A property other than a covered Village property that exceeds ten thousand (10,000)
VILLAGE       square feet in Gross Floor Area.
PROPERTY:
              Any covered Village property or covered non-Village property.
              A.   Single family, duplex, and triplex residential homes and related accessory
COVERED       structures, or any other residential building with less than four units are exempt
PROPERTY:     from the requirements of this article.
              B.   The State of Illinois and the Federal Government shall make reasonable efforts
              to comply with the requirements of this article with regard to a covered property
              which they own.
DATA QUALITY  The function in ENERGY STAR® Portfolio Manager® that runs a set of basic data checks
CHECKER:      on properties to help identify possible data entry errors and to see whether a
              building differs from typical operational patterns.
              Information generated by the benchmarking tool, other descriptive information about
              a physical property and its operational characteristics that is shared with the
              public. This information shall include, but is not limited to:
              A.   Descriptive information:
                 1.   Property address;
                 2.   Primary use of a building;
                 3.   Gross floor area;
                 4.   Number of years a property has been ENERGY STAR® certified and the last
              certification date, if applicable;
                 5.   Name of the property owner; and
                 6.   Individual or entity responsible for the benchmarking report.
DATA          B.   Output information:
TRANSPARENCY:    1.   Site and source energy use intensity;
                 2.   Weather normalized site and source energy use intensity;
                 3.   The ENERGY STAR® score when available;
                 4.   Total annual greenhouse gas emissions;
                 5.   Monthly energy use by fuel type;
                 6.   Indoor water use and water use intensity (consumption per gross square
              foot);
                 7.   Outdoor water use (where available);
                 8.   Total water usage;
                 9.   The ENERGY STAR® Water Score, where available; and
                 10.   Any property Notes, if needed, to explain a building's ENERGY STAR® score
              and/or operating characteristics.
              C.   Status of compliance or noncompliance with the requirements of the article.
DEPARTMENT:   The Development Customer Services Department.
DIRECTOR:     The Development Customer Services Department Director or the Director’s designee.
              Electricity, natural gas, steam, or other products sold by a Utility to an owner of
ENERGY:       property, or renewable on-site electricity generation, for purposes of providing
              heating, cooling, lighting, water heating, or powering or fueling other end uses as
              recorded in the benchmarking tool.
ENERGY STAR® The tool developed and maintained by the United States Environmental Protection
PORTFOLIO     Agency to track and assess the relative energy performance of buildings.
MANAGER®:
ENERGY STAR® The 1-100 numeric rating generated by the ENERGY STAR® Portfolio Manager® tool as a
Score:        measurement of a building's energy efficiency.
              The total property area, measured between the outside surfaces of the exterior walls
GROSS FLOOR   of the building(s). This includes all areas inside the building(s) including but not
AREA:         limited to lobbies, Tenant areas, common areas, meeting rooms, break rooms, atriums
              (count the base level only), restrooms, elevator shafts, stairwells, mechanical
              equipment areas, basements, and storage rooms.
              Any of the following:
              A.   An individual or entity possessing title to a property;
              B.   The board of a condominium association in the case of a condominium;
OWNER:        C.   The condominium association in the case of a Condominium where the powers of an
              owners' association are exercised by or delegated to an association;
              D.   The board of directors in the case of a cooperative apartment corporation; or
              E.   An agent authorized to act on behalf of any of the above.
              Any of the following:
              A.   A single building;
              B.   One or more buildings held in a condominium form of ownership and governed by a
              single board of managers; or
              C.   A campus of two or more buildings which are owned and operated by the same
              party, have a single shared primary function, and are:
                 1.   Behind a common utility meter or served by a common mechanical/electrical
PROPERTY:     system, such as a chilled water loop, which would prevent an owner from being able
              to easily determine the energy use attributable to each of the individual buildings;
              or
                 2.   Used primarily for one of the following functions:
                    a.   K-12 school;
                    b.   Hospital;
                    c.   Hotel;
                    d.   Multifamily housing; or
                    e.   Senior care community.
TENANT:       A person or entity occupying or holding possession of a building, or part of a
              building or premises, pursuant to a rental or lease agreement.
UTILITY:      An entity that distributes and/or sells natural gas, electricity, water, or thermal
              energy services for buildings. (Ord. 23-18, 2-6-2023)
 
7-14-3: BENCHMARKING SCHEDULE:
   A.   The owner of a covered property shall ensure that a benchmarking report
is generated, completed, and submitted to the Director annually for a covered
property.
   B.   The initial benchmarking report for a covered property shall be filed
in accordance with the schedule in the table below. Subsequent benchmarking
reports for each covered property shall be due by December 31 of each year
thereafter.
   C.   The Director shall make each covered property's data transparency
information available to the public beginning the year after the property is
first required to submit a benchmarking report in accordance with the schedule
in the table below. Subsequent data transparency information will be made
public each year thereafter.
 
Property                         Initial Reporting Date Data Transparency Year
Covered Village Properties = 10k June 1, 2023           2024
sq. ft.
Covered Non-Village Properties = December 31, 2023      2024
10k sq. ft.
 
(Ord. 23-18, 2-6-2023)
7-14-4: COLLECTING AND ENTERING BENCHMARKING DATA:
   A.   Each year, an owner of a covered property shall collect and enter all
data needed to benchmark the entire property for the previous calendar year
into the benchmarking tool. Aggregated whole-building data for a property's
energy and water use shall be compiled using one or more of the following
methods:
      1.   Obtaining aggregated whole-building Data from a utility;
      2.   Collecting data from all tenants; or
      3.   Reading a master meter.
   B.   If the owner of a covered property does not have access to aggregated
whole-building data (energy and water), such owner shall request aggregated
whole-building data from each utility company that provides energy or water
service to a property. If a utility does not provide aggregated whole-building
data for energy ow water service, an owner of a covered property shall request
energy and water data from any applicable tenants. An owner may also request
authorization from any applicable tenants for the utility to share their data
with an owner.
   C.   Each nonresidential tenant located at a covered property shall provide
an owner with all information necessary to comply with the requirements of this
article that cannot otherwise be acquired by an owner within forty-five (45)
days of a request.
   D.   Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit a property owner
to use tenant energy usage data for purposes other than compliance with
benchmarking report requirements, nor shall the reporting requirements of this
article be construed to excuse property owners from compliance with federal or
state laws governing direct access to tenant utility data from a responsible
utility. (Ord. 23-18, 2-6-2023)
7-14-5: BENCHMARKING REPORTING:
   A.   For each covered property subject to this article, an owner shall
submit a benchmarking report in an electronic format via the benchmarking tool
annually by the date set forth in section
7-14-3 above.
   B.   The information included in a benchmarking report shall include the
data information was entered in the benchmarking tool as set forth in sections
7-14-3 above for the previous calendar year.
   C.   An owner of a covered property shall ensure that data entered into the
benchmarking tool shall be based on the aggregated whole-building data for
energy and water service for the calendar year being reported.
   D.   Before submitting a benchmarking report, an owner shall run all data
quality checker functions available within the benchmarking tool and shall
verify that all data has been accurately entered into the benchmarking tool. In
order for the benchmarking report to be considered in compliance with this
article, an owner shall correct all missing or incorrect information as
identified by the data quality checker prior to submitting the benchmarking
report to the Director.
   E.   If an owner becomes aware that any information reported as part of the
current year benchmarking report is inaccurate or incomplete, the owner shall
amend the information reported within the benchmarking tool, and shall provide
the Director with an updated benchmarking report within thirty (30) days of
learning of the inaccurate or incomplete information. (Ord. 23-18, 2-6-2023)
7-14-6: BENCHMARKING EXEMPTIONS:
A covered property that meets one or more of the following conditions for the
calendar year to be benchmarked may apply for an exemption from the
benchmarking and data transparency requirements set forth in this article if:
   A.   The property did not have a certificate of occupancy or temporary
certificate of occupancy from the Village or other applicable entity for the
applicable full year; or
   B.   A demolition permit was issued for an applicable building located at a
property during the prior calendar year; or
   C.   The property had an average physical occupancy rate of less than fifty
percent (50%) over a given year; or
   D.   The benchmarking or data transparency information would disclose trade
secrets as provided by applicable law; or
   E.   Buildings primarily used for manufacturing or other industrial purposes
for which benchmarking results would not meaningfully reflect building energy
use characteristics due to the intensive use of process energy. "Process
energy" refers to energy used in the actual manufacturing, production, or
processing of a good, commodity, or other material. (Ord. 23-18, 2-6-2023)
7-14-7: MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
An owner shall maintain the data submitted through the benchmarking tool and
supporting data, including but not limited to, the energy and water bills and
reports or forms received from tenants and/or utilities pursuant to this
article. Such records shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years. At
the request of the Director, such records shall be made available for
inspection by the Director or the Director’s designee. (Ord. 23-18, 2-6-2023)
7-14-8: PENALTY:
Any owner, entity or person in violation of any provision of this article shall
be fined in accordance with the provisions of section
1-1-5 of this Code. (Ord. 23-18, 2-6-2023)
ARTICLE 15
POOL CODE
SECTION:
7-15-1: Adoption
7-15-2: Amendments
7-15-1: ADOPTION:
   A.   The 2021 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) as published
by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by the Village by
reference and is made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this section with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes set forth in section 7-6-2 of
this article. To the extent that the provisions of the ISPSC are inconsistent
with any codes previously adopted by the Village by reference, the provisions
of the 2021 ISPSC shall govern unless specifically set forth in this code. In
the event of a conflict between any provisions of the IRC and any provision of
the Oak Park Village Code, the provisions of the Oak Park Village Code shall
govern.
   B.   There shall be three (3) copies of the NEC kept on file for public
inspection in the office of the Village Clerk Chief Building Official. (Ord.
23-56, 6-20-2023)
7-15-2: AMENDMENTS:
The 2021 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as adopted pursuant to
section 7-15-1 of this article, is hereby amended by adding the underlined
language and deleting the overstricken language as follows:
   CHAPTER 1
   CODE AND ADMINISTRATION
   PART 1 – SCOPE AND APPLICATION
   Section 101 – GENERAL
   Section 101.1 Title. These regulations, as amended and adopted by the
Village of Oak Park, shall be known as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the
Village of Oak Park, herein referred to as “this code.”
   PART 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
   CHAPTER 1, PART 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT is deleted in its
entirety and replaced with the following:
   CHAPTER 1, PART 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
   Administration and enforcement of this code shall be governed by applicable
provisions of chapter 1 of the International Building Code as amended and
adopted by the Village.
   CHAPTER 3 – GENERAL COMPLAIANCE
   Section 302 – Electrical, Plumbing, Mechanical, and Fuel Gas Requirements
   302.2 Water service and drainage.
   Piping and fittings used for water service, makeup and drainage piping for
pools and spas shall comply with the provisions of the current edition of the
state of Illinois plumbing code. Fittings shall be approved for installation
with the piping installed.
   302.5 Backflow protection.
   Water supplies for pools and spas shall be protected against backflow in
accordance with the provisions of the current edition of the state of Illinois
Plumbing Code, or the International Residential Code, as applicable in
accordance with Section 102.7.1.
   302.6 Wastewater discharge.
   Where wastewater from pools or spas, such as backwash water from filters and
water from deck drains discharge to a building drainage system, the connection
shall be through an air gap in accordance with the provisions of the current
edition of the state of Illinois Plumbing Code or the International Residential
Code as applicable in accordance with Section 102.7.1.
   306.9.1 Hose bibbs.
   Hose bibbs shall be provided for rinsing down the entire deck and shall be
installed in accordance with the provisions of the current edition of the state
of Illinois Plumbing Code or International Residential Code, as applicable in
accordance with Section 102.7.1, and shall be located not greater than 150 feet
(45 720 mm) apart. Water-powered devices, such as water-powered lifts, shall
have a dedicated hose bibb water source.
   318.2 Protection of potable water supply.
   Potable water supply systems shall be designed, installed and maintained so
as to prevent contamination from nonpotable liquids, solids or gases being
introduced into the potable water supply through cross-connections or other
piping connections to the system. Means of protection against backflow in the
potable water supply shall be provided through an air gap complying with ASME
A112.1.2 or by a backflow prevention assembly in accordance with the
International Residential Code or the provisions of the current edition of the
state of Illinois Plumbing Code, as applicable in accordance with Section
102.7.1.
   SECTION 410
   SANITARY FACILITIES
   410.1 Toilet facilities.
   Class A and B pools shall be provided with toilet facilities having the
required number of plumbing fixtures in accordance with the International
Building Code or the provisions of the current edition of the state of Illinois
Plumbing Code.
   CHAPTER 6
   AQUATIC RECREATION FACILITIES
   SECTION 609 - DRESSING AND SANITARY FACILITIES
   609.1 General.
   Dressing and sanitary facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
minimum requirements of the International Building Code and provisions of the
current edition of the state of Illinois plumbing code and Sections 609.2
through 609.9.
   609.2 Number of fixtures.
   The minimum number of required water closets, urinals, lavatory, and
drinking fountain fixtures shall be provided as required by the International
Building Code and provisions of the current edition of the state of Illinois
Plumbing Code and the dressing facilities and number of cleansing and rinse
showers shall be provided in accordance with Sections 609.2.1, 609.2.2, and
609.3.1.
(Ord. 23-56, 6-20-2023)
CHAPTER 8
BUSINESS LICENSING
General Provisions   1
Fee Schedule   2
Advertising And Billposting   3
General Brokers   4A
Pawnbrokers   4B
Catch Basin Cleaners      5
Comprehensive Regulation Of Tobacco Products   6
Contractor's Storage Yard, Coal Or Lumber Yard   7
Dating Services   8
Electrical Contractors      9
Factories And Workshops   10
Florists      11
Parking Garages And Parking Lots   12
Adult Daycare Centers   13
Day And Night Care Centers And Homes   14
Junk Dealers   15
Laundries, Laundromats, Dry Cleaning Establishments And Dry Cleaners      16
Model Referral Service   17
Public Photography Studios   18
Rental Referral Agencies   19
Service Stations   20
Theaters   21
Undertakers And Funeral Directors   22
Amusements   23
Dances And Dance Halls   23A
Foods And Food Establishments   24
Long Term Care Facilities   25
Mason Contractors, General      26
Public Carriers   27
Barbers And Barbershops   28
Going Out Of Business Sales      29
Currency Exchanges   30
Horsedrawn Carriage Ride   31
Bed And Breakfast Establishments   32
Accessory Use Tour Houses      33
Tour Trolleys   34
Valet Parking   35
Donation Boxes   36
Secondhand Goods Dealers   37
Massage Establishments And Massage Services   38
Cannabis Business Establishments   39
Short-Term Rentals   40
Lawn Maintenance/Landscaping   41
Intoxicating Hemp And Kratom   42
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Compliance Required
8-1-2: Applications
8-1-3: Persons Subject To License
8-1-4: Investigations
8-1-5: License Term And Fees
8-1-6: Renewal Of Licenses; Late Fees
8-1-7: Bonds
8-1-8: Building And Premises
8-1-9: Location
8-1-10: Change Of Location
8-1-11: Nuisances
8-1-12: Inspections
8-1-13: Posting License
8-1-14: Suspension And Revocation Of License
8-1-15: Appeal
8-1-16: Hours Of Operation For Retail Goods Establishments And Service Stations
8-1-17: Penalty
8-1-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful in the Village of Oak Park for any person, either
directly or indirectly, to conduct any business or nonprofit enterprise, or to
use in connection therewith any vehicle, premises, machine or device regulated
by this chapter or for which a license is required by any other chapter of this
code, or for which a license fee is established in article 2 of this chapter,
without first having obtained a license to do so.
   B.   Contractors who seek to perform work for which a permit is required
must register with the Village in accordance with chapter 7, article 1 of this
code, regardless of whether they maintain a fixed place of business in Oak
Park.
   C.   Whenever a provision in this chapter refers to "the Village Clerk" or
"the Village", it shall mean "the Village Manager or the Manager's designee".
(Ord. 2014-0-52, 8-4-2014)
8-1-2: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses shall be made in writing to the Village Manager
or the Manager's designee on forms provided by the Manager or the Manager's
designee.
Each application shall state:
   A.   The name of the applicant;
   B.   Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation:
      1.   If an individual, the applicant shall provide the name and the
residence (and any business) address of the applicant;
      2.   If a partnership, the applicant shall provide the business and
residence address of each partner, including limited partners;
      3.   If a corporation, the applicant shall provide the name, state of
incorporation, and the names and business and residence addresses of the
officers, directors and managers in charge of any local facility thereof;
   C.   The permit or license desired;
   D.   The location and mailing address of the business, the telephone number
(s) of the business, and an e-mail address for the owner or general manager;
   E.   Whether the premises are owned or leased by the applicant; and if
leased, the name and address of the lessor;
   F.   The number of square feet of space to be occupied by the business;
   G.   The business or activity to be licensed;
   H.   The date the license was applied for and if the proposed business is
temporary, the time period for which the license is requested;
   I.   The number of employees or agents;
   J.   Whether the business is a "food establishment" as defined in section
8-24-1 of this chapter;
   K.   Whether there are or will be any coin operated devices on the property
and if so, the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the coin
operated devices.
Each application shall contain such additional information as may be required
or may be necessary to provide for the proper guidance of Village officials in
the issuance of the license. (Ord. 2014-0-52, 8-4-2014)
8-1-3: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or
conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in
any activity or occupation, every person shall be subject to the requirements
if, by himself or through an agent or employee, he holds himself forth as being
engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefor; or
performs or attempts to perform any such business or occupation in the Village.
Licenses are not transferable. (1981 Code)
8-1-4: INVESTIGATIONS:
   A.   After an application for a license or permit has been completed by the
applicant and where an investigation or inspection is required by ordinance
before the issuance of such license, the Village Clerk, within forty eight (48)
hours of such receipt, shall refer the application to the appropriate official
(s) for the making of such investigation or inspection.
   B.   The official(s) to whom the application has been referred shall
promptly make a report thereon.
   C.   All investigative reports shall be furnished to the Village Clerk who
shall evaluate the applications and seek additional information if required.
   D.   After consideration of the application and the related investigative
reports, if the Village Clerk determines that the application complies with
this code and all applicable statutes, and if the required fee has been paid,
the license shall be issued. If not, the applicant shall be advised that the
license has been denied.
The Clerk shall deny a license if it can be determined that the applicant has
knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the
application or in any documents required by the Village in conjunction
therewith. (1981 Code)
8-1-5: LICENSE TERM AND FEES:
Licenses shall be valid from April 1 to March 31 of the following year.
However, all licenses which are in existence on the date the ordinance codified
herein is adopted, and which expire on December 31, 2014, will be eligible to
be renewed on January 1, 2015, for a fifteen (15) month period, or until March
31, 2016, at the annual fee prorated to a fifteen (15) month period.
License fees shall be as established in article 2 of this chapter, or as
otherwise provided in this code, provided that when a license is issued for a
new business on or after July 1, the license fee shall be prorated to the end
of the license term on a quarterly basis. License fees are nonrefundable such
that no refund will be made if the licensed establishment is discontinued
during the licensed period. (Ord. 2014-0-52, 8-4-2014)
8-1-6: RENEWAL OF LICENSES; LATE FEES:
   A.   Business License Renewals: All licenses shall terminate on March 31 of
each year unless otherwise provided. The Village Manager or the Manager's
designee shall send a notice of renewal to all business license holders at
least eight (8) weeks prior to the application deadline. Failure of the Village
Manager to make such notification, or failure of the licensee to receive it,
shall not excuse the licensee from failing to obtain a new license or from
failing to obtain a renewed annual business license, nor shall it be a defense
in an action based upon operation without a license.
   B.   Late Fees: In the case of any annual license, if the license fee is not
paid by April 1 of the current licensing year, or on the date a new business
becomes subject to a license, the license fee shall be increased by ten percent
(10%); and further provided that in the case of any annual license, if the
license fee is not purchased by June 1 of the current license year, or within
thirty (30) days after a new business becomes subject to a license, the license
fee shall be increased by thirty percent (30%) of the original fee.
   C.   Payment Of Outstanding Fines And Fees Required: No license shall be
renewed unless and until the licensee has paid all other outstanding fines and
fees due the Village. (Ord. 2014-0-52, 8-4-2014)
8-1-7: BONDS:
The Village Clerk is hereby authorized to approve the security in all cases
where the ordinances require a bond to be given to the Village before such
license or permit shall be issued and said bond when so approved shall be filed
in the office of the Village Clerk. (1981 Code)
8-1-8: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall
be issued for any purpose or activity, if the premises and building to be used
for the purpose do not fully comply with all applicable ordinances and
regulations of the Village and the state of Illinois. (1981 Code)
8-1-9: LOCATION:
No license for the operation of a business or establishment in the Village
shall be construed to permit the operation of a licensed business or
establishment in more than one location in the Village; a separate license
shall be required for each location. For the purpose of this chapter, "one
location" means that all buildings containing the principal or accessory uses
shall be connected or on the same lot or parcel, be operated and managed by the
same person or owner, and that the business be in an establishment with the
same classification. (1981 Code)
8-1-10: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
The location of any licensed business or occupation or of any permitted
activity may be changed provided that ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to
the Village Clerk, in the absence of any provision to the contrary. (1981 Code)
8-1-11: NUISANCES:
No business shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance as
defined in chapter 16 of this code. (1981 Code)
8-1-12: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and lawful
manner and shall be inspected by the Village periodically, but not less than
annually, to assure compliance with this code and all applicable laws and
regulations. It shall be a prior condition of the acceptance of such a license
from the Village that the holder agrees to such inspections. It shall be the
duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected to
admit, for the purpose of making the inspection, any officer or employee of the
Village who is authorized or directed to make such inspection.
   B.   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to secure performance with any ordinance provision or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in
charge of the premises to be inspected to give, upon official request, to any
authorized officer or employee of the Village, samples of such material or
commodity for such analysis. (1981 Code)
8-1-13: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of every person conducting a licensed business in the
Village to keep his license posted at all times in a prominent place on the
premises used for such business. (1981 Code)
8-1-14: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   When the conduct or operation of any business or establishment, whether
or not licensed, shall constitute a nuisance or a clear and present danger to
the public health, safety or general welfare, the Village Manager shall have
the authority to summarily order the cessation of business and the closing of
the premises, and the suspension of any valid license or permit for a period
not to exceed ten (10) days.
   B.   Within five (5) days after he has so acted, the Village Manager shall
call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license or
permit should be revoked.
   C.   Licenses issued under the ordinances of the Village, unless otherwise
provided, may be revoked by the Village Manager after notice and hearing as
provided in subsections
8-1-14D and E of this section for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit;
      2.   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of the ordinance
provisions relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license
or permit, or the premises occupied;
      3.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
      4.   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the Village;
      5.   Refusal to permit an inspection or product sampling, or any
interference with a duly authorized Village officer or employee while in the
performance of his duties in making such inspections, as provided in subsection
8-1-12A of this article.
Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition of
any other penalties provided for the violation of other applicable ordinances
of the Village.
   D.   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be
given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and
the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the licensee or permittee at his last known
address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing.
   E.   The Village Attorney shall present the complaint and shall represent
the Village. The licensee or permittee shall be permitted counsel and shall
have the right to submit evidence and cross examine witnesses. The Village
Manager shall preside and shall render the decision. A transcript shall be made
of the hearing. (1981 Code)
8-1-15: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Village Clerk in regard to the
denial of an application for a business license, as provided in section
8-1-4 of this article, or in connection with the revocation of a license or
permit by the Village Manager, as provided in section
8-1-14 of this article, shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board of
Trustees. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Village Clerk, within
ten (10) days after notice of denial of an application or a revocation of a
license or permit, a written statement under oath setting forth specifically
the grounds for appeal. The Board of Trustees shall thereupon refer the
complaint to a special or existing hearing board for review.
After receipt of a referral from the Board of Trustees, the appropriate hearing
board shall notify the applicant or licensee in writing of a hearing to be held
thereon, specifying the date, time and place of the hearing, which shall not be
held sooner than ten (10) days after the notice is mailed, or delivered in
person. The notice shall also state the nature of the charges or reasons for
the Village's contemplated actions and restate the actions taken to date.
The hearing board shall invite the applicant or licensee to appear in person or
permit the same to be represented by counsel at the hearing, at which time the
applicant, licensee or counsel shall be afforded an opportunity to present all
relevant matters in support of the application or renewal thereof or to resist
the revocation thereof. Such hearing scheduled for a day certain may be
continued for some other date at the discretion of the hearing board.
The hearing board shall not be bound by common law or statutory rules of
evidence or by technical or formal rules of procedure, but shall conduct
hearings in such manner as seems best calculated to result in substantial
justice.
The hearing board shall make findings of fact and render a decision which shall
be entered upon the records of the Village.
In some certain cases (specified in individual licensing articles) the decision
of the hearing board may be appealed to the Board of Trustees, in which event
the proceedings shall be reviewed and a decision rendered by the Board based on
the written record before the hearing board. In all other cases the decision of
the hearing board shall be final. (1981 Code)
8-1-16: HOURS OF OPERATION FOR RETAIL GOODS ESTABLISHMENTS AND SERVICE
STATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for retail goods establishments and service
stations to open earlier than five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
   B.   Retail goods establishments and service stations shall close no later
than twelve o'clock (12:00) A.M.
   C.   Hours of operation shall apply to all sales and delivery activities for
retail goods establishments and service stations, including the sale of
gasoline or any highly volatile fuel for motor vehicles or internal combustion
engines, packaged food and tobacco products, beverages, and other merchandise.
   D.   No retail goods establishment and service station shall permit any
person other than an operator and its employees to remain in or on a retail
goods establishment or a service station premises longer than thirty (30)
minutes after the closing hour or thirty (30) minutes prior to the opening
hour.
   E.   For purposes of this section, a retail goods establishment is as
defined in Section 2.3 of the Village's Zoning Ordinance, as amended, as a
commercial enterprise that provides physical goods, products or merchandise
directly to the consumer, where such goods are typically available for
immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser.
   F.   For purposes of this section, a service station shall be as defined in
Section
8-20-1 of this Code, as amended. (Ord. 22-83, 11-7-2022)
8-1-17: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in accordance
with the provisions of section
1-1-5 of this code. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 22-83, 11-7-2022)
ARTICLE 2
FEE SCHEDULE
SECTION:
8-2-1: License Fee Schedule
8-2-1: LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE:
   A.   Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
or operate any business, trade or occupation without first obtaining a license
therefor and paying the license fee listed below. Not for profit businesses
shall be required to obtain a license, but shall be exempt from the license
fees set forth below.
Applicants shall pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) application fee with the initial
application for a business license in the Village of Oak Park. The application
fee will not apply toward the license fee. All license fees are for a one year
period, with the exception of temporary food establishment licenses. There
shall be no application fee for the renewal of a business license, temporary
food establishment initial annual event license, temporary food establishment
subsequent annual event license or temporary food establishment farmers' market
license.
   B.   Fees For Specific Businesses: The business license fee for the
following categories of businesses shall be as set forth in this table. Where a
business falls into more than one category, it will be charged only the higher
fee.
Category License Fee
Category                                                 License Fee
Accessory use tour house                                 $ 206.00
Adult day program, for profit                            309.00
Assisted living establishment as defined by 210 Illinois 1,030.00
Compiled Statutes 9/10
Bed and breakfast                                        360.00
Catering facility                                        660.00
Day/night care center for children                       577.00
Daycare home based                                       103.00
Dealers in household pets                                257.00
Environmental:                                            
Junk dealer (includes scrap metal and other scavengers)  206.00
Scavenger/waste hauler:                                   
Per service                                              1,030.00
Per vehicle: Commercial truck which operates on          515.00
alternate fuel such as compressed natural gas
Per vehicle: If under contract with the Village          206.00
Hospital                                                 1,080.00
Itinerant or mobile vendor, peddler or commercial        1,340.00
solicitor
"Long term care facility", including nursing home,
skilled nursing, intermediate care facility or sheltered 1,300.00
care facility as defined in section
8-25-1 of this chapter
Massage establishment                                    310.00
Mobile food food establishment                            
   Category I - high risk (3 annual inspections)      335.00
   Category II - medium risk (2 annual inspections)   206.00
   Category III - low risk (2 annual inspections)     154.00
Pawnbroker                                               2,060.00
Professional offices (For records only, includes, but is
not limited to, professionals holding State licenses
such as doctors, lawyers, accountants, real estate
brokers, architects, detective agencies, opticians,      0.00
insurance offices or political party offices. Also
includes government office, not for profits, banks and
savings and loans.)
Restaurant:                                               
Category I - high risk                                   814.00
Category II - medium risk                                690.00
Category III - low risk                                  505.00
"Retail food store" as defined in section                 
8-24-1 of this chapter:
With 12,000 or more square feet                          1,751.00
Between 8,000 and 11,999 square feet                     948.00
With less than 8,000 square feet                         Fee per subsection
                                                         8-2-1C of this section
Roll-off waste hauler, dropoff container service (The
Public Works Department charges right-of- way permit     $ 206.00
fees and daily fees which are separate from this license
fee.)
Roll-off waste hauler, per truck                         52.00
Temporary food establishment initial annual event fee: a
temporary food establishment initial annual event fee
shall be charged for the first event for which a license 103.00
is issued during a calendar year and shall be valid for
not more than fourteen (14) consecutive days after the
start date of the event.
Temporary food establishment subsequent annual event
fee: a temporary food establishment subsequent event fee
shall be charged for the second and all subsequent       52.00
events for which a license is issued during a calendar
year and shall be valid for not more than fourteen (14)
consecutive days after the start date of the event.
Temporary food establishment late fee: a late fee shall
be charged for temporary food license applications
received by the Village less than ten (10) calendar days 155.00
prior to the event. Applications received by the Village
less than three (3) days prior to an event shall not be
accepted by the Village.
Temporary food establishment farmers' market fee: a
license fee shall be charged for a market season license 150.00
which shall be valid for up to twenty five (25) total
market dates.
Temporary operations including, but not limited to,
Christmas tree vendors, single auctions, events, or      103.00
amusements and single transaction firearm sales
authorized by law.
Theater: 500 or fewer seats                              1,000.00
Theater: 500 or more seats                               1,400.00
Tobacco sales                                            300.00
Transportation:                                           
Horsedrawn carriage                                      103.00
House mover                                              206.00
Mover                                                    103.00
Private ambulance per driver                             10.00
Private ambulance per vehicle                            50.00
Taxi company or chauffeur service                        206.00
Taxi: Each driver                                        20.00
Taxi: Each vehicle                                       70.00
Tour trolley                                             103.00
Valet parking service                                    309.00
Veterinarian                                             258.00
 
   C.   General Business Fees:
      1.   Fee Based On Square Footage: Any business not specifically
identified in subsection
8-2-1B of this section with a permanent location in Oak Park shall pay a
general business license fee based on the number of square feet of occupied
space according to the following table:
 
0 - 1,999 square feet     $103.00
2,000 - 4,999 square feet 155.00
5,000 - 7,999 square feet 206.00
8,000+ square feet        257.00
 
      2.   Food Establishments: In addition to the general business license fee
set forth in subsection
8-2-1C1 of this section, all food establishments, as defined in section
8-24-1 of this chapter, adult daycare facilities and pharmacies with food sales
which are not specifically identified in subsection
8-2-1B of this section, shall be charged a food establishment fee as follows:
 
Category I (low risk) food establishments     $247.00
Category II (medium risk) food establishments 432.00
Category III (high risk) food establishments  556.00
 
The Director of Public Health or the Director's designee shall determine
whether a food establishment or a mobile food establishment is a category I, II
or III food establishment in accordance with the definition of those terms as
set forth in 77 Illinois Administrative Code 615.310, as amended.
      3.   Swimming Pools, Whirlpools And Spas: Any business with a swimming
pool, whirlpool or spa shall pay an additional fee of one hundred sixty dollars
($160.00).
      4.   Preemption: In the case that State or Federal law preempts a home
rule municipality from the regulation of the location or existence of a
business or activity, the establishment shall register with the Village but not
be charged a fee. (Ord. 15-068, 3-2-2015; amd. Ord. 18-334, 1-16-2018; Ord. 19-
116, 11-18-2019; Ord. 24-174, 11-21-2024)
ARTICLE 2
FEE SCHEDULE
SECTION:
8-2-1: License Fee Schedule
8-2-1: LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE:
   A.   Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
or operate any business, trade or occupation without first obtaining a license
therefor and paying the license fee listed below. Not for profit businesses
shall be required to obtain a license, but shall be exempt from the license
fees set forth below.
Applicants shall pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) application fee with the initial
application for a business license in the Village of Oak Park. The application
fee will not apply toward the license fee. All license fees are for a one year
period. There shall be no application fee for the renewal of a business
license. (Ord. 18-334, 1-16-2018)
   B.   Fees For Specific Businesses: The business license fee for the
following categories of businesses shall be as set forth in this table. Where a
business falls into more than one category, it will be charged only the higher
fee.
Category License Fee
Category                                                 License Fee
Accessory use tour house                                 $ 200.00
Adult day program, for profit                            300.00
Assisted living establishment as defined by 210 Illinois 1,000.00
Compiled Statutes 9/10
Bed and breakfast                                        350.00
Catering facility                                        640.00
Day/night care center for children                       560.00
Daycare home based                                       100.00
Dealers in household pets                                250.00
Environmental:                                            
 Junk dealer (includes scrap metal and other            200.00
  scavengers)
 Scavenger/waste hauler:                                 
  Per service                                          1,000.00
  Per vehicle: Commercial truck which operates on      500.00
    alternate fuel such as compressed natural gas
  Per vehicle: If under contract with the Village      200.00
Hospital                                                 1,050.00
Itinerant or mobile vendor, peddler or commercial        100.00
solicitor
"Long term care facility", including nursing home,
skilled nursing, intermediate care facility or sheltered 1,300.00
care facility as defined in section 8-25-1 of this
chapter
Massage establishment                                    300.00
Mobile food cart                                         100.00
Pawnbroker                                               2,000.00
Professional offices (For records only, includes, but is
not limited to, professionals holding State licenses
such as doctors, lawyers, accountants, real estate
brokers, architects, detective agencies, opticians,      0.00
insurance offices or political party offices. Also
includes government office, not for profits, banks and
savings and loans.)
Restaurant:                                               
 Category I - high risk                                 790.00
 Category II - medium risk                              670.00
 Category III - low risk                                490.00
"Retail food store" as defined in section                 
8-24-1 of this chapter:
 With 12,000 or more square feet                        1,700.00
 Between 8,000 and 11,999 square feet                   920.00
 With less than 8,000 square feet                       Fee per subsection
                                                         8-2-1C of this section
Roll-off waste hauler, dropoff container service (The
Public Works Department charges right-of- way permit     $ 200.00
fees and daily fees which are separate from this license
fee.)
Roll-off waste hauler, per truck                         50.00
Temporary operations including, but not limited to,
temporary food service events1, Christmas tree vendors,  100.00
single auctions, events, or amusements and single
transaction firearm sales authorized by law
Theater: 500 or fewer seats                              1,000.00
Theater: 500 or more seats                               1,400.00
Tobacco sales                                            300.00
Transportation:                                           
 Horsedrawn carriage                                    100.00
 House mover                                            200.00
 Mover                                                  100.00
 Private ambulance per driver                           10.00
 Private ambulance per vehicle                          50.00
 Taxi company or chauffeur service                      200.00
 Taxi: Each driver                                      20.00
 Taxi: Each vehicle                                     70.00
 Tour trolley                                           100.00
 Valet parking service                                  300.00
Veterinarian                                             250.00
 
Note:
      1.    Temporary food service applications and license fees shall be
submitted at least 7 days prior to an applicable event.
(Ord. 15-068, 3-2-2015; amd. Ord. 18-334, 1-16-2018)
   C.   General Business Fees:
      1.   Fee Based On Square Footage: Any business not specifically
identified in subsection
8-2-1B of this section with a permanent location in Oak Park shall pay a
general business license fee based on the number of square feet of occupied
space according to the following table:
 
0 - 1,999 square feet     $100.00
2,000 - 4,999 square feet 150.00
5,000 - 7,999 square feet 200.00
8,000+ square feet        250.00
 
      2.   Food Establishments: In addition to the general business license fee
set forth in subsection
8-2-1C1 of this section, all food establishments, as defined in section
8-24-1 of this chapter, adult daycare facilities and pharmacies with food sales
which are not specifically identified in subsection
8-2-1B of this section, shall be charged a food establishment fee as follows:
 
Category I (low risk) food establishments     $240.00
Category II (medium risk) food establishments 420.00
Category III (high risk) food establishments  540.00
 
The Director of Public Health or the Director's designee shall determine
whether a food establishment is a category I, II or III food establishment in
accordance with the definition of those terms as set forth in 77 Illinois
Administrative Code 615.310, as amended.
      3.   Swimming Pools, Whirlpools And Spas: Any business with a swimming
pool, whirlpool or spa shall pay an additional fee of one hundred sixty dollars
($160.00).
      4.   Preemption: In the case that State or Federal law preempts a home
rule municipality from the regulation of the location or existence of a
business or activity, the establishment shall register with the Village but not
be charged a fee. (Ord. 15-068, 3-2-2015)
ARTICLE 3
ADVERTISING AND BILL POSTING
SECTION:
8-3-1: In General
8-3-2: Audible Advertising or Advertising by Mechanical Device; Exceptions
8-3-3: Distribution on Private Premises; Exceptions
8-3-4: Throwing Advertising Matter or Samples in Public Places
8-3-5: Posting Handbills, Posters, Advertisements; Exceptions
8-3-6: Billposter; Application for License
8-3-7: Certain Handbills Prohibited
8-3-1: IN GENERAL:
The Board of Trustees finds that excessive noise endangers physical and
emotional health and well-being, interferes with legitimate business and
recreational activities, depresses property values, offends the senses, creates
public nuisances, and in other respects reduces the quality of our environment.
Therefore, no person shall emit beyond the boundaries of his property any noise
that unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life or with any lawful
business or activity.
8-3-2: AUDIBLE ADVERTISING OR ADVERTISING BY MECHANICAL DEVICE; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to advertise goods or merchandise, or attempt to invite
the patronage of any person to any business, or attempt to attract attention
for any purpose, by means of any amplified or mechanical device that is audible
on any public property.
8-3-3: DISTRIBUTION ON PRIVATE PREMISES; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to place any advertising matter or samples of merchandise
upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if
there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance
thereof, a sign bearing the words:
"No Trespassing", "No Peddlers or Agents", "No Advertisement" or any similar
notice.
The preceding paragraph shall not apply to the delivery of daily newspapers or
the delivery of weekly, monthly or other publication of general circulation, or
to any material requested by the occupant.
8-3-4: THROWING ADVERTISING MATTER OR SAMPLES IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, in any public place within this
Village, any advertising matter or samples of merchandise, for the purpose of
advertising any business, except as provided for in kiosks or other similar
devices made available for this express purpose.
8-3-5: POSTING HANDBILLS, POSTERS, ADVERTISEMENTS; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to affix any advertisement or notice of any
kind to or upon any portion or part of any public way or public place, except
such as may be authorized by law.
8-3-6: BILLPOSTER; APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of billposter
without first obtaining a license as provided in Article 1 of this Chapter.
8-3-7: CERTAIN HANDBILLS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, hand out, distribute or transmit
any sign, or any handbill which may reasonably tend to incite riot or other
public disorder, or which advocates disloyalty to or the overthrow of the
government of the United States by means of violence, or which urges any
unlawful conduct or encourages or tends to encourage a breach of the public
peace.
ARTICLE 4A
GENERAL BROKERS
SECTION:
8-4A-1: Definitions
8-4A-2: License Required
8-4A-3: Employees Acting As Brokers
8-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
GENERAL BROKER: A "general broker" is any person who negotiates, buys, sells,
trades, leases or handles for another, on a commission basis, or on the basis
of compensation in proportion to the amount of the transaction, any stocks,
bonds, mortgages, loans of all descriptions including personal, family or small
loans authorized under special legislative enactment or otherwise, investment
securities, certificates of indebtedness, foreign exchange letters of credit,
grain, produce, provisions, livestock, goods, wares, merchandise or any other
commodity, article of property except real estate, whether like or unlike those
herein named, or acts through the medium of another licensed broker in the
capacity and for any of the purposes aforesaid. (Ord. 1998-0-32, 6-15-98, eff.
7-1-98)
8-4A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of general broker without having first
complied with the general licensing requirements of this Chapter and without
first having obtained a license as a general broker. (Ord. 1998-0-32, 6-15-98,
eff. 7-1-98)
8-4A-3: EMPLOYEES ACTING AS BROKERS:
Any person employed by a person licensed as a broker under the provisions of
this Article, who shall himself engage in the business or act in the capacity
of a broker shall, notwithstanding the fact of such employment, be amenable to
all the provisions of this Article and shall be required to possess an
individual broker's license. (Ord. 1998-0-32, 6-15-98, eff. 7-1-98)
ARTICLE 4B
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
8-4B-1: Definitions
8-4B-2: License Administrator
8-4B-3: License Required
8-4B-4: Application For Licenses
8-4B-5: Restrictions On Licenses
8-4B-6: License Conditions
8-4B-7: Maintenance Of Records
8-4B-8: Removal Of Identifying Marks Prohibited
8-4B-9: Video Camera Surveillance Required
8-4B-10: Hours Of Business
8-4B-11: Sales And Redemptions Regulated
8-4B-12: Prohibited Pledges Or Purchases
8-4B-13: Violation Penalty
8-4B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings and are hereby defined
as follows:
AUTHORIZED ONLINE DATABASE: An online reporting system, such as LeadsOnline,
designated by the Chief of Police for reporting transactions pursuant to this
article.
GIFT CARD: A card, or a stored value card or other physical medium, containing
stored value primarily intended to be exchanged for consumer goods and
services.
JEWELRY: Any "precious metal" as defined in this section or any "precious stone
or gem" as defined in this section, including, but not limited to, earrings,
chains, pendants, pins, brooches, bracelets, armbands, rings, head or hair
ornaments, diadems, cuff links or similar objects comprising or containing
precious metals or precious stones. The term "jewelry" also includes articles
comprising or containing precious metals or precious stones, including, but not
limited to, optical frames, pens, pencils, flatware or hollowware.
PAWN: Something given as a security for a loan.
PAWNBROKER: Any person who lends money on deposit or pledge of physically
delivered personal property, or who deals in the purchase of personal property
on condition of selling the same back at a stipulated price, or who publicly
displays at his or her place of business the sign generally used by pawnbrokers
to denote the pawnbroker business, or who publicly displays a sign which
indicates, in substance, a business on the premises which "loans money for
personal property, or deposit or pledge". The business of a pawnbroker shall
not include the lending of money on deposit or pledge of title to property.
PAWNER: One who gives or deposits jewelry, precious metal, stones or gems or
secondhand property as security for payment of a loan.
PRECIOUS METAL: Gold, silver or platinum with a value of more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
PRECIOUS STONE OR GEM: Any genuine diamond, emerald, sapphire or pearl of any
value and any other genuine stone or gem with a value of more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
SECONDHAND PROPERTY: Any previously owned audio-video equipment, compact disc,
audio or video tapes or recordings, camera, computer hardware, jewelry made of
precious metal or stone, article made of precious metal, precious stone or gem,
watch, equipment, machine, tool or device.
TRANSACTION: The receipt or disbursement of jewelry, precious metal, stones or
gems or secondhand property by a pawnbroker through pawn, purchase, sale,
barter, consignment or trade. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-4B-2: LICENSE ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Chief Of Police To Serve: The Chief of Police shall be the pawnbroker
license administrator and shall be charged with the administration within the
Village of the appropriate provisions of this article.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The Chief of Police shall have the following powers,
functions and duties with respect to pawnbrokers' licenses:
      1.   To investigate and review all applications, renewals and complaints;
investigate operations of all licensed establishments; conduct hearings;
receive evidence and sworn testimony; and to authorize the issuance of all
pawnbroker licenses.
      2.   To reject license applications, suspend or revoke for cause all
local licenses issued to persons for premises within the Village's
jurisdiction. The violation of any of the provisions of this article by such
licensee or applicant shall be deemed to be sufficient cause for suspension
hereunder. A licensee knowingly, recklessly, or repeatedly violating any of the
provisions of this article or any rules promulgated hereunder or knowingly
submitting materially false or misleading documents hereunder shall be deemed
to be sufficient cause for revocation hereunder.
      3.   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of this article or the statutes of the state have been or are being
violated, and at such time to examine said premises, every article or other
thing of value pawned or pledged, and books and records of said licensee in
connection therewith.
      4.   To receive complaints that any of the provisions of this article,
any rules or regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or statutes of the state,
have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner
herein provided.
      5.   To receive local license fees and pay same forthwith to the Village
Finance Director.
      6.   To keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such licenses
issued by the Village Board. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-4B-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall own or operate within the Village any pawnbroker's
establishment, without first obtaining a license therefor as hereinafter
provided.
Each such license shall terminate one year from the date of issuance. Any
licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration thereof, provided the
applicant is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which
such renewal license is sought is suitable for such purpose; provided further,
that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a
vested right which shall, in any case, prevent the Board from decreasing the
number of licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction.
No more than three (3) such pawnbroker licenses shall be in force at any one
time.
No pawnbroker shall conduct the business of a secondhand dealer, buying and
selling secondhand property, without having obtained the license required for
such dealer in addition to his or her pawnbroker's license. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-
2016)
8-4B-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSES:
Applications for such license shall be made to the Chief of Police, in writing,
signed by the applicant if an individual, or by a duly sworn agent thereof if a
corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following
statements and information:
   A.   The name, age, date of birth, and address of the applicant, in the case
of an individual; in the case of a partnership, the persons entitled to share
in the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation, the date of
incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, a summary of its
activities during the past year, and the names and addresses of the officers,
directors, all persons owning directly or beneficially more than five percent
(5%) of the stock of such corporation, and the person(s) managing the premises.
   B.   A detailed description of the business of the applicant, and, in the
case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
   C.   The length of time said applicant has been in this type of business, or
in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was issued and a copy
of the charter.
   D.   The location and description of the premises or place of business which
is to be operated under such license, including security devices and systems
which will be installed on the premises.
   E.   A statement whether the applicant has made application for a similar or
other license on premises other than described in the application, and the
disposition of such application.
   F.   A statement that the applicant is not disqualified to receive a license
by reason of any matter or thing contained in this article, laws of the state,
or the ordinances of the Village, and a statement as to whether the applicant
has ever been convicted of any felony, theft, burglary or possession of stolen
property or any other criminal offense relating to dishonesty or breach of
trust in connection with the operations of a pawnshop.
   G.   Whether a previous license issued by any state, or subdivision thereof,
has been revoked, and the reasons therefor.
   H.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
state or any ordinances of the Village in the conduct of its place of business.
   I.   The application for a license shall be accompanied by the license fee,
the amount of which is set forth in article 2 of this chapter and which sum
shall be paid in full by the applicant to the Chief of Police or the Chief's
designee who shall then forward said fee to the Finance Director for licensing
such business for the term or period of one year upon granting of such license
by the Village Board.
   J.   Each applicant for a license under the provisions of this article shall
execute to the Village a bond in the penalty amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), conditioned on the due observance of all ordinances of the
Village respecting pawnbrokers during the effective period of such license.
(Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-4B-5: RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSES:
No such license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he or she resides.
   B.   A person who has been found guilty of a felony under any federal or
state law or of the offense of theft, burglary, possession of stolen property
or of any violation of the pawnbroker's provisions of this code.
   C.   A person whose license under this article has been revoked for cause.
   D.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license under a first
application.
   E.   A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license.
   F.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning directly or beneficially in the aggregate
more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, would not be
eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason.
   G.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   H.   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
issued.
   I.   Any elected public official, or an employee of the Village or an
appointee to any board or commission of the Village, which employee or
appointee is charged with the responsibility of administering or enforcing this
article.
   J.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-4B-6: LICENSE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Transfer Of License: A license shall be purely a personal privilege,
good for not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this
article provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license will cease upon the death of the licensee and shall
not descend by laws of testate or intestate devolution.
   B.   Change In Personnel:
      1.   Any changes in partnerships, officers, directors, persons holding
directly or beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the stock or ownership
interest, or managers of establishments licensed under this article, shall be
reported, in writing, to the Chief of Police within ten (10) days of the
change. All new personnel shall meet all of the standards of this article and
must otherwise qualify to hold a pawnbroker's license. All such changes in
personnel shall be subject to review by the Chief of Police.
      2.   When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of
ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible
to hold a pawnbroker's license, said license shall terminate.
      3.   When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes
place in officers, directors, shareholders of more than five percent (5%) of
the stock, or managers, resulting in the holding of office or such shares of
stock by one who is not eligible for a license, said license shall terminate.
      4.   When a license has been issued to an individual who is no longer
eligible for a license, said license shall terminate.
      5.   When a licensee ceases to operate and closes its business premises,
said license shall terminate.
   C.   Maximum Number Of Authorized Licenses: When a license terminates, as
set forth in subsection
8-4B-6A or B of this section, the maximum number of licenses authorized to be
in force, pursuant to section
8-4B-3 of this article, shall be reduced by one for each license so terminated.
   D.   Change Of Location: A pawnbroker's license shall permit operation of a
pawnbroker's establishment only on the premises described in the application
and license. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new
location is a proper one for operation of a pawnbroker's establishment under
the laws of this state and the ordinances of the Village. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-
2016)
8-4B-7: MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
   A.   At the time of each transaction, each licensee under this article shall
enter into an accessible computer database, using LeadsOnline or other
computerized reporting system designated by the Chief of Police for reporting
transactions pursuant to this article, an accurate description in English of:
1) the goods, article or things pawned or pledged; 2) the amount of money
loaned on such items; 3) the time such items were pawned or pledged; 4) the
rate of interest to be paid on the loan; and 5) the name and address of the
person pawning or pledging the goods, article or things pawned or pledged. If
the licensee does not have internet access, the licensee shall seek permission
and approval from the Chief of Police to use an alternative reporting system
acceptable to the Chief of Police. No entry made in such database or other
approved reporting system shall be erased, obliterated or defaced.
   B.   Every pawnbroker shall require two (2) forms of identification to be
shown to him or her by each person pledging or pawning any goods, articles or
other things to the pawnbroker. At least one of the two (2) forms of
identification must list the person's name and residence address. Except as
provided in subsection
8-4B-7C of this section, at least one of the two (2) forms of identification
must be a photographic identification, issued by a federal, state or local
governmental entity. Forms of identification may include, but are not limited
to: a state driver's license, a state identification card, a passport, a
military identification card or a credit card or utility bill.
   C.   If the customer does not have a photographic identification card issued
by a federal, state or local governmental entity, the licensee shall photograph
the customer. The photograph shall be in color. On the reverse side of the
photograph, the licensee shall record the date the photograph was taken, the
person taking the photograph, the customer's name, residence address, date of
birth, social security number, gender, height and weight. If the customer has
no social security number, the licensee shall record this fact. Two (2) forms
of identification shall also be required. At least one of the two (2) forms of
identification shall list the person's name and residence address.
   D.   Whenever any such licensee shall buy any article of secondhand property
or sell any item of personal property, the information with regard to the
secondhand property purchased by the licensee and the ultimate purchaser of
such property from the licensee shall be recorded in the same manner as a
pledge, and said record shall show all information required for a pawn or
pledge. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-4B-8: REMOVAL OF IDENTIFYING MARKS PROHIBITED:
No licensee shall remove, alter or obliterate any manufacturer's make, model or
serial number, personal identification number, or identifying marks engraved or
etched upon an item of personal property that was purchased or received in
pledge until such time that the licensee becomes the legal owner of the
property. In addition, an item shall not be accepted for pledge or purchase
where the manufacturer's make, model or serial number, personal identification
number or identifying marks engraved or etched upon an item of personal
property has been removed, altered or obliterated. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-4B-9: VIDEO CAMERA SURVEILLANCE REQUIRED:
As of October 31, 1998, each pawnbroker shall be required to install, operate
and maintain a video camera surveillance system capable of recording clear and
unobstructed photographic representations of his or her customers and shall
retain the video recordings produced therefrom for at least thirty (30) days.
Said video recordings shall be subject to inspection and copying by the police
during normal business hours. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-4B-10: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
No such licensee shall receive on deposit or pledge any personal property or
other valuable thing, or shall buy any article of secondhand property before
the hour of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or after the hour of nine o'clock (9:00)
P.M. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-4B-11: SALES AND REDEMPTIONS REGULATED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to charge or collect a greater
benefit or percentage upon money advanced, and for the use and forbearance
thereof, than the rate of three percent (3%) per month. Nothing in this section
shall be construed so as to conflict with the law pertaining to usury, and the
person receiving money so advanced may hold such monies to pay any fees in
addition to interest as herein provided.
Each pawnbroker, when making a loan under this section, must disclose, in
printed form on the pawn contract, the following information to the persons
receiving the loan:
      1.   The amount of money advanced, which must be designated as the amount
financed;
      2.   The maturity date of the pawn, which must be at least thirty (30)
days after the date of the pawn;
      3.   The total pawn interest and the total service charge payable on the
maturity date, and the total of both which must be designated as the finance
charge;
      4.   The total of payments that must be paid to redeem the pledged goods
on the maturity date, which must be designated as the total of payments; and
      5.   The annual percentage rate, computed according to the regulations
adopted by the board of governors of the federal reserve system under the
federal truth in lending act.
Each pawnbroker may contract for and receive a monthly finance charge,
including interest and fees, not to exceed one-fifth (1/5) of the loan amount,
as set forth herein, for appraising, investigating title, storing and insuring
the collateral, closing the loan, making daily reports to local law enforcement
officers, including enhanced computerized reporting, complying with regulatory
requirements and for other expenses and losses of every nature whatsoever and
for all other services. Such fees, when made and collected, shall not be deemed
interest for any purpose of law.
   B.   No personal property received on deposit or pledge by any such licensed
pawnbroker shall be sold or permitted to be redeemed or removed from the place
of business of such licensed pawnbroker for the period of two (2) business
days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after the copy and statement
to be delivered to the Chief of Police shall have been delivered as required by
this article.
   C.   If the pawner or pledger fails to repay the loan during the period
specified on the pawn ticket, the pawnbroker shall automatically extend a grace
period of thirty (30) days from the default date on the loan during which the
pawnbroker shall not dispose of or sell the personal property pledged. The
parties may agree to extend or renew a loan upon terms agreed upon by the
parties, provided the terms comply with the requirements of this article.
   D.   No article of secondhand property purchased by any such licensed
pawnbroker shall be sold or removed from the place of business of such licensed
pawnbroker for the period of thirty (30) calendar days after the copy and
statement to be delivered to the Chief of Police shall have been delivered as
required by this article.
   E.   Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of each loan, deliver to the person
pawning or pledging any goods, articles or things, a memorandum or note, signed
by him or her, containing an identifying pledge number and the substance of the
entry required to be made by section 8-4B-7 of this article, and no charge
shall be made or received by any pawnbroker, loan broker or keeper of a loan
office for any such entry, memorandum or note.
   F.   Every pawnbroker, during business hours, upon the request of any
pledger presenting the memorandum herein provided for, or upon the request of
any assignee or transferee thereof presenting such memorandum, shall exhibit to
such person the article pledged and described in such memorandum. Each article
pledged shall have attached thereto a tag with the pledge number, the time when
said pledge was obtained and the amount of said pledge. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-
2016)
8-4B-12: PROHIBITED PLEDGES OR PURCHASES:
   A.   No such licensee shall take or receive in pawn or pledge for money
loaned or shall buy any property from a minor, or shall so take, receive or buy
any such property, the ownership of which is in, or which is claimed by any
minor, or which may be in the possession or under the control of any minor.
   B.   No such licensee shall take any article in pawn or buy from any person
appearing to be intoxicated or under the influence of any drug, nor from any
person known to be a thief or to have been convicted of theft, burglary,
robbery or possession of stolen property and when any person is found to be the
owner of stolen property which has been pawned or bought, and the owner has
filed a police report which evidences that ownership, such property shall be
returned to the owner thereof without the payment of the amount advanced by the
pawnbroker thereon or any costs or charges of any kind which the pawnbroker may
have placed upon the same.
   C.   No pawnbroker shall receive as a pledge, purchase, or sell, or keep on
the business premises for any reason any pistol, revolver, sawed off shotgun,
derringer, bowie knife, blackjack, dirk or other weapon of like character which
can be concealed on the person. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-4B-13: VIOLATION PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not
less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each violation in
regard to a separate transaction shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
ARTICLE 5
CATCH BASIN CLEANERS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Catch Basin Cleaners; Definition
8-5-2: Bond
8-5-3: Vehicles
8-5-4: Disposal
8-5-1: CATCH BASIN CLEANERS; DEFINITION:
A "catch basin cleaner" is a person who engages in the business of cleaning,
collecting, or transporting the contents of catch basins or sewers and refuse
by vehicle or otherwise, or in any manner professes to engage in the business
of cleaning catch basins and sewers. Provided that licensed sewer builders who
may clean catch basins or sewers shall not be required to obtain such separate
license. (1981 Code)
8-5-2: BOND:
No license shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has filed
with the Clerk a bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
conditioned to indemnify the Village for a loss, liability or damage caused by
the licensee. Either the Village or a customer of the licensee shall be
entitled to maintain an action upon said bond. (1981 Code)
8-5-3: VEHICLES:
Any vehicle or apparatus used by such catch basin cleaner in his business shall
be watertight and equipped with airtight covers. (1981 Code)
8-5-4: DISPOSAL:
It shall be unlawful for any catch basin cleaner to dispose or store any
residue from a catch basin in any place within the Village limits. (1981 Code)
ARTICLE 6
COMPREHENSIVE REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Definitions
8-6-2: License Required
8-6-3: License Application
8-6-4: License Fees
8-6-5: Prohibited Sales, Delivery; Signs
8-6-6: Prohibited Locations - Retail Tobacco Dealers
8-6-7: Minimum Age To Sell Tobacco Products Or Tobacco Accessories
8-6-8: Purchase Or Possession Of Tobacco Products Or Tobacco Accessories By
Minors
8-6-9: Certain Free Distributions Prohibited
8-6-10: Vending Machines; Locking Devices
8-6-11:    Responsibility For Agents And Employees
8-6-12:    Sale Of Improperly Packaged Tobacco Products, Tobacco Accessories Or
E-Cigarettes Prohibited
8-6-13:    Suspension; Nonrenewal; Revocation Of License; Fines And Costs
8-6-14:    Use Of Premises After Revocation
8-6-15:    Penalties
8-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words or combinations of words
are defined as follows:
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE OR E-CIGARETTE: An electronic device usually composed of a
mouthpiece, a heating element or atomizer, a battery, and electronic circuits
that provides vapor of nicotine and/or other substances which is inhaled by a
user to simulate smoking. The term includes such devices generally
manufactured, marketed or sold to resemble cigarettes, cigars, pipes, or other
smoking devices regardless of the details of the product appearance or marketed
name or as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic
cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or under any other product
or descriptor. The term "electronic cigarette" shall not include any asthma
inhaler or other similar device that has been specifically approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE SKIN: A sticker, sleeve and/or magnetic cover applied to
an electronic cigarette device as a form of decoration and/or to hide the
identity of an electronic cigarette device.
FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any tobacco or electronic cigarette product that
contains a constituent that imparts a characterizing flavor that contain
nicotine in liquid, non-leaf form. As used in this definition, the term
"characterizing flavor" means a distinguishable taste or aroma, other than the
taste or aroma of tobacco, imparted either prior to or during consumption of a
tobacco product including but not limited to tastes or aromas of menthol, mint,
wintergreen, chocolate, vanilla, honey, cocoa, any candy, any dessert, any
alcoholic beverage, any fruit, any herb, or any spice. No tobacco product shall
be determined to have a characterizing flavor solely because of the use of
additives or flavorings or the provision of ingredient information. A public
statement or claim made or disseminated by the manufacturer of a tobacco
product, or by any person authorized or permitted by the manufacturer to make
or disseminate such statement or claim, that a tobacco product has or produces
a characterizing flavor shall establish that the tobacco product is a flavored
tobacco product.
LICENSEE: Any business that is issued a tobacco dealer's license pursuant to
this article.
TOBACCO ACCESSORIES: Cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking
materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed
primarily for the smoking, vaporing or ingestion of tobacco products.
TOBACCO DEALER: Any individual, corporation, business, partnership or other
entity that engages in the sale or delivery of tobacco products or tobacco
accessories.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any product or substance containing, made or derived from
tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked,
chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed or ingested by any other
means, including, without limitation, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff,
chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, electronic cigarettes as defined herein or
other similar products that rely on vaporization or aerosolization and shall
include electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes as defined in this section.
"Tobacco product" includes any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco
product, including cartridges containing liquid nicotine. "Tobacco product"
does not include any product that has been approved by the United States food
and drug administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product and that is
marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
tobacco products, tobacco accessories or liquid nicotine products. (Ord. 16-
054, 6-6-2016, eff. 8-1-2016; amd. Ord. 19-72, 10-7-2019)
8-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away, deliver
or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or delivering
tobacco products or tobacco accessories within the Village without having first
obtained a tobacco dealer's license pursuant to this article. Said license
shall be required regardless of the method of sale or dispensing and shall
include sales and dispensing by self-help, manual service, mechanical service
or coin operated device. Said license shall be nonassignable and
nontransferable by the licensee, but may be transferred from one machine to a
replacement device. In the event a licensee chooses to offer tobacco products
or tobacco accessories for sale by means of a vending machine device
exclusively, the provisions of this section shall not be interpreted to require
an additional license and fee for the premises whereon such device is located.
Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by this code.
(Ord. 16-054, 6-6-2016, eff. 8-1-2016; amd. Ord. 19-72, 10-7-2019)
8-6-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for a license hereunder shall be made in writing to the Village and
shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of article 1 of this
chapter. (Ord. 16-054, 6-6-2016, eff. 8-1-2016)
8-6-4: LICENSE FEES:
The license fees for a tobacco license shall be as set forth in article 2 of
this chapter. (Ord. 16-054, 6-6-2016, eff. 8-1-2016)
8-6-5: PROHIBITED SALES, DELIVERY; SIGNS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell,
offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products or tobacco accessories to
any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, give away, or display
tobacco products or tobacco accessories for sale at any location where the
consumer can acquire those products through self-service, except that this
restriction shall not apply to customer self-service from vending machines as
described in section
8-6-9  of this article. All tobacco products or tobacco accessories shall be
displayed from behind a sales/service counter so that no consumer can access
tobacco products or tobacco accessories without assistance by an employee of
the licensee.
   C.   Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein
shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products
or tobacco accessories, and on or upon every vending machine which offers
tobacco products or tobacco accessories for sale. Each such sign shall be
plainly visible and shall state:
      THE SALE OF ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR TOBACCO
ACCESSORIES TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY- ONE YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW AND
THE SALE OF FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES SKINS ARE
PROHIBITED BY LAW.
   The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background; said
letters to be at least one inch (1") high.
   D.   No signs advertising the sale of tobacco products or tobacco
accessories shall be displayed on any windows, doors or other area of a
licensed establishment that are in public view from any street or sidewalk.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell,
offer for sale, give away or deliver flavored tobacco products or electronic
cigarette skins. (Ord. 16-054, 6-6-2016, eff. 8-1-2016; amd. Ord. 19-72, 10-7-
2019)
8-6-6: PROHIBITED LOCATIONS - RETAIL TOBACCO DEALERS:
   A.   No licensee engaged in the business of retail tobacco dealer shall
sell, give away, barter, exchange or otherwise deal in tobacco products or
tobacco accessories at any location that has a property line within five
hundred feet (500') of the property line of any building or other location used
primarily as a school, child care facility, or for the education or recreation
of children under twenty one (21) years of age.
   B.   The Village shall not issue any new tobacco license to engage in the
business of retail tobacco dealer at any location that has a property line
within five hundred feet (500') of the property line of a school, child care
facility, or other facility for the education or recreation of children under
twenty one (21) years of age as of January 1, 2020. This subsection B shall not
apply to: (1) renewals of licenses existing as of January 1, 2020; or (2)
applications for a new tobacco license to engage in the business of retail
tobacco dealer pursuant to a purchase of a retail tobacco business at a
location that holds such a license on or after January 1, 2020. (Ord. 19-72,
10-7-2019)
8-6-7: MINIMUM AGE TO SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR TOBACCO ACCESSORIES:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee to engage, employ or permit
any person under twenty one (21) years of age to sell tobacco products or
tobacco accessories in any licensed premises. A licensee may engage, employ or
permit a person between eighteen (18) years of age and twenty one (21) years of
age to sell tobacco products in any licensed premises until August 1, 2017.
(Ord. 16-054, 6-6-2016, eff. 8-1-2016; amd. Ord. 19-72, 10-7-2019)
8-6-8: PURCHASE OR POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR TOBACCO ACCESSORIES BY
MINORS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to purchase or possess any tobacco product or tobacco accessory as
defined in section
8-6-1  of this article, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any
false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing or possessing a
tobacco product or tobacco accessory.
   B.   Any law enforcement officer who finds a person under the age of twenty
one (21) years of age to be in possession of a tobacco product or tobacco
accessory is authorized to seize and destroy the tobacco product or tobacco
accessory. (Ord. 16-054, 6-6-2016, eff. 8-1-2016; amd. Ord. 19-72, 10-7-2019)
8-6-9: CERTAIN FREE DISTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of
selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco products or
tobacco accessories, or any employee or agent of any such licensee or such
person, in the course of such licensee's or such person's business, to
distribute, give away or deliver tobacco products or tobacco accessories free
of charge to any person in any right of way, park, playground or other property
owned by the Village, any school, any park, any public library, or other area
open to the public.
   B.   No person shall give away, barter, exchange, distribute or in any way
dispense any coupon or other price reduction instrument for any free or
nominally priced tobacco product or tobacco accessory sample in any right of
way, park, playground or other property owned by the Village, any school, any
park, any public library, or other area open to the public. This subsection B
shall not apply to coupons or price reduction instruments included in
newspapers, magazines or other publications or received by a person through the
mail or on-line. (Ord. 16-054, 6-6-2016, eff. 8-1-2016; amd. Ord. 19-72, 10-7-
2019)
8-6-10: VENDING MACHINES; LOCKING DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give away,
deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or delivering
tobacco products or tobacco accessories by use of a vending machine, except
under the following circumstances:
   A.   Such vending machine is clearly visible to the licensee or licensee's
agent and is equipped with a manual, electric or electronic locking device
controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the
age of twenty one (21) years;
   B.   Such vending machine is located on any premises where access by persons
under the age of twenty one (21) years is prohibited by law; or
   C.   Such vending machine is located on any premises where the public is
generally not permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of
employees of the business located at such premises. (Ord. 16-054, 6-6-2016,
eff. 8-1-2016; amd. Ord. 19-72, 10-7-2019)
8-6-11: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this article by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such
act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord. 16-
054, 6-6-2016, eff. 8-1-2016)
8-6-12: SALE OF IMPROPERLY PACKAGED TOBACCO PRODUCTS, TOBACCO ACCESSORIES OR E-
CIGARETTES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any retail establishment to sell, give away, barter,
exchange, or otherwise furnish to any other person any tobacco product or
tobacco accessory, including, but not limited to, a single or loose cigarette
or e-cigarette, that is not contained within a sealed package provided by the
manufacturer that has affixed to it any tax stamps required by law and that
complies with all requirements imposed by federal law regarding warnings and
other information on packages of tobacco products manufactured, packaged, or
imported for sale, distribution, or use in the United States. (Ord. 16-054, 6-
6-2016, eff. 8-1-2016; amd. Ord. 19-72, 10-7-2019)
8-6-13: SUSPENSION; NONRENEWAL; REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES AND COSTS:
   A.   The Village Manager may suspend or not renew any license issued under
the provisions of this article if he or she determines that the licensee has
violated any of the provisions of this article; or revoke any license issued
under the provisions of this article, if he or she determines that the licensee
has intentionally or repeatedly violated any of the provisions of this article.
The Village Manager may also levy a fine against the licensee in addition to a
suspension, nonrenewal or revocation of a license or in lieu of a suspension,
nonrenewal or revocation. The fine imposed shall not exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day on which a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation.
   However, no such license shall be suspended, not renewed or revoked and no
licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the Village Manager,
with a seven (7) day prior written notice to the licensee, affording the
licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in
such notice. The seven (7) day notice provisions shall begin the day following
delivery by certified mail or by personal service.
   B.   The Village Manager shall within seven (7) days after such hearing, if
he or she determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked, not
renewed or suspended, and/or that the licensee should be fined, state the
reason for such determination in a written order and either the amount of the
fine, the period of suspension or that the license has been revoked or not
renewed and serve a copy of such order within the seven (7) days upon the
licensee.
   C.   Any licensee determined by the Village Manager to have violated any of
the provisions of this article shall pay to the Village the costs of the
hearing before the Village Manager on such violation. The Village Manager shall
determine the costs incurred by the Village for said hearing, including, but
not limited to, court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records,
attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all
other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the Village or such lesser sum as the
Village Manager may allow.
   The licensee shall pay said costs to the Village within thirty (30) days of
notification of the costs by the Village Manager. Failure to pay said costs
within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this article and may
be cause for an additional license suspension, nonrenewal or revocation, or the
levy of a fine in addition to any fine previously imposed. (Ord. 16-054, 6-6-
2016, eff. 8-1-2016)
8-6-14: USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION:
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be
granted to said licensee for the period of six (6) months thereafter for the
conduct of the business of selling "tobacco products" or "tobacco accessories"
as defined in section
8-6-1  of this article, in the premises described in such revoked license.
(Ord. 16-054, 6-6-2016, eff. 8-1-2016; amd. Ord. 19-72, 10-7-2019)
8-6-15: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person convicted of violating section
8-6-8  of this article shall be ordered to complete a community based
education, counseling or treatment program.
   B.   Any person convicted of violating any section of this article other
than section
8-6-8  of this article, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a first
offense, and not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than one
thousand dollars ($1000.00) for any subsequent offense in addition to the
penalties set forth in section
8-6-13  of this article with regard to an applicable license. Any fines issued
pursuant to this subsection shall be used to fund compliance checks of
licensees. (Ord. 16-054, 6-6-2016, eff. 8-1-2016; amd. Ord. 19-72, 10-7-2019)
ARTICLE 7
CONTRACTOR'S STORAGE YARD, COAL OR LUMBER YARD
SECTION:
8-7-1: Definition
8-7-2: Regulations
8-7-1: DEFINITION:
A "contractor's storage yard" is a place where stone, gravel, sand, cement,
tile sewer pipe or other building material is stored or kept for sale. A "coal
yard" is a place where coal is stored or kept for sale. A "lumber yard" is a
place where lumber is stored, cut, milled or kept for sale.
8-7-2: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to store coal, coke, lumber or other material in such a
way that it can fall down upon, or on to, any adjoining property, street,
sidewalk, alley or public way, or so as to endanger any person or property upon
such street, sidewalk, alley or public way.
ARTICLE 8
DATING SERVICES
SECTION:
8-8-1: Dating Service; Definition
8-8-2: Application for License
8-8-3: Issuance of License
8-8-4: Register of Employees
8-8-5: Revocation or Suspension of License
8-8-6: Required Facilities
8-8-7: Membership Limited to Persons 18 Years of Age and Older
8-8-8: Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited
8-8-9: Hours
8-8-10: Maintenance of Client List
8-8-11: Conduct of Members
8-8-12: Name and Place of Business
8-8-13: Transfer
8-8-1: DATING SERVICE; DEFINITION:
A "dating service" is a service whereby a person's name and other information
is maintained on file and for a fee that name is referred to other persons for
the purpose of making dates or otherwise facilitating social contacts. A
"dating service" is also a place or club maintained for the purpose of
establishing social contacts by the members where a fee is charged for this
service.
8-8-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Every applicant for a license for a dating service shall file an application
under oath with the Village Clerk as provided for in Article 1 of this Chapter.
Hereinafter all provisions which refer to "applicant" include an applicant
which may be a corporation or partnership and all of the relevant persons
thereof. In addition to the basic information required by Section
8-1-2, each application shall contain the following information:
   A.   A definition of service to be provided.
   B.   The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the
business is to be conducted.
   C.   If applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses of
each stockholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the
corporation.
   D.   The two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present address
of the applicant.
   E.   Proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
   F.   Individual or partnership applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and
hair, and sex.
   G.   Copy of identification for each applicant such as driver's license and
social security card.
   H.   One portrait photograph of the applicant at least two inches by two
inches (2" x 2") and a complete set of applicant's fingerprints which shall be
taken by the Chief of Police or his agent. If the applicant is a corporation,
one portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches (2" x 2") of all
officers and managing agents of said corporation and a complete set of the same
officers' and agents' fingerprints which shall be taken by the Chief of Police
or his agent. If the applicant is a partnership, one front-face portrait
photograph at least two inches by two inches (2" x 2") in size of each partner,
including a limited partner in said partnership, and a complete set of each
partner's or limited partner's fingerprints which shall be taken by the Chief
of Police or his agent.
   I.   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three (3)
years immediately preceding the date of application.
   J.   The business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in
previously operating in this or another village or state has had a business
license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or
occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation.
   K.   All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place convicted.
   L.   The name and address of any dating service business or other
establishment wherein the business or profession of dating service is carried
on owned or operated by each applicant.
   M.   A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises
or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant.
   N.   Such other identification and information necessary to discover the
truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the
application.
8-8-3: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The Village Clerk shall issue the license for the dating service unless, based
on the investigation of the application, the Clerk shall find:
   A.   That facts have been altered, concealed or otherwise omitted from the
application.
   B.   The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders holding
more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation, any of the
officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of partners,
including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the holder of
any lien, of any nature, upon the business and/or the equipment used therein;
or the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business, have been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of
an offense without the State of Illinois that would have constituted any of the
following offenses if committed within the State of Illinois:
      1.   An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person
of another that amounts to a felony; or
      2.   An offense involving sexual misconduct; or
      3.   An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons
that amounts to a felony.
The Village may issue a license or permit to any person convicted of any of the
crimes described in paragraphs 1, 2 or 3 of this subsection if it finds that
such conviction occurred at least five (5) years prior to the date of the
application and the applicant has had no subsequent felony convictions of any
nature and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions for crimes mentioned in this
Section.
   C.   The applicant has had a license denied, revoked or suspended by the
Village or any other State or local agency within five (5) years prior to the
date of the application.
   D.   The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors,
if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not over the age of
eighteen (18) years.
8-8-4: REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES:
The licensee shall maintain a register of all persons employed by the dating
service. Such register shall be available for inspection by representatives of
the Village during regular business hours.
8-8-5: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued for a dating service establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Village after notice and a hearing, for good cause, or in any
case where any of the provisions of this Article are violated, or where any
employee of the licensee is engaged in any conduct which violates any State or
local law or ordinance at licensee's place of business and the licensee has
actual or constructive knowledge by due diligence. Such permit may also be
revoked or suspended by the Village after notice and hearing, upon the
recommendations of the Health Inspector that such business is being managed,
conducted or maintained without regard to proper sanitation and hygiene. Such
revocation proceedings shall be as prescribed in Sections 8-1-14 and 8-1-15
herein.
8-8-6: REQUIRED FACILITIES:
No license to conduct a dating service shall be issued unless the establishment
containing the dating service complies with the following requirements:
   A.   Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When
employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time,
separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. If more than fifteen
(15) persons of any sex shall be on the premises at any one time, one
additional water closet shall be provided for each such fifteen (15) or more
persons.
   B.   Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water
shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule thereof. Lavatories
or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary
towels.
8-8-7: MEMBERSHIP LIMITED TO PERSONS 18 YEARS OF AGE AND OLDER:
No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted to be a member of
the dating service or to be on the premises of any such dating service.
8-8-8: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED:
No person shall consume, sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be
sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the
premises of any dating service.
8-8-9: HOURS:
No dating service shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of
Midnight and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
8-8-10: MAINTENANCE OF CLIENT LIST:
The licensee shall maintain a register of all clients of the dating service
including at least the following information: name, address, occupation and
age. Such client list shall be available for inspection by the Chief of Police
or his representative during regular business hours.
8-8-11: CONDUCT OF MEMBERS:
The commission of an act of rape, prostitution, public indecency, soliciting
for prostitution or pandering as defined in the Criminal Code of the State of
Illinois of 1961 by a member of a dating service while in the course of dating
another person through a referral by the dating service shall constitute
grounds for revocation of the license of the dating service.
8-8-12: NAME AND PLACE OF BUSINESS:
No person granted a license pursuant to this Article shall operate the dating
service establishment under a name not specified in the license, nor shall
business be conducted under any designation or location not specified in the
license.
8-8-13: TRANSFER:
No license or permit shall be transferable except with the consent of the
Village and ratified by the Board of Trustees. An application for such transfer
shall be in writing. The written application for such transfer shall contain
the same information as requested herein for initial application for the
license or permit.
ARTICLE 9
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
8-9-1: Electrical Contractor; Definition
8-9-2: Regulations
8-9-1: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR; DEFINITION:
Any person engaged in the business of installing or altering by contract
electrical equipment for the utilization of electricity for light, heat or
power. But the term "electrical contractor" shall not include the installing or
altering of (a) radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds
and signals, or (b) apparatus, conductors or other equipment installed for or
by the public utilities, including common carriers, which are under the
jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission, for use in their operation as
public utilities. Nor shall the term include the employees employed by an
electrical contractor to do or supervise his work.
8-9-2: REGULATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person registered under the provisions of
this Article to install any electrical appliances, wiring or fixtures without
first having obtained a permit to do so.
   B.   Any "electrical contractor" who is registered in any other municipality
in this State must register in Oak Park but shall not be required to pay a fee
for being registered in the Village.
ARTICLE 10
FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS
SECTION:
8-10-1: Factories and Workshops; Definitions
8-10-2: Sanitary Requirements
8-10-1: FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS; DEFINITIONS:
The terms "factory" or "workshop" as used in this Article shall mean any
building, room, premises or establishment where any goods, products,
commodities or merchandise is manufactured, finished, printed, engraved,
altered, repaired, cleaned or renovated, for sale or for wages.
This Article shall not apply to places or establishments specifically defined
and required to be licensed by other provisions of this Code.
8-10-2: SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:
Every factory or workshop shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No
person carrying any contagious or infectious disease shall be employed in any
such factory or workshop. All refuse and waste shall be removed and disposed of
at least once a day. Adequate ventilation, washing and toilet facilities shall
be provided in accordance with the provisions of the State of Illinois, "Health
and Safety Act".
ARTICLE 11
FLORISTS
SECTION:
8-11-1: Florist; Definition
8-11-2: Sanitary and Safety Requirements
8-11-3: Sale of Christmas Trees; Deposit
8-11-1: FLORIST; DEFINITION:
"Florist" shall mean any person engaged in the business of selling, at
wholesale or retail, flowers, shrubs, trees, ornamental plants, bridal
bouquets, funeral floral designs or growing plants.
8-11-2: SANITARY AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
No licensee hereunder shall permit any dead or dying vegetation to remain on or
upon the premises so as to cause noxious or disagreeable odors.
8-11-3: SALE OF CHRISTMAS TREES; DEPOSIT:
   A.   No person other than a florist shall engage in the business of selling
Christmas trees without first having obtained a license therefor.
   B.   The application for a license shall be accompanied by a deposit of one
hundred dollars ($100.00). The licensee shall notify the Village Clerk within
forty eight (48) hours after December 25 of each year that the sale of trees
has terminated. The fire inspector shall thereupon inspect the premises; and if
he finds that all debris has been removed, the one hundred dollar ($100.00)
deposit shall be returned to the licensee. If the debris remains on the
premises, the Village Clerk shall cause same to be removed and pay the cost of
removal out of the one hundred dollar ($100.00) deposit. The balance of the
deposit, if any, shall be returned to the licensee.
ARTICLE 12
PARKING GARAGES AND PARKING LOTS
SECTION:
8-12-1: Definitions
8-12-2: Garage License Application; Information to be Given
8-12-3: Inspections
8-12-4: Parking Lot License Application; Information to be Given
8-12-5: Submission of Plans
8-12-6: Barriers
8-12-7: Adjacent Sidewalk and Driveway Maintenance
8-12-8: Pavement Maintenance
8-12-9: Lighting
8-12-10: Pavement Construction
8-12-11: Alignment of Cars
8-12-12: Driveways
8-12-13: Fire Equipment
8-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article the following terms and words shall have the
following meanings, and are hereby defined as follows:
ATTENDANT PARKING or STORAGE PARKING: "Attendant parking" or "storage parking"
shall be interpreted to mean the storing or parking of cars or motor vehicles
on a parking lot, abutting each other so as to restrict the mobility of the
cars and the access to the cars, which shall include but not be limited to used
car parking lots and parking lots operated with attendant car parking.
PARKING GARAGE: "Parking Garage" is a building or structure used for the
storing or parking of more than four (4) motor-driven vehicles; "storing and
parking" shall include, but not be limited to, the storing, parking or display
of motor-driven vehicles for sale, exchange or repair. Such definition,
however, shall not apply to a facility operated by a public entity for the use
of the general public.
PARKING LOT: "Parking lot" is any parcel of land used for storing or parking of
vehicles having a capacity for more than four (4) automobiles; excluding
however, places where vehicles are stored or parked within a building.
SELF PARKING: "Self parking" shall be construed to mean the storing or parking
of a car or motor vehicle on a parking lot in a marked stall by the operator of
the vehicle, permitting access to the car and unrestricted exit of the car, and
shall be classified as to the following types:
   A.   "Short term parking" is usage of parking lots for less than three (3)
hours by a particular vehicle.
   B.   "Long term parking" is usage of the parking lot for more than three (3)
hours by a particular vehicle.
8-12-2: GARAGE LICENSE APPLICATION; INFORMATION TO BE GIVEN:
Application for a parking lot license shall be made by the person intending to
operate a garage, upon a form furnished by the Village Clerk, setting forth in
addition to that required by Article 1 of this Chapter, the following:
   A.   The number of motor-driven vehicles which may at any one time be stored
upon the premises.
   B.   Whether or not the premises are to be used for the sale,
exchange or repair of motor-driven vehicles.
8-12-3: INSPECTIONS:
All garages, as defined in this Article, shall be inspected by the Chief of the
Fire Department periodically to determine if the provisions of all applicable
ordinances are being complied with.
8-12-4: PARKING LOT LICENSE APPLICATION; INFORMATION TO BE GIVEN:
Application for a parking lot license shall be made by the person intending to
operate a parking lot, upon a form furnished by the Village Clerk, setting
forth, in addition to that required by Article 1 of this Chapter, the
following:
   A.   The number of vehicles which may at any one time be stored upon the
premises.
   B.   The type of usage of the parking lot (as defined in Section
8-12-1) and the hours during which the vehicles may be stored.
   C.   Whether premises are to be used for the sale or exchange of vehicles.
   D.   Each application shall be accompanied by plats or drawings of such
parking lot showing the location, size, capacity, driveways, dimensions and
arrangement of parking stalls, location(s) and size(s) of drainage structures
and sewers, the type of lighting (if lighting is required in accordance with
Section
8-12-9 of this Article), type and thickness of the parking lot pavement
structure, elevations of existing and/or proposed adjacent public walk and
pavement area (indicting the nature of the storm water run-off), locations of
barriers (as required by Section
8-12-6 of this Article), and any other details which the Village may require.
8-12-5: SUBMISSION OF PLANS:
Two (2) copies of said plat or drawing shall be submitted with the application
to the Village Clerk: one for the Clerk and one for the Director of Public
Works for his approval.
8-12-6: BARRIERS:
All owners, operators or maintainers of parking lots shall maintain a
substantial barrier on or adjacent to the property lines, and barriers shall be
so located that no portion of any vehicle parked on a lot shall extend over the
property lines.
8-12-7: ADJACENT SIDEWALK AND DRIVEWAY MAINTENANCE:
Each licensee having a license as required by this Article shall keep the
sidewalks surrounding the parking lot and all driveway entrances and exits free
from dirt, ice, sleet and snow and shall keep same in safe condition for the
travel of pedestrians.
8-12-8: PAVEMENT MAINTENANCE:
Persons operating parking lots shall maintain same to provide a smooth and
durable surface which is free from pot holes and other structural defects, and
adequately drained and free from dust.
Snow removal: Each parking lot shall be kept free from any accumulation of snow
in excess of four inches (4"), providing this provision shall not prohibit the
piling of snow on said lots temporarily in areas not used for parking so long
as said piling of snow does not interfere with ingree or egress to the parking
spaces.
8-12-9: LIGHTING:
When night parking is permitted, parking lots shall be lighted from sunset to
sunrise.
The lights shall be so arranges as to reflect the light away from adjoining
lots and shall provide a distribution of light which is ample to distinguish
silhouettes. Proper shades shall be used to control such installations to
prevent glare and light from infringing upon adjoining properties.
Open bulbs shall not be permitted.
8-12-10: PAVEMENT CONSTRUCTION:
Parking lot pavement constructed after May 2, 1966 shall meet the followin
structural minimum requirements:
   A.   Flexible Pavement: An eight inch (8") macadam base course or other
materials of the required thickness to obtain the same structural equivalence,
and a two inch (2") surface course consisting of bituminous, plant mix,
materials.
   B.   Rigid Pavement: A six inch (6") Portland cement concrete pavement
constructed in accordance with recommendations published by the Portland Cement
Association.
   C.   Conformance: All materials and construction procedures shall be in
conformance with the specifications provided in the Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction, adopted by the Illinois Department of
Transportation.
The pavement shall be graded so that the surface storm water will not run off
into adjacent private or public properties. Said storm water shall be collected
within the parking lot by drainage structures which shall be connected to the
Village sewer system by underground storm sewers of adequate size. As a guide
for drainage requirements, one catch basin shall be required for any area up to
and including ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Ord. 1986-0-38, 5-5-86)
8-12-11: ALIGNMENT OF CARS:
All parking lots with self parking usage shall have stalls marked for each
vehicle to be parked. The arrangement and size of the stalls and aisles shall
conform to the minimum standards as shown in Exhibit A at the end of this
Section. However, parking lots located in an "R-6" or less restrictive zoning
district may include one or more pairs of stalls located end to end, with one
of the stalls having access to the aisle only via its companion stall, provided
that: a) both vehicles occupying such stalls are owned by persons residing in
the same dwelling unit or by persons employed at the same business, commercial
or other permitted establishment; b) no other stall's access is impeded; and c)
the lot otherwise complies with all standards shown in Exhibit A at the end of
this Section.
All parking lots with attendant parking or storage parking usage shall provide
one hundred eighty (180) square feet of pavement area for each vehicle to be
parked and a clear aisle space through the parking lot for emergency service.
A maximum of ten percent (10%) of the total number of spaces in any parking
garage or parking lot used by the general public may be designated as "Compact
Car Only" spaces. Each space shall be marked or signed in such a way to
distinguish it as a "compact car only" space. In private parking garages and
parking lots where the spaces are assigned to specific vehicles, a maximum of
twenty percent (20%) of the total number of spaces may be designated as
"Compact Car Only" spaces. Also, each space should be marked or signed in such
a way to distinguish the space as a compact car only space, as referenced in
Exhibit A.
   EXHIBIT A
   PARKING DIMENSIONS AND DEFINITIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3300.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3302.gif]
(Ord. 1999-0-22, 6-21-99)
8-12-12: DRIVEWAYS:
Each parking garage or parking lot shall have not more than two (2) driveways
leading to and from the garage or lot over the public sidewalks, along any
given street. Driveways shall be at least twenty five feet (25') from the curb
line of any intersection street. (Ord. 1986-0-38, 5-5-86)
8-12-13: FIRE EQUIPMENT:
Parking garages shall be equipped with proper fire extinguishing apparatus
subject to the approval of the Fire Department of the Village and all vehicles
shall be so stored that they may be reached readily in case of fire or other
emergency. (Ord. 1986-0-38, 5-5-86)
ARTICLE 13
ADULT DAY CARE CENTERS
SECTION:
8-13-1: Definitions
8-13-2: License
8-13-3: Licensing Requirements
8-13-4: License Revocation
8-13-5: Hearing
8-13-6: Operational Standards
8-13-7: Services Required
8-13-8: Plant and Equipment Standards
8-13-9: Personnel Requirements
8-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
DAY CARE: A program of services provided under health leadership in an
ambulatory care setting for adults who do not require twenty four (24) hour
institutional care and yet, due to physical and/or mental impairment, are in
need of a protective environment. The essential elements of a day care program
are directed toward maintaining physical and mental health. Day care shall
provide a maximum of twelve (12) hours care to any one individual within a
twenty four (24) hour period.
APPLICANT: Any person making application for a license of a day care facility.
OWNER: In the case of a licensee who is an individual means the licensee, and
in the case of a corporation, partnership or association, licensee means each
member thereof.
LICENSE: The certificate issued by the Village that allows the licensee to
open, conduct, manage or maintain an adult day care facility and advertise as
such.
8-13-2: LICENSE:
No adult day care center shall be operated without first obtaining a license
therefor as provided in Article 1 of this Chapter.
The license fee shall be as set forth in Article 2 of this Chapter.
8-13-3: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
The terms of the adult day care license require that:
   A.   The facility demonstrates compliance with the adult care standards of
this Article.
   B.   The number of adults specified on the license shall be the maximum
allowed in the center at any one time.
   C.   The facility shall operate within the conditions that are specified on
the license document.
8-13-4: LICENSE REVOCATION:
A license may be revoked or renewal denied for:
   A.   Cruelty or indifference to the welfare of a participant; or
   B.   Violations of any provisions of this Article or of the minimum
standards, rules, regulations or orders of the Village.
8-13-5: HEARING:
A hearing on issues related to the licensing of an adult day care center shall
be held before the Board of Health which shall be designated as the "hearing
board" by the Trustees. Said hearing shall follow all provisions of Section
8-1-15 of this Code except as modified by specific language contained in this
Section.
The decision of the Board of Health shall be final.
8-13-6: OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
Each adult day care center must have and follow a written policy which shall
cover the following:
   A.   Each program shall have admission policies. Admission policies shall be
in writing as a part of the program policy statement and shall define who can
be served.
   B.   Area hospitals, rehabilitation centers, mental health facilities and/or
other health facilities or providers shall be described as used for client
referral. The client's medical and/or psychiatric physician must be consulted
when additional professional consultation is needed.
   C.   Personnel policies shall specify the educational and experience
qualifications for each position category of the staff of the day care program.
   D.   Each facility shall have an established emergency medical plan
consisting of:
      1.   The availability of hospitalization and emergency room care.
      2.   A written agreement signed by the participant, if capable, or his
responsible caretaker, to grant permission to transport the participant in need
of emergency care to the designated hospital or other type facility.
      3.   An established procedure to be followed in an emergency which covers
immediate care of the client, persons to be notified and reports to be
prepared.
   E.   Procedures stating mechanisms to follow in the case of fire or other
natural disaster.
   F.   A written individualized client treatment plan will be established in
collaboration with the team of the daycare program. The treatment plan is:
      1.   Based on a preadmission physical examination and recommendations of
the client's personal physician, and an assessment made by the team of the
daycare program.
      2.   A record system that maintains a complete file on each participant
and requires:
         a.   Confidentiality: Records shall be maintained so that they are
accessible only to the director, staff and to funding and monitoring agencies.
The center may not discuss or reveal the contents of the records without the
client's or the client's caretaker's permission.
         b.   Client Information: The records to be kept by the center shall
contain:
            (1)   Identifying information consisting of the client's name,
address, telephone number, sex, age, the name of the person to be notified in
case of emergency, next of kin, travel directions between home and the center
when necessary.
            (2)   Functional (physical and psychosocial) assessment original
and revised versions noting participant progress.
            (3)   Individual plan of care.
            (4)   Physician's report, including admission medical assessment
and subsequent additional information.
            (5)   Medications.
            (6)   Accident report.
            (7)   A periodic update to reflect the client's current condition
and staff interventions.
The treatment plan will reflect identified client needs, staff interventions to
meet these needs and predicted or expected client results.
Progress notes will be maintained to document client changes and give direction
to the periodic revisions of the treatment plan. (1981 Code)
8-13-7: SERVICES REQUIRED:
The following services shall be provided:
   A.   Nutrition Services: The center shall make provision for one meal a day
and snacks. Provision for special diets is not mandatory unless participants
requiring special diets are admitted.
   B.   Exercise And Rest: Opportunity for physical exercise designed in
relation to the individual's impairments and needs shall be provided and shall
be alternated with indicated rest periods.
   C.   Observation: The health, functional status, and adherence to prescribed
medical regimen shall be observed and documented.
   D.   Consultation With Medical And/Or Psychiatric Physician: The director
shall communicate as indicated with the participant's physician to report
observed changes in health status, including reaction to medicine and to obtain
current medical recommendations regarding such items as diet and medications.
Assistance in locating a regular source of healthcare shall be provided to
participants without a physician. Medical supervision remains the continuing
responsibility of each client's personal physician.
   E.   Optional Services: The following services are not mandated unless
participants are admitted requiring these services:
      1.   Nursing Services: The daycare center shall provide nursing services
where medication dispensing, treatments, physical restoration or rehabilitative
services are provided.
      2.   Diet Modifications: The center shall make provision for special
diets and other diet modifications as ordered by a physician. (1981 Code)
8-13-8: PLANT AND EQUIPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Building: All adult daycare facilities must comply with those
provisions of the Oak Park building code relative to the institutional use
group classification, subject to the following additions and modifications:
      1.   Resident or client areas must be located at grade level or no more
than four feet (4') above grade level when provided with ramps.
      2.   All exit doors must swing in the direction of exit travel, and if
latched when closed, must be equipped with approved panic hardware.
      3.   The applicable provisions of the Oak Park building code relating to
the physically handicapped and aged must be satisfied.
      4.   For the purpose of determining maximum occupancy load limits, the
following areas shall not be included in such calculations: offices, storage
rooms, furnace rooms, water closet compartments, food preparation rooms,
examination or dining rooms, unless the latter are also used for activities.
      5.   Minimum occupant space requirements shall be:
         a.   Ambulatory person with mobility limitations: Eighty (80) square
feet of floor space for each person.
("Ambulatory persons with mobility limitations" are defined as persons who are
unable to walk readily or freely with ease. In order to move safely and
efficiently, these individuals rely on the aid of a wheelchair or mechanical
device. These mechanical devices are defined as Canadian crutch, walkers, leg
braces, canes: tripod, quadpod and hemicrutch. Ordinary crutches and standard
canes are excluded.)
         b.   Ambulatory persons with no mobility limitations: Fifty (50)
square feet of floor space for each person.
      6.   A full automatic fire alarm system (smoke detector connected to the
Village Communications Center) shall be provided in that portion of a building
devoted to the daycare operation.
      7.   Boiler rooms, storage rooms, workshops and hazardous areas as
determined by the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be sprinklered
when located within, underneath or adjacent to that portion of a building
devoted to the daycare operation.
Until the sprinkler system and automatic fire alarm system required above are
installed, each room, boiler room, storage room, workshop and any other
hazardous areas, as determined by the Chief of the Fire Department, shall be
equipped with smoke detector devices.
      8.   The sanitary facilities and physical construction in food
preparation areas must comply with all applicable requirements of the current
edition of the state of Illinois, food services sanitation rules and
regulations.
   B.   Equipment:
      1.   Facility equipment and furnishings shall be adequate to meet the
needs of participants and staff and enable efficient operation of the program.
All equipment and furnishings shall be in good condition and safe for use by
all participants and staff of the facility.
      2.   Table space shall be adequate for all participants to be served a
meal at a table at the same time.
      3.   An isolated quiet area shall be provided with a bed or cot so that a
participant who may become ill can be separated from other persons to prevent
possible spread of communicable diseases and can lie down in the event of
weakness.
      4.   Water closets and lavatories shall be provided as required in
section 82.153 of the Oak Park plumbing code.
      5.   A drinking fountain and/or faucet with disposable cups will be
available and accessible to participants.
      6.   All rugs and floor coverings must be securely fastened down. Floors
shall not be slippery.
      7.   Storage areas must be adequate in size and number for storage of
cleaning materials, household supplies, food, equipment and program supplies. A
separate locked area for storing poisons, chemicals or other potentially
harmful products (cleaning fluids, disinfectants, etc.) shall be provided.
   C.   Food Handling: All food service operations, whether catered or prepared
on site, must comply with all applicable requirements of the state of Illinois,
food service sanitation rules and regulations, 1975 edition and the provisions
of the Oak Park Village Code, relating article 24, "Foods And Food
Establishments", of this chapter.
   D.   General Sanitation: The facility shall be cleaned daily and kept in a
sanitary condition at all times. Sections of village of Oak Park Code, relating
to garbage, trash and weeds and nuisances, referencing general sanitation shall
apply. (1981 Code)
8-13-9: PERSONNEL REQUIREMENTS:
An adult daycare staff shall have the skill and competence necessary to
contribute to each client's physical, intellectual, personal, emotional and
social development.
   A.   Director: The director shall have a college bachelors degree that
identifies him or her as a health, social service and/or allied health
professional.
The director shall designate a qualified alternate to serve in his/her absence.
   B.   Staff: Adequate staff will be available daily to provide for client
needs in safety, protection and programmatic activities.
   C.   Staff Qualifications: It is recommended that the staff have a
background in human, physical, psychosocial concepts and appropriate working
experiences. Red Cross first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation training is
desirable. (1981 Code)
ARTICLE 14
DAY AND NIGHT CARE CENTERS AND HOMES
SECTION:
8-14-1: Definitions
8-14-2: License Required
8-14-3: Application
8-14-4: License Fee
8-14-5: Inspection
8-14-6: State Regulations Adopted
8-14-7: Issuance of License
8-14-8: Revocation of License
8-14-9: Hearing
8-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby defined
as follows:
DAY CARE CENTER: Any child care facility receiving more than eight (8) children
for daytime care during all or part of a day. The term "day care center"
includes facilities commonly called "child care centers", "day nurseries",
"nursery schools", "kindergartens", "play groups" and "centers or workshops for
mentally or physically handicapped" with or without State educational purposes.
The term does not include (a) kindergartens or nursery schools or other daytime
programs operated by public or private elementary school systems or secondary
level school units or institutions of higher learning which serve children five
(5) years of age and older; (b) any type of day care center that is conducted
on Federal government premises; or (c) special activities programs, including
athletics, crafts instruction and similar activities conducted on an organized
and periodic basis by civic, charitable and governmental organizations.
DAY CARE HOMES: Family homes which receive not more than eight (8) children for
regular ongoing care during the day. The maximum of eight (8) children includes
the family's natural or adopted children under age sixteen (16) and those
children who are in the home under full time care as set forth in the Illinois
Child Care Act of 1969.
CHILD CARE FACILITY: Any person, group of persons, agency, association or
organization, whether established for gain or otherwise, who or which receives
or arranges for care or placement of one or more children, unrelated to the
operator of the facility, apart from the parents, with or without the transfer
of the right of custody in any facility as defined in the Illinois Child Care
Act of 1969, established and maintained for the care of children.
CHILD CARE CENTERS: Day care centers which receive preschool or school-age
children, or both, for short term or extended hours of care, or out of school
hours, and which provide essential personal care, protection, supervision,
training and programs to meet the needs of the children served.
DAY NURSERIES: Day care centers which receive preschool-age children for short
term or extended hours of care, and which provide essential personal care,
protection, supervision, training and programs to meet the needs of the
individual children served.
NURSERY SCHOOL: Day care centers which receive children between the ages of two
(2) and six (6) years and which are established and professionally operated
primarily for educational purposes to meet the development needs of the
children served.
KINDERGARTENS: Day care centers which receive children between the ages of four
(4)and six (6) years, and which are established and professionally operated to
conduct educational programs for early childhood development.
PLAY GROUP: Day care centers which receive preschool or school-age children, or
both, for relatively short periods of time, not to exceed three (3) hours per
day for any child or group of children, and which provides services and
programs designed to meet the recreational, physical, emotional and
developmental needs of the individual children served.
CENTERS OR WORKSHOPS FOR MENTALLY OR PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED: Day care centers
receiving mentally retarded or physically handicapped children, for short
periods or extended hours, and which provide services and programs to meet the
children's needs for care, protection and training.
NIGHT CARE FACILITIES: Centers or family homes in which children are received
for periodic care during the night when a single parent, or both parents, are
absent from home because of employment, emergency or other reasonable
circumstance, and the children are in need of supervision during sleeping
hours. A facility may be licensed for either day care or night-time care, or
both, if circumstances permit, and whether the same children are served
according to the work shifts of their parents or other circumstances. "Night
care facilities" are further defined as follows:
   A.   "Night-time center" means a facility which is established to receive
nine (9) or more children, but not to exceed twenty (20) children, for night-
time care.
   B.   "Night-time home" means a family home which receives no more than eight
(8) children, including the family's own children under age eighteen (18) for
night-time care.
8-14-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to operate a day or night care center or facility under
any above definition, in the Village without first obtaining a license
therefor. Operators of day care homes must register with the office of the
Village Clerk.
8-14-3: APPLICATION:
Application for a license to conduct and operate a day care center shall be
made in conformity with the general requirements of the Village relating to
applications for licenses as contained in Article 1 of this Chapter. The
application shall be under oath and shall additionally contain:
   A.   The location of the day care center for which a license is sought;
   B.   The number of children to be cared for;
   C.   The number of children that can reasonably be handled in the space
available;
   D.   The name of the person or persons under whose management or supervision
the day or night care center will be conducted;
   E.   Such information relating to the number, experience and training of
employees of the day or night care center, and of the moral character of the
applicant and employees as the Department of Health may deem necessary.
8-14-4: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee to conduct a day or night care center shall be as set
forth in Article 2 of this Chapter. Operators of day care homes shall pay an
annual registration fee of five dollars ($5.00)
8-14-5: INSPECTION:
The Department of Health, the Fire Department and the Department of Buildings
shall make a thorough inspection of the premises and facilities proposed to be
licensed including an inspection of any transportation vehicle proposed to be
used for the transportation of children in the charge of the day or night care
center at least once a year, or as often as necessary.
8-14-6: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The requirements of the Child Care Act of 1969 as amended (chapter 23, Illinois
Revised Statutes, 1977, sections 2211, et seq.) are adopted by reference as
part of this Article including sections 17 and 18 (chapter 23, sections 2212-17
and 2212-18). The rules and regulations of the State of Illinois Department of
Children and Family Services entitled Licensing Standards-Day and Night Care
Centers effective January 1, 1978 and those applicable to day care homes are
adopted by reference as part of this Article. Three (3) copies of both
referenced rules and regulations are to be kept on file in the office of the
Village Clerk. It is further provided, however, that for the purposes of this
Article, the term "day or night care center" shall include: child care centers
which exclusively serve, or that portion of the center which serves,
handicapped children between the ages of three (3) and twenty one (21) and
which are registered and approved as meeting standards of the Illinois Office
of Education and applicable fire marshal standards.
8-14-7: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
If the premises, operators and vehicles of the proposed day or night care
center conform to the requirements of this Article and all other applicable
ordinances of the Village and requirements of the State of Illinois, then upon
payment of the required fee the Clerk shall issue the license.
8-14-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A day or night care center license may be denied or revoked for violation of
the provisions of this Article or of the State Statute entitled "Licensing
Standards for Day and Night Care Centers" and the rules, regulations and
minimum standards promulgated thereunder.
8-14-9: HEARING:
A hearing on issues related to the licensing of a day or night care center
shall be held before the Board of Health which shall be designated as the
"hearing board" by the Board of Trustees.
Said hearing shall follow all provisions of Section
8-1-15 of this Code except as modified by specific language contained in this
Section.
The decision of the Board of Health shall be final.
ARTICLE 15
JUNK DEALERS
SECTION:
8-15-1: Definitions
8-15-2: Vehicles
8-15-3: Bond
8-15-4: Records Required; Records to be Open to Inspection
8-15-5: Minors
8-15-6: Lost or Stolen Articles
8-15-7: Change of Location
8-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
JUNK: Shall mean and include old iron, chain, brass, copper, tin, lead or other
base metals, old rope, old bags, rags, waste, empty bottles and articles and
things discarded or no longer used as a manufactured article.
JUNK DEALER: Any person who operates a place of business for the sale of junk,
or who travels from place to place within the Village for the purpose of
purchasing junk or collecting junk for resale or makes a business of purchasing
junk from anyone who desires to sell it.
8-15-2: VEHICLES:
Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear
thereon the name and address of the owner and proprietor thereof, in characters
at least two and one-half inches (21/2") in height. Only motor vehicles of the
second division, defined in section 1-146 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code,
shall be used for the collecting of junk or scavenging.
8-15-3: BOND:
Every person licensed as a junk dealer shall, at the time of receiving such
license, give a bond to the Village, with corporate sureties to be approved by
the Village in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned
upon the due observance of all such ordinances of the Village as may be in
force or passed respecting junk dealers at any time during the continuance of
such license.
8-15-4: RECORDS REQUIRED; RECORDS TO BE OPEN TO INSPECTION:
Every junk dealer shall provide and keep a book in which shall be recorded at
the time of every purchase, a description of the article so purchased, the name
and address of the person from whom the purchase was made, and the day and hour
of the purchase.
Such record book shall at all times be open to the inspection of any member of
the Police Department or the Board of Trustees.
8-15-5: MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any junk dealer to purchase or receive any article
from a minor without the written consent of their parent(s) or guardians.
8-15-6: LOST OR STOLEN ARTICLES:
Every junk dealer, who shall receive or be in possession of any article which
may have been lost or stolen, or alleged to have been lost or stolen, shall
present the same to any member of the Police Department on demand. The officer
receiving such property shall arrange for a receipt for same to be delivered to
the dealer. If, after investigation by the police, it can reasonably be
determined that the property so delivered is neither lost nor stolen, then it
shall be returned to the dealer and the Village receipt so noted.
8-15-7: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
In case any junk dealer shall remove his store or place of business from the
place designated in the license, such keeper shall immediately thereupon give
notice to the Village Clerk and have the same endorsed upon such license, and
the address of such place of business shall thereupon be changed on the sides
of the vehicles used by such licensed dealer, and made to correspond with such
change of store or place of business.
ARTICLE 16
LAUNDRIES, LAUNDROMATS, DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS AND DRY CLEANERS
SECTION:
8-16-1: Definitions
8-16-2: License Required; Application; Number Of Machines
8-16-3: Regulations
8-16-4: Equipment Requirements; Automatic Dry Cleaning Establishments
8-16-5: Equipment Installation; Automatic Dry Cleaning Establishments
8-16-6: Operation; Automatic Dry Cleaning Establishments
8-16-7: Maintenance Requirements; Automatic Dry Cleaning Establishments
8-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANER: Any place, building, structure, room, establishment or
portion thereof having within such premises one or more automatic dry cleaning
machines for use by the general public either directly or through an attendant.
AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING MACHINE: Any device or apparatus for the cleaning of
clothes or fabrics and designed to be used or operated by the general public,
or an employee of the owner thereof, which machine or device makes use of or
contains a chemical solvent or substance which may cause harm to human beings
by reason of inhalation or contact.
DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT: Any structure, store, building or other place where
the service of dry cleaning, wet cleaning as a process incidental to dry
cleaning, dyeing, spotting and/or finishing any cloth fabric is rendered as a
business or service.
LAUNDROMAT: Any place, building, structure, room, establishment or portion
thereof having within such premises one or more self-service, coin operated
washing machines which are available for use by the general public for a fee
and for use upon such premises.
LAUNDRY: Any place, building, structure, room, establishment or portion thereof
which is used for the purpose of washing, drying, starching or ironing shirts,
dresses, collars, cuffs or other wearing apparel, table, bed or other household
linens, towels, curtains, draperies, bedding or other washable fabrics for the
general public.
   A.   A laundry as used in this article shall be held to include any private
laundry maintained or operated in connection with any hotel, restaurant, public
institution, hospital or charitable institution.
   B.   The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person engaged in
doing custom laundry work at home for a regular family trade, nor to any room,
or portion thereof, located in an apartment building, or other dwelling in
which domestic laundry work is done by or for the occupants of such building
exclusively. (1981 Code)
8-16-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; NUMBER OF MACHINES:
No person shall conduct, operate, maintain or carry on the business of a
laundry, laundromat, dry cleaning establishment or automatic dry cleaning
establishment within the village without first obtaining a license to do so and
paying the fee set forth in article 2 of this chapter.
In addition to the information required on an application described in article
1 of this chapter, an application for a license under this article shall state
the number of machine devices (whether under the control of the owner or his
agent, or self-service, coin operated machines) proposed to be used in said
business for washing, drying, dry cleaning or other laundry or dry cleaning
processes. (1981 Code)
8-16-3: REGULATIONS:
   A.   All persons owning or operating establishments licensed under this
article shall comply with all the applicable provisions of the health and
building codes of the village, as well as the applicable provisions regarding
fire prevention contained in chapter 7, article 5 of this code.
   B.   In addition to any other fire extinguishing equipment required by law,
there must be kept on the premises at all times in a conspicuous and easily
accessible place one or more portable fire extinguishers adequate to extinguish
any fires that might occur in connection with any machinery on the premises.
Such extinguisher(s) shall be of a number and type prescribed by the Oak Park
Fire Department.
   C.   No person who has tuberculosis, any acute or active venereal disease or
any other communicable disease shall work in any laundry, laundromat, or dry
cleaning establishment, and no owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge
shall knowingly permit any such person to be employed therein.
   D.   Every laundry, laundromat or dry cleaning establishment shall be
provided with separate toilet facilities for male and female employees. Every
room or compartment in which any toilet is installed shall be provided with
adequate ventilation and such equipment as the director of public health may
deem necessary for the health and comfort of the persons employed therein, or
using the facilities.
   E.   A separate room or partitioned space in a room, which is entirely
separate from the room in which wearing apparel, linen or other fabrics are
washed or dried, and which can be maintained in a dry and sanitary condition,
shall be provided and maintained in every laundry as a cloak or locker room in
which employees may keep their clothing. Should persons employed be required to
wear any special or designated garment during working hours, such space or room
shall be so arranged that the employees may make such changes as may be
necessary.
   F.   Every machine or mechanical device in any laundry, laundromat or dry
cleaning establishment that is operated by an employee or patron which emits or
sends off excessive heat, shall be equipped with proper heat deflectors, hood
and exhaust or other apparatus that will turn the heat from the room or place
in which the same is located.
   G.   No laundry, laundromat or dry cleaning establishment situated in any
building which is partially used for residence purposes shall be operated after
the hour of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. or before the hour of seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M.
   H.   No person owning, maintaining, conducting or operating any laundry,
laundromat or dry cleaning establishment in which wearing apparel, household
linens, towels, bedding or any other fabrics are received and treated through
the process of washing, shall remove or cause to be removed from such premises
any laundered article, until the same has been thoroughly sterilized by keeping
it in the washing machine, vat or other vessel provided for that purpose and
the water therein has been brought to a boiling temperature or maintained at a
temperature of one hundred seventy five degrees (175°) F. for at least twenty
(20) minutes; or until subjecting it to live steam under pressure; or keeping
it in a drying house or drying tumbler, in which the temperature is not less
than two hundred fifteen degrees (215°) F. for a period of not less than
fifteen (15) minutes; or until passing it through any ironing machine where the
ironing surface is at a temperature of not less than two hundred twenty five
degrees (225°) F., except in the case of such fabrics which would be injured by
the foregoing processes, in which event the same shall be treated with soap,
bleach or other such standard disinfectant solutions as shall be approved by
the Director of Public Health.
   I.   Any person establishing a new laundry shall be required to submit to
the Director of Public Health for his approval, a complete set of plans and
specifications of the building in which such new laundry is to be located; also
a complete diagram of the floor plan of each room to be occupied by such new
laundry, correctly showing the arrangement of setting of all machinery and
equipment to be installed therein, together with the height of the rooms.
No new laundry, which is to be used for the purpose of washing wearing apparel,
table, bed or other household linens, towels, bedding or other washable fabrics
shall be established in any tenement house situated in the Village.
If any existing laundry shall be vacated, discontinued or unused for a period
of more than six (6) consecutive months and shall thereafter be reopened and
reestablished as a laundry, such laundry shall be considered a new laundry and
be subject to all of the provisions of this Article relating to a new laundry.
   J.   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Health, and he is hereby
authorized and empowered to inspect, or cause to be inspected, from time to
time, all premises wherein laundries are conducted, for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the provisions of this Article and all other ordinances of
the Village and laws of the State, relative to the keeping and operating of
laundries, are being complied with, and it shall be his duty to cause all such
ordinances, provisions of this Code and other such laws to be strictly
enforced.
In any establishment in which the act of cleaning is to be performed by clients
thereof, and not the proprietor or his agent, the following shall apply:
   K.   Step-by-step operating instructions shall be posted conspicuously near
each coin-operated machine provided for public use.
   L.   Each machine used in this activity shall be checked daily and at all
times properly maintained and kept in a safe condition for public use.
8-16-4: EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS; AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   Vents: The machines shall be completely enclosed by a cabinet. The
cabinet shall be provided with vents at or near the bottom and connected to
exhaust ventilation adequate to prevent the escape of vapor to the surrounding
area, unless the installation is so constructed as to have no air flow through
the partition between the customer and service area. The exhaust vent
connection shall be located at or near the top of the cabinet.
   B.   Exhaust System: The cleaning equipment must be provided with an exhaust
system capable of maintaining a minimum of one hundred feet (100') per minute
face velocity through the loading door whenever the door is open. The duct-work
connections from this system must be sealed (soldered or taped) and the
discharge stack extended to a minimum height two feet (2') above the roof line.
The discharge stack shall be extended two feet (2') above the level of any
windows located within fifty feet (50') of the opening, and shall be located
horizontally at a safe distance from any fresh air intakes for gas or
electrically fired equipment such as dryers, water heaters or building heating
plants. All exhausts from the machines and area occupied by the machines shall
have a separate duct system and discharge to the atmosphere.
   C.   Interlocks: An interlock system must be provided on the machine to
prevent the loading door from being opened during the normal cycle. This system
may be either electrical and/or mechanical and so connected as to protect
against the event of power failure.
   D.   Vapor Odors: The cleaning cycle controls shall be such that there will
be no odors of solvent or solvent vapor in the material being cleaned when it
is removed from the machine at the end of the cycle.
   E.   Doors: The machines shall be equipped with transparent doors or ports
to allow visual inspection and determination of the status of the cleaning
cycle.
   F.   Water Supply: If the machine is connected to a potable water supply, it
shall be equipped with an air gap or properly installed vacuum breaker in the
water supply line upstream for the condenser. There shall be no control valves
downstream from the vacuum breaker. The waste water shall discharge through an
air gap.
   G.   Fluids: Fluids used in cleaning procedures shall be of nonflammable and
nonexplosive types of mixtures, and the units shall be so designed that the
user of equipment may not come in contact with the raw cleaning fluid.
8-16-5: EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION; AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS:
The equipment shall be installed such that only the front of the machine shall
be exposed in the customer area. The working or maintenance portion of the
equipment should be separated from the front of the machine by a solid
partition. As a means of minimizing any solvent or vapor buildup in the
customer area and also to control any minor solvent leakage, it is required
that there be a minimum air flow rate from the customer area through the
partition as follows:
 
No. of     Minimum Air Flow Rate
Machines   Per Machine (cfm)1  
1 - 3      500
4 - 8      400
9 - 16     375
17 or more 360
 
1 Each cleaning cell shall constitute one machine.
The exhaust ventilation as described above shall be provided on a continuous
basis while the establishment is open for business. The fan wiring shall be
such that the dry cleaning equipment cannot be operated unless the fan system
is in operation.
Where grille openings are to be installed in the partition to facilitate air
movement, they should be sized on the basis of about five hundred (500) cfm per
square foot of net grille area and should be placed as close to the machine as
possible. An example would be the use of a thirty inch by six inch (30" x 6")
grille located directly over a machine.
A supply of tempered make-up air shall be provided for the customer service
area in an amount approximately equal to the exhaust ventilation required in
the table on minimum air flow rate per machine in this Section. The device
shall be capable of providing the above amount of make-up air at room design
temperature with an outside air temperature equal to the mean winter
temperature. In all cases it is required that the exhaust rate be slightly
greater than the make-up rate which will at all times maintain a slight
negative pressure in the customer service area.
Access doors to the maintenance area shall be kept locked.
Where there is no air flow through the partition between the customer and
service area, the exhaust ventilation required in the table on minimum air flow
rate per machine in this Section is sufficient provided that it is operated
continuously with a satisfactory source of tempered make-up air in the service
area. The volume of make-up air provided in the service area should be slightly
less than the exhaust capacity in order that a slight negative pressure be
maintained in the service area at all times. A supply of suitably tempered
make-up air should be supplied for the customer area.
Auxiliary Fan -- Where there is air flow between the customer and the service
area, it is also required that a general ventilation fan be installed in the
back room or maintenance area to be used in case of serious solvent leakage.
This fan may be installed in the rear wall and when combined with the system
required in this Section should enable the exhausting of twice the amount of
air required in the table on minimum air flow rate per machine in this Section.
Prevention of Leaks -- A satisfactory means of preventing liquid leaks from
escaping the enclosure must be provided. The floor of the enclosure or machine
base shall be diked so as to hold a liquid volume equal to the maximum quantity
of solvent which might possibly escape from machines in the system. A method
shall be provided for draining and containing solvent in the event of a leak.
Tanks so provided for containing leaks shall be vented to the outside.
In lieu of the diking aforesaid, the integral pan and piping system may be used
provided that the piping system is connected to a properly sized and vented
holding tank as described above.
Use as Dwelling -- Equipment shall not be installed in a building occupied
solely as a dwelling place.
Plans -- Any person establishing an automatic dry cleaning establishment shall
be required to submit to the Director of Building and Zoning a complete set of
plans and specifications of the building in which such dry cleaning
establishment is to be located and also a complete diagram of the floor plan of
each room to be occupied, correctly showing the area of all machinery and
ventilating equipment to be installed therein.
8-16-6: OPERATION; AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   Attendant: Automatic dry cleaning establishments may not be operated
unless an attendant is on the premises at all times when such equipment is
available for use by the public. Such attendant shall be trained and well
qualified in the procedures relative to the safe operation of such equipment.
The attendant as well as the owner shall be responsible for the enforcement of
the provisions of this Article.
   B.   Instructions: In addition to the general machine operating instructions
required by
8-16-3K there shall be posted a warning to the effect that garments or
materials bearing the odor of the solvent are dangerous if enclosed in an
automobile or other tightly enclosed place.
   C.   Warning Signs: Signs shall be posted requesting evacuation of the
establishment in the presence of noticeable vapor odor or in the presence of
such symptoms as irritation of the eyes, nose or throat, lacrimation or
dizziness.
   D.   Age of Operator: No person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be
permitted to operate any automatic dry cleaning machine.
   E.   Hours of Operation: No automatic dry cleaning establishment shall be
operated between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M.
8-16-7: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS; AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   Exhausts: Servicing of the machines shall be done only during operation
of all exhaust ventilation functions required in Section
8-16-5 of this Article.
   B.   Storage: The solvent shall be stored in closed containers, and should
be transferred from the containers in a line free of leaks. All storage
facilities for solvent, external from the equipment, must be adequately and
properly labeled.
   C.   Residues: Filter residue and other residues containing solvent shall be
disposed of so as not to create a health hazard or nuisance. A covered metal
container shall be used for temporary storage outside the building.
   D.   Protective Equipment: Respiratory protective equipment shall be
provided for maintenance personnel and must be kept in good repair and
available for immediate use. Chemical cartridge respirators are approved for
light solvent concentrations and the wearer should replace the cartridges
immediately upon noting odor.
Safety goggles, rubber gloves and rubber safety aprons shall be provided for
the use of the service personnel.
ARTICLE 17
MODEL REFERRAL SERVICE
SECTION:
8-17-1: Model Referral Service; Definition
8-17-2: Application for License
8-17-3: Register of Employees
8-17-4: Revocation or Suspension of License
8-17-5: Required Facilities
8-17-6: Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited
8-17-7: Hours
8-17-8: Maintenance of Client List
8-17-9: Name and Place of Business
8-17-10: Transfer
8-17-1: MODEL REFERRAL SERVICE; DEFINITION:
A model referral service is defined as a service whereby names and other
information regarding persons offering their services as models is maintained
and for a fee made available to other persons seeking the use of those
services.
8-17-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Every applicant for a license for a model referral service shall file an
application under oath with the Village Clerk as provided for in Article 1 of
this Chapter. The application shall be referred by the Clerk to the appropriate
officials for investigation.
8-17-3: REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES:
The licensee shall maintain a register of all persons employed, listed or
referred by the model referral service. Such register shall be available for
inspection by representatives of the Village during regular business hours.
8-17-4: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued for a model referral service establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Village after notice and a hearing, for good cause, or in any
case where any of the provisions of this Article are violated or where any
employee of the licensee, is engaged in any conduct which violates any of the
State or local laws or ordinances at licensee's place of business and the
licensee has actual or constructive knowledge by due diligence. Such permit may
also be revoked or suspended by the Village after notice and hearing, upon the
recommendations of the Health Inspector that such business is being managed,
conducted or maintained without regard to proper sanitation and hygiene. Such
revocation proceedings shall be as prescribed in Section
8-1-14. The commission of an act of prostitution, public indecency, soliciting
for prostitution or pandering as defined in the Criminal Code of the State of
Illinois by a model referred by the model referral service shall constitute
grounds for revocation of the license of the model referral service.
8-17-5: REQUIRED FACILITIES:
No license to conduct a model referral service shall be issued unless the
establishment containing the model referral service complies with the following
requirements:
   A.   Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When
employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time,
separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. If more than fifteen
(15) persons of any sex shall be on the premises at any one time, one
additional water closet shall be provided for each such fifteen (15) or more
persons.
   B.   Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water
shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule thereof. Lavatories
or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary
towels.
8-17-6: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED:
No person shall consume, sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or cause to be
sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the
premises of any model referral service.
8-17-7: HOURS:
No model referral service shall be kept open for any purposes between the hours
of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
8-17-8: MAINTENANCE OF CLIENT LIST:
The licensee shall maintain a register of all models referred through the model
referral service and a register of all persons using the model referral
service, including at least the following client information: Name, address,
occupation and age.
Such client list shall be available for inspection by the Chief of Police or
his representative during regular business hours.
8-17-9: NAME AND PLACE OF BUSINESS:
No person granted a license pursuant to this Article shall operate the model
referral service establishment under a name not specified in the license, nor
shall the business be conducted under any designation or location not specified
in the license.
8-17-10: TRANSFER:
No license or permit shall be transferable except with the consent of the
Village and ratified by the Board of Trustees. An application for such transfer
shall be in writing. The written application for such transfer shall contain
the same information as requested herein for initial application for the
license or permit.
ARTICLE 18
PUBLIC PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIOS
SECTION:
8-18-1: Definitions
8-18-2: Application for License
8-18-3: Issuance of License
8-18-4: Register of Employees
8-18-5: Revocation or Suspension of License
8-18-6: Required Facilities
8-18-7: Persons Under 18 Years of Age
8-18-8: Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited
8-18-9: Unlawful Conduct
8-18-10: Hours
8-18-11: Transfer
8-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
PUBLIC PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIO: A place where, for profit, persons for a fee
(whether by membership or otherwise) may take photographs of persons available
for that purpose.
OBSCENE: To the average person applying contemporary community standards:
   A.   The predominant appeal of the matter taken as a whole, is to prurient
interest in sexual conduct, nudity or excretion; and
   B.   The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner sexual
conduct; and
   C.   The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political
or scientific value.
8-18-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Every applicant for a license to operate a public photography studio shall file
an application under oath with the Village Clerk as provided for in Article 1
of this Chapter. Hereinafter all provisions which refer to "applicant" include
an applicant which may be a corporation or partnership and all of the relevant
persons thereof. The application, shall be referred by the Clerk to the
appropriate officials for investigation. In addition to the basic information
required by Section
8-1-2, each application shall contain the following information:
   A.   A description of the proposed use of licensed premises;
   B.   The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the
business is to be conducted;
   C.   If applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses of
each stockholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the
corporation;
   D.   The two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present address
of the applicant;
   E.   Proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
   F.   Individual or partnership applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and
hair, and sex;
   G.   Copy of identification for each applicant including driver's license
and social security card;
   H.   One portrait photograph of the applicant at least two inches by two
inches (2" x 2") and a complete set of applicant's fingerprints which shall be
taken by the Chief of Police or his agent. If the applicant is a corporation,
one portrait photograph of at least two inches by two inches (2" x 2") of all
officers and managing agents of said corporation and a complete set of the same
officers' and agents' fingerprints which shall be taken by the Chief of Police
or his agent. If the applicant is a partnership, one front-face portrait
photograph at least two inches by two inches (2" x 2") in size of each partner,
including a limited partner in said partnership, and a complete set of each
partner's or limited partner's fingerprints which shall be taken by the Chief
of Police or his agent;
   I.   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three (3)
years immediately preceding the date of application;
   J.   The business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in
previously operating in this or another village or state has had a business
license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or
occupation subsequent to such action or suspension or revocation;
   K.   All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
including the date of convictions, nature of crimes and place convicted;
   L.   The name and address of any public photography studio or other
establishment wherein the business or profession of a public photography studio
is carried on owned or operated by each applicant;
   M.   A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises
or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant;
   N.   Such other identification and information necessary to discover the
truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the
application.
8-18-3: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The Village Clerk shall issue the license for the public photography studio
unless, based on the investigation of the application, the Clerk shall find:
   A.   The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to the Village's
building, zoning and health regulations;
   B.   The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders holding
more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation, any of the
officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the
partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the
holder of any lien, of any nature, upon the business and/or the equipment used
therein; or the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation
of the business, have been convicted of any of the following offenses or
convicted of an offense without the State of Illinois that would have
constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the State of
Illinois:
      1.   An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person
of another that amounts to a felony;
      2.   An offense involving sexual misconduct; or
      3.   An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons
that amounts to a felony.
The Village Clerk may issue a license or permit to any person convicted of any
of the crimes described in paragraphs 1, 2 or 3 of this subsection if he finds
that such conviction occurred at least five (5) years prior to the date of the
application and the applicant has had no subsequent felony convictions of any
nature and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions for crimes mentioned in this
Section;
   C.   The applicant has had a license denied, revoked or suspended by the
Village or any other State or local agency within five (5) years prior to the
date of the application;
   D.   The applicant, if an individual or any of the officers and directors,
if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not over the age of
eighteen (18) years;
8-18-4: REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES:
The licensee shall maintain a register of all persons employed by the public
photography studio. Such register shall be available for inspection by
representatives of the Village during regular business hours.
8-18-5: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
Any license for a public photography studio may be revoked or suspended by the
Village after notice and a hearing, for good cause, or in any case where any of
the provisions of this Article are violated or where any employee of the
licensee is engaged in any conduct which violates any State or local law or
ordinance at licensee's place of business and the licensee has actual or
constructive knowledge by due diligence. Such permit may also be revoked or
suspended by the Village after notice and hearing, upon the recommendations of
the Health Inspector that such business is being managed, conducted or
maintained without regard to proper sanitation and hygiene. Such revocation
proceedings shall be as prescribed by in Sections
8-1-14 and
8-1-15 herein.
The commission of an act of prostitution, public indecency, soliciting for
prostitution or pandering as defined in the Criminal Code of the State of
Illinois on the premises licensed as a public photography studio may also
result in revocation of the license after notice and hearing, as provided
herein.
8-18-6: REQUIRED FACILITIES:
No license to conduct a public photography studio shall be issued unless the
establishment containing the public photography studio complies with the
following requirements:
   A.   Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When
employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time,
separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. If more than fifteen
(15) persons of any sex shall be on the premises at any one time, one
additional water closet shall be provided for each such fifteen (15) or more
persons.
   B.   Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water
shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule thereof. Lavatories
or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary
towels.
8-18-7: PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE:
No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted to take pictures in
a public photography studio or be employed therein for the purpose of having
their picture taken.
8-18-8: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED:
No person shall consume, sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be
sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the
premises of any public photography studio.
8-18-9: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person in a public photography studio to:
   A.   Distribute or make available any obscene material;
   B.   Engage in or participate in any obscene performance;
   C.   Provide services to customers in such a manner as to expose to public
view:
      1.   His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or
pubic hair region;
      2.   Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic
hair region; or
      3.   Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola.
   D.   To engage in any bodily contact between the model and the customer.
8-18-10: HOURS:
No public photography studio shall be kept open for any purposes between the
hours of Midnight and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
8-18-11: TRANSFER:
No license or permit shall be transferable except with the consent of the
Village and ratified by the Board of Trustees. An application for such transfer
shall be in writing. The written application for such transfer shall contain
the same information as requested herein for initial application for the
license or permit.
ARTICLE 19
RENTAL REFERRAL AGENCIES
SECTION:
8-19-1: Definition
8-19-2: Required Practices
8-19-3: Records
8-19-4: Familiarity with Human Rights Chapter
8-19-5: Bond Required
8-19-6: Individual Complaints
8-19-7: License Revocation
8-19-1: DEFINITION:
Rental referral agency is defined as any person, other than an agent for the
lessor of a specific building or unit, who for a fee furnishes information
regarding the availability of dwelling units for rental in Oak Park.
8-19-2: REQUIRED PRACTICES:
Each rental referral agency shall comply with the following regulations:
   A.   Information furnished regarding available dwelling units must be
current, accurate and complete. No dwelling unit shall be represented as
available for rental that is not in fact available for rental. All listings of
rental units shall include conditions imposed by the lessor for rental,
including but not limited to restrictions upon children, number of persons,
age, source of income and pets.
   B.   The rental referral agency shall make no misrepresentations to
prospective lessors or their agents in order to obtain data regarding dwelling
units available for rental.
   C.   No rental referral agency shall purport to represent an owner or lessor
when in fact the rental referral agency has not been retained to represent the
owner or lessor.
8-19-3: RECORDS:
Each rental referral agency shall keep a record of all dwelling units which it
represents are available for rental and which are included on lists for which a
fee is charged. All such lists shall contain the date or dates on which any
such list was sold. The lists shall be made available for inspection by
authorized representatives of the Village Manager.
8-19-4: FAMILIARITY WITH HUMAN RIGHTS CHAPTER:
Each rental referral agency and all employees thereof shall comply with and be
familiar with the provisions of Chapter 13 of the Oak Park Village Code.
8-19-5: BOND REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a rental referral agency unless such person maintains
in full force and effect a bond with sureties licensed by the State of Illinois
in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) indemnifying any person
damaged by a violation of this Article.
8-19-6: INDIVIDUAL COMPLAINTS:
Any customer of the rental referral agency or any resident of Oak Park shall
have the right to file a complaint against the licensee with the Administrator
of the Community Relations Department or with the Village Law Department. The
Community Relations Department shall attempt to conciliate the complaint. In
the event the complaint cannot be conciliated by the Department, then the
Community Relations Commission shall hold an informal hearing with all the
parties upon reasonable notice to resolve the grievance. The failure of the
licensee, or its designated representative, to attend said proceedings without
cause shall constitute an admission of the truth of the complaint and may be
used as such in any proceeding against the licensee pursuant to Section 8-19-7.
The complainant or the Village may file a complaint in the Circuit Court for
appropriate relief from the alleged violation.
8-19-7: LICENSE REVOCATION:
Upon complaint or upon its own initiative, the Community Relations Department
or Law Department may initiate license revocation proceeding with the Community
Relations Commission. If the Community Relations Commission finds, by a
preponderance of the evidence that a licensee has engaged in a pattern and
practice of violating the provisions of this Article, said license shall be
revoked, the bond forfeited to the extent necessary to make whole all aggrieved
customers and/or residents of Oak Park, and said person shall be subject to the
penalties established by Section
1-1-5 of the Oak Park Village Code. The proceedings shall be governed by the
rules established in Section
8-1-14 of the Oak Park Village Code.
ARTICLE 20
SERVICE STATIONS
SECTION:
8-20-1: Definition
8-20-2: Nonbusiness Filling Stations
8-20-3: Bulk Sales Prohibited
8-20-4: Care and Attendance
8-20-5: Fire Extinguishers
8-20-6: Regulations
8-20-1: DEFINITION:
Service station shall mean any place of business where gasoline, or any highly
volatile fuel for motor vehicles or internal combustion engines, is sold or
offered for sale.
8-20-2: NONBUSINESS FILLING STATIONS:
Any person, firm or corporation maintaining or operating any storage tank for
gasoline for the use of the vehicles of the owner, lessee, employees or agents
of such person, firm or corporation, shall comply with all of the provisions of
this Article, other than the requirements for payment of a fee.
8-20-3: BULK SALES PROHIBITED:
No motor fuels shall be dispensed at any service station except into the fuel
tanks of motor vehicles, when such tanks are connected with carburetion systems
of such vehicles, provided, however, that individual sales up to five (5)
gallons may be made in metal receptacles when painted red and labeled in full
conformity with the Illinois Red Can Gasoline Law. Such individual sales shall
be limited to five (5) gallons to any one person at any one time.
8-20-4: CARE AND ATTENDANCE:
   A.   No fuel shall be dispensed into any vehicle until motor and ignition
have been shut off.
   B.   No use of any smoking materials shall be permitted in the immediate
vicinity of the fuel pumps; signs stating same must be posted in that area.
   C.   No open flame shall be permitted except within a stove within the
station building.
   D.   Premises shall be kept clean and neat, free from rubbish or trash.
8-20-5: FIRE EXTINGUISHERS:
Each service station shall be equipped with at least one readily accessible
chemical fire extinguisher suitable for oil and gasoline fires.
8-20-6: REGULATIONS:
   A.   The construction, operation and maintenance of service stations and
service station equipment including tanks, and the requirement for safety
clearances around same, shall be done in accordance with the provisions of all
applicable codes of the Village.
   B.   Upon demand, an itemized statement of parts and labor used in repairing
a motor vehicle and the charges made therefor shall be furnished to the legal
or equitable owner of any vehicle repaired on the premises of any service
station or under the direction of an owner, manager or agent of said service
station.
   C.   In cases where used or secondhand parts are used in making any repair
or alteration, the person having the work done must be informed that the parts
used are not new, and such fact must be noted in the record, and upon any bill
rendered.
   D.   No partially dismantled, nonoperable or wrecked motor vehicle shall be
stored or dismantled on the service station premises, except as a direct,
immediate and necessary incident to its repair.
   E.   Every service station shall be provided with adequate and conveniently
located toilet facilities for its employees and customers, conforming with the
ordinances of this Village. Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean condition, in
good repair, and well lighted and ventilated.
ARTICLE 21
THEATERS
SECTION:
8-21-1: License Requirements; Exceptions
8-21-2: Seating of Patrons
8-21-3: Scenery
8-21-1: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTIONS:
Compliance under Section 8-1-1 of this Code shall be required for any person
giving, presenting or conducting any motion picture or theatrical performance,
for admittance to which a fee is charged, excepting performances given solely
for the benefit of and under the supervision of a charitable, educational or
religious organization.
8-21-2: SEATING OF PATRONS:
It shall be unlawful to permit any person, excepting ushers or other theater
employees, to remain standing in a room or hall in which a motion picture is
presented, during the time of such performance, and it shall be unlawful to
admit into any such room or hall more persons than can be accommodated by the
permanent seating arrangements for the premises.
8-21-3: SCENERY:
It shall be unlawful to use any scenery in any theater other than nonflammable
scenery, or such as shall have been rendered not flammable by the application
of fire preventive substances.
ARTICLE 22
UNDERTAKERS AND FUNERAL DIRECTORS
SECTION:
8-22-1: Definitions
8-22-2: Application for Village License; Issuance; Term; Fee; Proration
8-22-3: Preparation Room or Morgue
8-22-4: Burial or Cremation Permits; Issuance
8-22-5: Burial or Cremation Permits; Recall
8-22-6: State License Required; All Persons Covered
8-22-7: License; Suspension and Revocation
8-22-8: Temporary License
8-22-1: DEFINITIONS:
UNDERTAKER or FUNERAL DIRECTOR: Any person conducting or engaging in the
practice of funeral directing or embalming.
UNDERTAKING ESTABLISHMENT or FUNERAL DIRECTING PLACE: A fixed place of business
or establishment devoted to the care and preparation for burial, transportation
or any other disposition of dead human bodies.
8-22-2: APPLICATION FOR VILLAGE LICENSE; ISSUANCE; TERM; FEE; PRORATION:
An application for a Village license under this Article shall be made to the
Village Clerk on forms prepared and furnished for such purpose. The applicant
shall state his name and residence address, and give the number of his State
registration card to practice embalming or funeral directing and the location
of his fixed place of business. Such application shall be transmitted to the
Director of Public Health for his investigation.
Any undertaker or funeral director making application in proper form and
otherwise meeting the requirements of the preceding paragraph of this Section
shall be entitled to the Village license required upon payment of the license
fee in the amount required by Article 2 of this Chapter. The Village Clerk
shall thereupon issue a license to such undertaker or funeral director.
All such applications for a license and the license fees shall be due on the
first day of January of each year and such licenses shall expire on the thirty
first day of December following the date of issuance. Licenses issued for a
period of less than one year, shall carry a fee to be paid proportionate to the
full year fee fixed by Article 2 of this Chapter, provided, that no fee under
this Section shall be less than one-half (1/2) the annual fee.
8-22-3: PREPARATION ROOM OR MORGUE:
Every undertaking establishment or funeral directing place shall include a
preparation room or morgue which shall connect with a sewer by an approved
sanitary drain and have running water available, a nonabsorbent floor, washable
walls and forced ventilation. Such room or morgue shall be partitioned from
other parts of the undertaking establishment or funeral directing place and
such room or morgue shall be arranged or placed so that it will not directly
serve as a public exit from such establishment or from other rooms which are a
part thereof. An annual inspection of each undertaking establishment or funeral
directing place shall be caused to be made by the Director of Public Health.
8-22-4: BURIAL OR CREMATION PERMITS; ISSUANCE:
No permit for the burial or cremation of any dead human body shall be issued to
anyone except an undertaker or funeral director who is licensed as provided in
this Article. Permits may be obtained through application to the Vital Records
Division of the Village Department of Public Health.
8-22-5: BURIAL OR CREMATION PERMITS; RECALL:
Any burial or cremation permit may be recalled by the Director of Public Health
any time when he shall have evidence that such permit was issued on improper or
Sufficient information contained in the death certificate or when it is found
that the conditions of the permit are not complied with. Any undertaker or
funeral director holding such permit shall, upon notification of its recall
forthwith surrender such permit to the Director of the Department of Public
Health.
8-22-6: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED; ALL PERSONS COVERED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of an undertaker
or funeral director or to conduct, manage or operate an undertaking
establishment or funeral direction place without first having been qualified
under and having received the license required by Illinois Revised Statutes
1979, chapter 111, 2801 et seq. Persons assisting or otherwise employed by
undertakers or funeral directors also must first secure such State licenses as
their duties require before engaging in the same.
8-22-7: LICENSE:   SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
Any license issued under this Article may be suspended by the Director of
Public Health for a period of not to exceed ten (10) days, and such license may
be revoked as provided by Section 8-1-14 at any time after the issuance
thereof, for a violation of any of the provisions of this Code or the rules or
regulations of the Board of Health, or of any law relating to the practices for
which such license is given. Any appeal of such revocation shall be as
permitted in Section 8-1-15. Any decision by the Board of Health (which shall
be the designated hearing board) may be appealed to the Village Board, whose
decision shall be final.
Upon the revocation of any license issued pursuant to this Article, the
licensee shall immediately surrender and deliver to the Village Clerk the
license certificate so revoked.
8-22-8: TEMPORARY LICENSE:
Any undertaker or funeral director not having an annual license, as required by
this Article, may obtain a temporary license upon making application and
qualifying therefor in the manner provided in the preceding sections and paying
a temporary license fee in the amount required by Article 2 of this Chapter to
the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall issue to such applicant a temporary
license which shall be in force for a period of fifteen (15) days from the date
of issuance.
In the absence of an annual license, a temporary license will not be required
for the preparation for burial or cremation of dead human bodies of persons
under ten (10) days of age.
ARTICLE 23
AMUSEMENTS
SECTION:
8-23-1: License; Duty to Obtain
8-23-2: License Required; Exceptions
8-23-3: Definitions
8-23-4: License Classifications
8-23-5: Prize Fights and Similar Contests Prohibited
8-23-6: License Contents; Fees
8-23-7: New Location of Coin-Operated Machine Requires New License; Inspection
8-23-8: License; Board Authorization Required
8-23-9: Optional License
8-23-10: Gambling Prohibited by License Terms
8-23-11: Mutilating Entertainment Posters
8-23-12: No Seats Permitted in Aisles of Theaters
8-23-13: Doors of Places of Public Assemblage to Open Out
8-23-14: Duty to Preserve Order
8-23-15: Loitering at Licensed Premises Prohibited
8-23-16: Unobstructed View From Street Into Poolrooms, etc.
8-23-17: Poolrooms, etc., to Close by Midnight
8-23-18: Presence of Minors in Poolrooms, etc; Restricted
8-23-1: LICENSE; DUTY TO OBTAIN:
It shall be the duty of every proprietor or lessee of any theater, hall or
other building where public entertainments are given, or any person offering
the use of devices which require licensing before he permits any person to use
the same for the purpose of giving any entertainment therein for gain, to
obtain the license required by Section
8-23-2 of this Code, either in his own name or in the name of the person
proposing to give such entertainment.
8-23-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
No person within the limits of the Village shall give any of the entertainments
mentioned or referred to in this Article for gain, without a license for that
purpose first being obtained from the Village Clerk; provided, that for
entertainments given by citizens of the Village not engaged in the giving of
such entertainments as a business, nor for personal gain, no license shall be
required. Provided further that some licenses as covered by 8-23-8 may only be
issued after approval of the Board of Trustees. (1981 Code)
8-23-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and/or phrases shall have the meanings set forth herein
when such words or phrases are used in this Article.
ENTERTAINMENT: Entertainment shall be taken to include theatrical and other
exhibitions, shows and amusements wherein and whereby any person shall act,
play or perform any play, opera or other dramatic or musical composition or
give performance of any kind or give any show or public exhibition for gain.
PRIVATE HEALTH CLUB: As referred to in Section
8-23-16 and Section
17-1-32 of this Code shall be defined to mean a legal entity which.
   A.   Is organized in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois and
which is owned, operated and maintained for the primary purpose of promoting
the physical health and fitness of its members only, through exercise and
sporting activities to be conducted on the premises of the club;
   B.   Is kept, used and maintained by and for said members only, through the
members' payment of membership dues which shall apply to membership periods of
no less than three (3) months in duration; and
   C.   Owns or leases a properly zoned building or commercial space in a
building which complies with all Village Codes and which contains fitness,
exercise and/or sporting activity equipment which is not available for use by
nonmembers, except on a brief, free trial basis to promote new memberships, and
is of such extent and character as to be suitable and adequate for the
reasonable benefit and promotion of the physical health and fitness of its
members. (Ord. 1992-0-47, 8-3-92)
8-23-4: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS:
For the purpose of licensing, theatrical shows, amusements and all public
exhibitions for gain are divided into four (4) classes, as follows:
   A.   Class 1: All entertainments of a dramatic or operatic character,
including public readings and recitations, and exhibitions of painting or
statuary, moving pictures, concerts or other musical or minstrel
entertainments, panoramas, performances of any feats of jugglery, sleight-of-
hand or necromancy and exhibitions of any natural or artificial curiosities.
   B.   Class 2: Circuses, menageries, caravans, side shows and concerts,
minstrel or musical entertainments given under a covering of canvas and all
other exhibitions, performances and entertainments not herein classified.
   C.   Class 3: Every bowling alley, roller skating rink, pin or ball alley,
shooting gallery and billiard hall.
   D.   Class 4: Every piano, cabinet, box, container or device of any kind,
nature or description operated automatically, mechanically or by electricity by
the insertion of a coin, slug or other similar means of control, providing
entertainment in some mechanical fashion in public places; additionally,
baseball, football, tennis or other athletic contests or any musical, minstrel
or dancing entertainments.
8-23-5: PRIZE FIGHTS AND SIMILAR CONTESTS PROHIBITED:
No license shall be issued for any boxing, sparring, wrestling or prize
fighting shows, matches or exhibitions, and such shows, matches and
exhibitions, are hereby prohibited.
8-23-6: LICENSE CONTENTS; FEES:
Each license required by Section
8-23-2 of this Code shall state for what it is granted and the time it to
continue. The license fees as provided in Article 2 of Chapter 8 of this Code
shall be imposed for each license granted and paid to the Village Clerk on the
granting of such license.
8-23-7: NEW LOCATION OF COIN-OPERATED MACHINE REQUIRES NEW LICENSE; INSPECTION:
Any transfer of any machine or device referred to in subsection D of Section
8-23-4 of this Code, to another location shall require a new and additional
license. Each such machine or device shall be inspected and properly labeled
upon the issuance of the license therefor.
8-23-8: LICENSE; BOARD AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED:
The license required for the owning or keeping of any pool, pigeon-hole or
billiard table, or pin or bowling alley or shooting gallery for gain or public
use, shall be granted only by the express direction of the Board of Trustees.
(1981 Code)
The annual renewal of each pool hall or billiard parlor license shall be
granted only after review and approval by the President and Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 1986-0-75, 8-18-86)
8-23-9: OPTIONAL LICENSE:
In lieu of the license required by Section
8-23-2 of this Code, the manager or owner of any hall, opera house or theater,
may take out a license for such hall, opera house or theater and persons giving
entertainments included in Class 1 only in such place during the term of such
facility license shall be required to pay the per exhibition license fee
required in Article 2 of this Chapter.
8-23-10: GAMBLING PROHIBITED BY LICENSE TERMS:
All licenses for entertainments, where a license is required, shall contain a
proviso that no gambling, raffle, lottery or chance, gift, distribution of
money or articles of value shall be connected therewith or be allowed by the
person obtaining such license or in anywise permitted or held out as an
inducement to patrons. Any person violating any such proviso in any such
license, shall, in addition to all other penalties provided by this Code or
other ordinances of the Village, have his license revoked immediately in the
discretion of the Board of Trustees.
8-23-11: MUTILATING ENTERTAINMENT POSTERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, tear, mutilate, cover over or
otherwise deface or injure any bill or poster (posted in such place as may be
permitted), descriptive of any performance or entertainment given in any
licensed theater or hall or in pursuance of a license given by the Village.
8-23-12: NO SEATS PERMITTED IN AISLES OF THEATERS:
No chairs, stools or seats of any description shall be placed or be permitted
to remain in or across the lobby, aisles or passageways in any theater, hall,
church or other public building when the same is occupied by the public.
8-23-13: DOORS OF PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLAGE TO OPEN OUT:
All persons owning, leasing, managing or having charge of any church, theater,
opera house, public hall or other place of amusement in the Village shall be
required to have all doors leading to or from the same hung so as to open out
therefrom.
8-23-14: DUTY TO PRESERVE ORDER:
It shall be the duty of every owner or lessee of any licensed theater, hall or
other public building to keep and preserve good order in and about the
premises.
8-23-15: LOITERING AT LICENSED PREMISES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in the outer entrance to any
licensed premises or on the sidewalk adjacent to and within fifty feet (50') of
such entrance, after a request to move on by the owner, lessee or any police
officer. (1981 Code)
8-23-16: UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW FROM STREET INTO POOLROOMS, ETC.:
Every person to whom shall be granted a license for any of the purposes
provided in Section
8-23-8 of this Code, shall construct, conduct and operate such gallery, alley
or room in such a manner that the windows, doors, curtains, showcases,
partitions and all other parts of such gallery, alley or room shall be so
arranged that persons passing along the street or being in front of the
premises may be able to see, without obstructions of any kind or description
other than the necessary pool or billiard tables, any and all persons who may
be within such room or place where such game is carried on. The provisions of
this Section shall not apply to private health clubs as defined in Section
8-23-3 of this Article when such pool, pigeon hole or billiard table is
maintained by the club for the exclusive use of its members. (Ord. 1992-0-47,
8-3-92)
8-23-17: POOLROOMS, ETC., TO CLOSE BY MIDNIGHT:
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to own or keep any billiard,
pigeon-hole or pool table, or pin or ball alley, or shooting gallery, to keep
the hall or room used therefor open after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
8-23-18: PRESENCE OF MINORS IN POOLROOMS, ETC.; RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to own or keep any billiard hall,
pigeon-hole or pool table, or pin or bowling alley, roller skating rink, or
shooting gallery, for gain or public use, within the Village, to permit any
minor under the age of seventeen (17) years to loiter in or about such premises
wherein the same is kept or operated, or play billiards, pigeon-hole or pool or
bowl in such bowling alley, or shoot in such shooting gallery, without first
obtaining the written consent of the parent or guardian of such minor under the
age of seventeen (17) years to do so.
ARTICLE 23A
DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
SECTION:
8-23A-1: Definitions
8-23A-2: License Required; Exception
8-23A-3: Application for License
8-23A-4: Public Dance Application Information
8-23A-5: Public Dance Hall Application Information
8-23A-6: Investigation; Issuance of License
8-23A-7: Denial of License
8-23A-8: Suspension and Revocation
8-23A-9: Appeal
8-23A-10: Rules
8-23A-11: Application for Renewal of License; Extension
8-23A-12: Extension of Expiration Date Based on Appeal
8-23A-13: Hearing Re-Extension
8-23A-14: Public Dance and Public Dance Hall Regulation
8-23A-15: Teenage Dance Regulation
8-23A-16: Violation, Penalty
8-23A-1: DEFINITIONS:
CHARITABLE: Includes the words religious, patriotic, social welfare, welfare,
benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal.
PERSON: All natural persons and all legal entities and organizations.
PUBLIC DANCE: Any dance where a charge or fee for admission to the public is
made, paid or received; or where a charge or fee is made, paid or received for
a service or activity which is incidental to a dance.
PUBLIC DANCE HALL: Any room, place or space in which a public dance shall be
held.
TEENAGE DANCE: A dance conducted exclusively for minors between the ages of
thirteen (13) and eighteen (18) years, both inclusive, to which no person
nineteen (19) years of age or over, or twelve (12) years of age or younger is
admitted as a participant, and at which no alcoholic beverage is sold,
serviced, provided free of charge, or is permitted or allowed on the premises.
TEENAGE DANCE HALL: Any room, place or space in which a teenage dance shall be
held.
8-23A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
   A.   No person shall hold any public dance in any room, place or space
within the limits of the Village until the room, space or place in which the
public dance may be held has been duly licensed for such purposes as a public
dance hall. The public dance hall license shall be required whether or not the
dance hall is incidental to another business or businesses which are operated
on the premises. Any person, other than the owner or operator of a licensed
public dance hall, who wishes to conduct a public dance in any licensed public
dance hall, must also obtain a public dance license. Provided, however, that
such per son or persons obtaining such licenses must enforce at such dance the
requirements herein provided for the governing of public dance halls.
   B.   Failure on the part of any person or persons to obtain such license or
to comply with the foregoing shall subject him or them to the penalties
provided for in this Section.
No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this Section shall be
assignable. An attempted transfer of any such permit shall constitute an
automatic revocation thereof.
No person shall knowingly participate in any such dance conducted without a
license.
   C.   The provisions of this Section, however, shall not apply to licensed
dance academies and to dances given by governmental, quasi-governmental or
charitable organizations as defined herein. Further, the owners and/or
operators of any public dance hall licensed under the provisions of this
Article shall not be required to obtain a public dance license for any public
dance conducted by the owners and/or operators in their licensed public dance
hall.
8-23A-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person or entity desiring to obtain a license to operate a public dance
hall or conduct a public dance shall make and submit an application to the
Village Clerk. Such application shall be on a form approved by the Village and
shall be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the proposed dance or opening
of a proposed dance hall.
8-23A-4: PUBLIC DANCE APPLICATION INFORMATION:
Applications to conduct a public dance shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), which shall be applied to the
license fee in the event that the license is approved. The applications shall
include:
   A.   A complete identification of the applicant and all persons directly or
indirectly interested in the license and, if the applicant is a corporation,
the names, residence and business addresses of the principal officers thereof
and of any persons holding five percent (5%) or more of its shares of stock
outstanding or ownership of the beneficial interest therein or a lien thereon.
   B.   The name, residence and business address of the manager or person in
charge.
   C.   The address and the particular room or rooms for which the license is
required, the square foot area thereof to be used for dancing, and the seating
capacity.
   D.   The date upon which the dance will be conducted, which shall be not
less than thirty (30) days subsequent to the date upon which the application is
filed.
   E.   The approximate attendance expected.
   F.   The times at which the dance will begin and end.
   G.   A statement in detail of any other entertainment to be provided.
   H.   A statement as to whether the dance is being conducted specifically for
teenagers.
   I.   The application shall be signed by the applicant or applicants, or in
case of a club, society or corporation, the application shall be signed by the
manager or one of its principal officers.
8-23A-5: PUBLIC DANCE HALL APPLICATION INFORMATION:
Applications to operate a public dance hall, whether or not incidental to
another business, shall be made on forms provided by the Village Clerk, shall
be filed in the office of the Village Clerk accompanied by an annual
nonrefundable application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), which
shall be applied to the license fee in the event that the license is approved.
The application shall include:
   A.   A complete identification of the applicant and all persons directly or
indirectly interested in the license, and if the applicant is a corporation,
the names, residence and business addresses of the principal officers thereof
and of any persons holding five percent (5%) or more of its share of stock
outstanding or ownership of the beneficial interest therein or a lien thereon.
   B.   The names, residence and business address of the manager or person in
charge.
   C.   Whether, the applicant or manager has ever been engaged in operating a
dance hall, and when, where and how long in each place, within five (5) years
prior to application.
   D.   The name of the owner of the premises in which such dance hall is
located and the complete address of such owner.
   E.   The address, the exact nature of the business, the name under which it
is to be operated and the hours of operation.
   F.   The square foot area of the room or rooms to be used for dining, for
dancing, for entertainment, the seating capacity of each such room and the
square foot area of the dance floor.
   G.   Whether or not the applicant or any one having a beneficial interest in
the per mit, directly or indirectly, has had a license or permit for the same
or a similar business suspended or revoked anywhere, and, if so the
circumstances thereof.
   H.   A statement as to whether teenage dances will be conducted in the
public dance hall and a schedule of the dates and times when such events will
occur.
   I.   The application shall be signed by the applicant or applicants, or in
case of a club, society or corporation, the application shall be signed by the
manager or one of its principal officers.
8-23A-6: INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The Village Clerk shall refer the application to the Village Manager who shall
cause an investigation to be made and shall thereafter approve the issuance of
the license when he has determined that:
   A.   The required fee has been paid.
   B.   The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this
Article.
   C.   The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in
the application.
   D.   The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the
corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or
any of the partners, including limited partners, if the application is a
partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any
offense, or convicted of an attempt to commit any offense in any state which,
if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as a crime
involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude.
   E.   Applicant, or any of its owners, partners, officers or directors has
not had a public dance hall or public dance permit or similar license or permit
issued by this Village denied or revoked within five (5) years prior to
application.
   F.   The proposed dance hall or public dance would comply with all
applicable laws, including but not limited to, health, zoning, fire and safety
requirements and standards. Prior to granting a permit, the Village Manager
shall obtain a certificate from the Zoning Officer certifying that the proposed
use is in compliance with the land use and zoning provisions of the applicable
Municipal and ordinance codes. In the event that land use and/or zoning
approvals are required, they shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit.
   G.   Applicant is at least twenty one (21) years of age.
   H.   The applicant possesses good moral character and is a proper person to
conduct such a business.
   I.   The dance or dance hall would not be contrary to the health, peace,
morals, safety or welfare of the community.
Upon receipt of approval from the Village Manager, the Village Clerk shall
issue a license to the applicant. All dance hall licenses issued in accordance
with the provisions of this Article shall expire on December 31 of the year of
issuance. Public dance licenses issued in accordance with this Article shall be
valid only for the scheduled date of the dance set forth on the license
application.
All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this Article shall be subject
to the condition that the premises at which the dance is held shall be open to
inspection free of charge at all times to officers responsible for the
administration and enforcement of said provisions when such dance is in
progress and immediately prior thereto.
8-23A-7: DENIAL OF LICENSE:
If the Village Manager, following investigation of the applicant, finds that
the applicant does not fulfill the requirements of this Article, he shall
notify the applicant in writing within thirty (30) days after receipt of the
application. However, failure to notify the applicant shall not constitute a
basis for granting the license. The applicant shall have ten (10) days after
notification of denial is mailed to appeal such denial pursuant to the
provisions of this Article.
8-23A-8: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
Any license issued under the terms of this Article may be suspended or revoked
by the Village Manager when it shall appear to him that the activity authorized
by such license is conducted, maintained or carried on contrary to or in
violation of any law of the State, any provision of this Code, or any rule of
the Village Manager governing public dances, or is conducted, maintained or
carried on in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance, or to disturb the
peace of persons in the vicinity, or to be deleterious to the public peace,
morals, health, safety or welfare, or for any cause set forth in Section
8-1-14C of this Code; provided that any suspension or revocation of a license
issued under the terms of this Article shall be in accordance with Section
8-1-14 of this Code.
8-23A-9: APPEAL:
Any applicant aggrieved by the act of the Village Manager in disapproving the
issuance of a license, or suspending or revoking a license, may appeal to the
President and Board of Trustees within the time and in the manner provided in
Section
8-1-15 of this Code.
8-23A-10: RULES:
The Village Manager is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules as
he may deem reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this Article,
subject to the review and approval of the President and Board of Trustees.
8-23A-11: APPLICATION FOR RENEWAL OF LICENSE; EXTENSION:
The license holder shall, at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration
date, file an application for renewal thereof with the Village Clerk in
accordance with Section
8-23A-5 of this Article. In the event that the renewal license has not been
issued by the Village Manager on the date of expiration of the dance license,
the date of expiration thereof may be extended by the Village Manager for not
more than thirty (30) days or until the new license is issued, whichever occurs
first.
Should the license holder fail to file an application for renewal at least
thirty (30) days prior to expiration date, the Village Clerk shall collect a
late fee equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the annual fee.
8-23A-12: EXTENSION OF EXPIRATION DATE BASED ON APPEAL:
In the event the renewal license is denied, the date of expiration shall be
extended until the time for appeal has expired as provided in Section
8-1-15 of this Code, or until the President and Board of Trustees has heard and
determined the ap peal under the provisions of the aforesaid Code.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provision for extension of expiration date of
public dance licenses, the Village Manager may order the said license revoked
upon expiration date upon finding that there is an overriding public interest
requiring the revocation thereof by applying the standards set forth in Section
8-23A-8 of this Code.
8-23A-13: HEARING RE-EXTENSION:
The Village Manager, in his discretion, before revoking a public dance hall
license as permitted by the provision of Section
8-23A-12 of this Code, may convene a hearing for the purpose of allowing
applicant to show good cause why the expiration date of the license should be
ex tended. Notice of hearing shall be given to the applicant and any other
interested per sons fifteen (15) days prior thereto.
8-23A-14: PUBLIC DANCE AND PUBLIC DANCE HALL REGULATION:
   A.   Public Dance Hall Licenses for Restaurants and Liquor Establishments:
No per son shall conduct, operate, maintain or allow public dancing in any
restaurant or in any business establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold,
furnish ed, consumed or offered for sale or consumption on the premises unless
and until a public dance hall license has been issued pursuant to the
provisions of this Article and, in addition thereto, all of the requirements
and conditions in this Article are complied with and exist.
   B.   Ratio of Dance Area to Seating Capacity: There shall be set aside and
maintained exclusively for dancing during the time that dancing is permitted
the following minimum unobstructed areas, such areas to be exclusive of hallway
space:
      1.   Three hundred (300) square feet of dance floor where the seating
capacity of the establishment is not more than fifty (50) persons.
      2.   Four hundred (400) square feet of dance floor where the seating
capacity is more than fifty (50) and not more than seventy five (75) persons.
      3.   Five hundred (500) square feet of dance floor where the seating
capacity of the establishment is in excess of seventy five (75) persons.
   C.   Prohibited Conduct: No licensee shall allow upon the premises and no
patron shall engage in any of the following acts or conduct:
      1.   Dancing by an intoxicated, boisterous or disorderly person, or the
continued presence of any such person;
      2.   Smoking or carrying of lighted cigarettes or tobacco, or the
drinking or carrying of drinks while dancing.
   D.   Solicitation of Drinks: No employee of licensee shall solicit or accept
drinks from any customer or dance with any customer while so employed.
   E.   Closing Hours: No person shall operate a public dance hall or conduct
or assist in conducting any public dance between the hours of one thirty
o'clock (1:30) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
   F.   Public Dance Places to be Kept Reasonably Lighted When Open for
Dancing: All places where public dances are held must at all times when open
for dancing therein be reasonably lighted throughout.
   G.   Minors Under Eighteen Barred From Public Dances; Exceptions: No minor
per son under eighteen (18) years of age shall enter, be or dance in any public
dance not conducted by a governmental, quasi-governmental or charitable
organization. No parent or guardian of a minor under eighteen (18) years of
age, or the proprietor or person in charge of any public dance, shall permit
any such minor person to enter, be or dance in any public dance; provided, that
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent a minor person under the age of
eighteen (18) years from being in a bona fide hotel, cafe or other place where
meals are regularly served, and where a public dance is being held, or from
participating in a teenage dance as provided in Section
8-23A-15 of this Article.
8-23A-15: TEENAGE DANCE REGULATION:
   A.   Persons Who May Secure License: No person may secure a license to
conduct or sponsor any teenage dance except an adult sponsoring group,
provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to organizations exempted
under Section
8-23A-2 of this Article.
   B.   Application for License; Contents: In addition to the information
required in Section
8-23A-4 or
5 of this Article, applications for teenage public dances or teenage public
dance halls shall include:
      1.   The approximate attendance expected and the minimum number of adult
supervisors who will be in attendance at all times during the holding of said
dance, said minimum number of supervisors to be not less than one per one
hundred (100) teenagers, or fraction thereof, in attendance;
      2.   The names and addresses of the supervisors who will be in attendance
at said dance;
      3.   The approximate expenses to be incurred as an incident to the
holding of said dance, and the admission charge, if any, required as an
incident to the attendance of each said dance;
      4.   A certificate of the applicant stating that the applicant assumes
full and complete responsibility for each event, its direction and any
expenditure of funds connected therewith.
   C.   Parking Lots; Lighting and Supervision: All off-street parking
facilities made available for the participants of teenage dances shall be
lighted and supervised as follows:
      1.   Lighting: Parking facilities shall be lighted in such a manner as to
provide illumination to all vehicles sufficient to insure the safety of those
persons using said facility and to permit supervision of the parking area.
      2.   Supervision: Parking facilities shall be supervised and inspected at
reasonable intervals.
   D.   Attendance: No minor admitted to a teenage dance shall be permitted to
leave and thereafter re-enter the dancing premises during the duration of this
dance, and no readmission pass of any kind shall be issued to anyone exiting
the premises during a dance.
   E.   Use of Alcoholic Beverages or Other Intoxicants Prohibited: Admission
to a teenage dance shall be denied to any person showing evidence of drinking
any alcoholic beverage or taking any other intoxicant or who has any alcoholic
beverage or other intoxicant on his person.
   F.   Participation of Adults Prohibited: A person nineteen (19) years of age
or over shall not attend any teenage dance as a participant. This Section does
not prohibit the attendance and participation of chaperons or sponsors.
   G.   Loitering: No person, having first been requested to leave by a
chaperon or other person in charge, shall remain or loiter in, around or about
the premises at which a teenage dance is being conducted.
   H.   Closing: All teenage dances shall terminate one half (1/2) hour before
the curfew time established for minors.
   I.   Residence of Sponsors: At least two (2) persons of the sponsoring group
shall have been bona fide residents of the Village of Oak Park for at least
three (3) months prior to making application for a license under this Article.
8-23A-16: VIOLATION, PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be deemed
guilty of a petty offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a
fine as provided in Section 1-1-5 of this Code. (Ord. 1986-0-112, 12-1-86)
ARTICLE 24
FOODS AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
8-24-1: Definitions
8-24-2: General Provisions
8-24-3: Adulterated And Misbranded Food; Examination And Condemnation Of Food
And Other Articles
8-24-4: Enforcement
8-24-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
ACCESSIBLE: Capable of being exposed for cleaning and inspection with the use
of simple tools such as a screwdriver, pliers or open-end wrench.
ADULTERATED FOOD: The condition of any food that:
   1.   Contains any poisonous or deleterious substance in a quantity which may
render it injurious to health.
   2.   Contains any added poisonous or deleterious substance for which no safe
tolerance has been established by regulation or is in excess of such tolerance
if one has been established.
   3.   Consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid, or decomposed
substance or if it is otherwise unfit for human consumption.
   4.   Has been processed, prepared, packed or been held under unsanitary
conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or whereby it may
have been rendered injurious to the public's health.
   5.   Is in whole or in part the product of a diseased animal or animal which
has died otherwise than by slaughter.
   6.   Whose containers are composed in whole or in part of any poisonous or
deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health.
Acceptable to the Health Department of the Village of Oak Park based on a
determination of conformity with principles, practices, and generally
recognized standards that protect public health.
APPROVED: Acceptable to the Health Department of the Village of Oak Park based
on determination as to conformance with appropriate standards and good public
health practice.
CLEANING: The physical removal of residues of foods, ingredients and other
soiling materials.
CORE ITEM: A provision of the current edition of the U.S. FDA Food Code that is
not designated as a priority item or a priority foundation item. A "core item"
is related to general sanitation, operational controls, sanitation standard
operating procedures, facilities or structures, equipment design or general
maintenance.
CRITICAL LIMIT: The maximum or minimum value to which a physical, biological,
or chemical parameter must be controlled at a critical control point to
minimize the risk that the identified food safety hazard may occur.
DEPARTMENT: Oak Park Department of Public Health.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Department of Public Health or his or her duly
appointed representative.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment that stores, prepares, packages, serves,
vends food directly to the consumer, or otherwise provides food for human
consumption such as a restaurant; satellite or catered feeding location;
catering operation if the operation provides food directly to a consumer or to
a conveyance used to transport people; market; vending location; conveyance
used to transport people; institution; or food pantry; and relinquishes
possession of food to a consumer directly, or indirectly, through a delivery
service such as home delivery of grocery orders or restaurant takeout orders,
or delivery service that is provided by common carriers.
   1.   A food establishment includes an element of the operation such as a
transportation vehicle or a central preparation facility that supplies a
vending location or satellite feeding location unless the vending or feeding
location is permitted by the regulatory authority; and an operation that is
conducted in a mobile, stationary, temporary, or permanent facility or
location; where consumption is on or off the premises; and regardless of
whether there is a charge for the food.
   2.   A food establishment does not include an establishment that offers only
prepackaged foods that are not time/temperature control for safety foods; a
produce stand that only offers whole, uncut fresh fruits and vegetables; a food
processing plant including those that are located on the premises of a food
establishment; a kitchen in a private home, such as a small family daycare
provider or a bed and breakfast operation as defined in the Illinois Bed and
Breakfast Act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 820/1 et seq., as amended, that
prepares and offers food to guests; a private home that receives catered or
home delivered food; a closed family function where food is prepared or served
for individual family consumption; or a cottage food operation as defined in
410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 625/4, as amended.
FOOD DELIVERY VEHICLES: Includes, but not necessarily limited to the following:
Any vehicles, wagons, motor vehicles and vehicles propelled by manpower, for
the storage or transportation of any meat or meat products, milk or milk
products, fish or fish products, bread or bakery products or any other
provision intended for human consumption, excluding carbonated beverages and
alcoholic liquors, within the Village for the purpose of delivering the above
commodities to any premise within the Village.
FOOD PROCESSING PLANT: A commercial operation that manufactures, packages,
labels, or stores food for human consumption, and provides food for sale or
distribution to other business entities such as food processing plants or food
establishments. Food processing plant does not include a food establishment.
FROZEN FOODS: Any food or food product which has been preserved by freezing or
subjected to a process of refrigeration sufficient to reduce every portion to
minus eighteen (-18) Centigrade degrees (0 Fahrenheit degrees) or lower.
GOOD REPAIR: The absence of any deterioration, damage or wear which may harbor
dirt or food; items not in good repair would display property which impedes
cleaning.
HACCP: Hazard analysis and critical control point (HACCP).
HACCP PLAN: A systematic approach to the identification, evaluation and control
of food safety hazards.
HERMETICALLY SEALED CONTAINER: A container designed and intended to be secure
against the entry of microorganisms and to maintain the commercial sterility of
its contents after processing.
ILLINOIS FOOD CODE: The latest edition of the Illinois Food Code, as amended,
promulgated by the Illinois Department of Public Health and adopted herein by
reference.
ILLINOIS LOCAL HEALTH PROTECTION GRANT CODE: The latest edition of the Illinois
Local Health Protection Grant Code, as amended, promulgated by the Illinois
Department of Public Health and adopted herein by reference.
MISBRANDED: Food may be deemed to be misbranded:
   1.   If the label, brand, tag or notice under which it is sold is false or
misleading in any particular as to the kind, grade or quality or composition;
   2.   If it is sold as the product of one manufacturer when in reality it is
the product of another manufacturer; or
   3.   If on the label, brand, tag or notice under which it is sold there is
any false statement concerning the sanitary conditions under which it is
manufactured.
MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: Any food service establishment capable of being
readily moved from location to location; one without a fixed location.
PERISHABLE FOOD: Any food of a type or in such condition as may spoil, but does
not include foods or beverages enclosed in hermetically sealed containers,
unless such container is labeled so as to indicate that the contents are
perishable.
PRIORITY ITEM: A provision in the U.S. FDA Food Code whose application
contributes directly to the elimination, prevention or reduction to an
acceptable level, hazards associated with food borne illness or injury and
there is no other provision that more directly controls the hazard. A priority
item includes items with a quantifiable measure to show control of hazards such
as cooking, reheating, cooling, hand washing; and an item is an item that is
denoted in the U.S. FDA Food Code with a superscript P - P.
PRIORITY FOUNDATION ITEM: A provision in the U.S. FDA Food Code whose
application supports, facilitates or enables one or more priority items. A
priority foundation item includes an item that requires the purposeful
incorporation of specific actions, equipment or procedures by industry
management to attain control of risk factors that contribute to food borne
illness or injury such as personnel training, infrastructure or necessary
equipment, HACCP plans, documentation or record keeping, and labeling; and an
item that is denoted in the U.S. FDA Food Code with a superscript Pf - Pf.
RETAIL FOOD STORE: Grocery store; meat market; poultry market; fresh fruit and
vegetable market; confectionery; nut store; or any other establishment whether
fixed or moveable where food, intended for human consumption off the premise is
manufactured, produced, prepared, handled, transported, sold or offered for
sale at retail to the general public. A delicatessen or other facility by
whatever name, where foods are cooked or prepared, located, within a food
store, shall have to comply with such other food sanitation regulations that
apply to such food preparation operations.
SAFE MATERIALS: Articles manufactured from or composed of materials that may
reasonably be expected to result, directly or indirectly, in their becoming a
component or otherwise affecting the characteristics of any food with which
they may contact. If materials used are food additives or color additives as
defined in section 20.1(s) or (t) of The Federal Food, Drug or Cosmetic Act,
they are "safe" only if they are used in conformity with regulations
established pursuant to section 409 or section 706 of the Act. Other materials
are "safe" only if, as used, they are not food additives or color additives as
defined in section 20.1(s) or (t) of The Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act
and are used in conformity with all applicable regulations of the Food and Drug
Administration.
TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: A food establishment that operates for a period
of no more than fourteen (14) consecutive days in conjunction with a single
event or celebration.
TIME/TEMPERATURE CONTROL FOR SAFETY FOOD: A food that requires time/temperature
control for safety (TCS) to limit pathogenic microorganism growth or toxin
formation.
U.S. FDA FOOD CODE: The current edition of the United States Food and Drug
Administration Model Food Code, as amended, and adopted herein by reference.
WHOLESOME: In sound condition, clean, free from adulteration and otherwise
suitable for use as human food.
8-24-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   License Required, Posting; Duration. It shall be unlawful for any
person who does not possess a valid license obtained from the Village, which is
neither revoked nor suspended, to establish, maintain or operate a food
establishment within the Village. Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at the food establishment. The license for a food establishment shall be
valid for the licensing period unless revoked or suspended as provided herein
and must be renewed annually. Licenses are not transferable from one person to
another or from one location to another. Every person licensed and operating
vehicles under the provisions of this Article shall maintain a copy of their
active Village license in their vehicle.
   B.   Application for and Issuance of License; License to Remain in Force.
The application for a food establishment license shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code. The application shall convey to the
Village Clerk such pertinent information as may be necessary and required in
order to inform that office fully as to the size and nature of the place to be
used for the purpose of the business and the conditions, equipment and
facilities for conducting the business therein. Before any license shall be
issued, and before any food may be dispensed, the Village Clerk shall refer all
applications for a license to operate a food establishment to the Public Health
and Code Administration Departments for inspection. The Public Health and Code
Administration Departments shall inspect the premises for which the license
application is made and report the findings thereon to the Village Clerk within
seven (7) days with a recommendation for either approval of the license or
advising against the issuance of the license applied for.
   When a person who has applied for a license has complied with all of the
requirements of this Chapter, and the General Licensing Chapter, the Village
Clerk shall issue the license requested.
   All licenses for the operation of a food establishment now held by any
person shall continue in force for the period for which they are issued.
   C.   Transferability. No license issued for the operation of any food
establishment shall be assigned or transferred to any other person, nor to any
other location; but a new license must be obtained by any new operator or owner
of any such business, or if the location thereof be changed, the old license
must be surrendered, and a new license shall be obtained and the fees therefor
must be paid. No refund shall be granted by an unexpired period of the former
license.
   D.   Suspension and Revocation of License. The Village Manager and/or
Director of Public Health may, without warning, notice or hearing, suspend any
license to operate a food establishment if the holder of the license does not
comply with the requirements of this Article, or if the operation of the
establishment does not comply with the requirements of this Article, or if the
operation of the food establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard
to public health.
   When a license is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. The
holder of the license shall be notified in writing that the license, upon
service of the notice, is immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a
hearing before the Director of Public Health will be provided if a written
request for a hearing is filed within ten (10) days. The Director of Public
Health may end the suspension at any time if reasons for the suspension no
longer exist.
   The Board of Health may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a
license for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this
Article or for interference with the Director of Public Health or his or her
duly appointed representative in the performance of duty.
   Prior to revocation or refusal to renew a license for a food establishment,
a hearing shall be held before the Board of Health. Acting as the hearing board
authorized by Section
8-1-15 the Board of Health may act upon its own motion, or upon the verified
complaint in writing of any person setting forth facts which if proven would
constitute grounds for the denial of an application for a license, the refusal
or removal of a license, and the revocation of a license, or upon the petition
of an applicant investigate the applicant or licensee. Proceeding shall be as
provided in Section
8-1-15, provided the hearing body shall be the Board of Health.
   The Board of Health shall make findings of fact and render a decision which
shall be entered upon record of the Board.
   The decision of the Board of Health may be appealed to the Board of Trustees
in which event the proceedings shall be reviewed and a decision rendered by the
Board of Trustees based on the written record before the Board of Health.
   Whenever a revocation of a license has become final, the holder of the
revoked license may make written application for a new license.
   E.   Construction and Remodeling Food Establishments. Any person who desires
or proposes to remodel an existing building or portion thereof which is being
used or is proposed to be used to conduct a food establishment, or who desires
or proposes to construct a new building which is to be used in whole or in part
to conduct a food establishment, shall, prior to such remodeling or
construction, submit plans and specifications to the Village for review and
approval. The plans and specifications shall include a menu and indicate the
proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans and construction materials of
work areas, and the type and model of fixed equipment and facilities. All
equipment installed pursuant to this Section shall be listed in the most
recently published National Sanitation Foundation Annual Listing of Food
Service Equipment or meet equivalent standards. The Village shall review the
plans, and if they conform to the sanitation and construction requirements of
this code, the Village shall approve them and return one copy thereof with
approval written thereon. The Village shall retain the other copies for the
files and records of the Village.
   If the Village finds that the plans do not conform to the sanitation and
construction requirements of this Code, the Village shall communicate in
writing said item to be corrected prior to Village approval. Whenever plans and
specifications have been approved by the Village, the Village shall cause to
have made such inspections as may be necessary prior to the start of
operations, to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications
and with the requirements of this Code.
   F.   Reopening of Discontinued Food Establishments. If any food
establishment which is now being maintained and operated shall be vacated,
discontinued or unused for a period of six (6) consecutive months or more and
shall thereafter be reopened or reestablished as a food establishment, it shall
be considered a new food establishment for the purpose of this Article and
treated accordingly.
   G.   Inspection of Food Establishments. The Director of Public Health shall
make or cause to have made an inspection of all food establishments at least as
often as prescribed in the Illinois Local Health Protection Grant Code, but no
less than at least once each six (6) months. Other inspections, surveys,
investigations and studies of food establishments shall be performed as may be
necessary to determine that all food establishments are constructed, operated
and maintained in compliance with the standards and requirements set forth in
this Article. In case a violation of any item of sanitation shall be discovered
by the Health Inspector he shall make a second inspection after the lapse of
such time as he deems necessary for the defect to be remedied, and the second
inspection shall be used in determining compliance with the requirements of
this Article.
   H.   Report of Inspections. Whenever an inspection of a food establishment
is made, the findings shall be recorded on an inspection report form provided
by the Director of Public Health. The inspection report form shall summarize
the sanitary requirements of this article. A copy of the completed inspection
report form shall be furnished to the license holder at the conclusion of the
inspection.
   The most recent copy of the inspection report provided to the license holder
shall be posted upon the inside wall of the food establishment under the
license. The most recent inspection report shall not be defaced or removed by
any person except the Director of Public Health or his or her representative.
Another copy of the inspection report shall be filed with the records of the
Department of Public Health. The completed inspection report form is a public
document and shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who
requests it according to law.
      1.   The inspection report shall state the penalty (including license
suspension or revocation) for failure to correct inspection determined
deficiencies within the time limits for corrections. An opportunity for hearing
on the inspection findings or the time limitations or both will be provided if
a written request is filed with the Director of Public Health within ten (10)
days after delivery of the inspection report. If a request for hearing is
received, a hearing shall be held by the Director of Public Health within
twenty (20) days of receipt of the request.
      2.   Whenever a food service establishment is required under the
provision of this section to cease operations, it shall not resume operations
until it is shown on reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to
cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered
within a reasonable time.
   I.   Correction Of Violations: Violations shall be corrected as follows:
      1.   Priority Item or Priority Foundation Item Violation: A licensee
shall correct a priority item or priority foundation item violation or HAACP
plan deviation as follows unless otherwise required by the Village:
         a.   Seventy two (72) hours after an inspection for the licensee to
correct a priority item violation; or
         b.   Ten (10) calendar days after an inspection for the licensee to
correct a priority foundation item violation or HACCP plan deviation.
      2.   Core Item Violation: A license holder shall correct a core item
violation by a date and time as required by the Village but no later than
ninety (90) calendar days after an inspection. The Village may approve an
extension of said period if a written schedule of compliance is submitted by a
licensee and approved by the Village.
      3.   Temporary Food Establishment Violation: In the case of temporary
food service establishments, all violations shall be corrected within twenty
four (24) hours. If violations are not corrected within twenty four (24) hours,
the food establishment shall immediately cease food service operations until
authorized to resume by the Director of Public Health.
      4.   Imminent Health Hazard/Ceasing Operations And Reporting: A licensee
shall immediately discontinue operations and notify the Village if an imminent
health hazard exists because of an emergency such as a fire, flood, extended
interruption of electrical or water service, sewage backup, misuse of poisonous
or toxic materials, onset of a food borne illness outbreak, gross insanitary
occurrence or condition, or other circumstance that may endanger public health.
         a.   A licensee is not required to discontinue operations in an area
of an establishment unaffected by an imminent health hazard.
         b.   The Village may allow a licensee to continue operations in the
event of an extended interruption of electrical or water service based upon the
nature of the potential hazard and the complexity of the necessary corrective
action if:
            (1)   A written emergency operating plan has been approved;
            (2)   Immediate corrective action is taken to eliminate, prevent,
or control any food safety risk and imminent health hazard associated with the
electrical or water service interruption; and
            (3)   The Village is informed upon implementation of the written
emergency operating plan.
   J.   Access: Free access to all food establishments shall be accorded to the
Director of Public Health or his or her representatives at all reasonable times
for the purpose of inspection and examination of such places and of the food
stored, manufactured, processed, prepared, displayed, handled, served, sold or
offered for sale therein or thereon. No person holding a valid license,
including such person's agents and employees, shall obstruct or otherwise
hinder, delay or detain the Director or his or her representative in making
such inspections in pursuance of his or her duty. Free access to any or all
records of food received, used or purchased shall also be accorded the Director
or his or her representative.
   K.   Food Establishments Located Outside The Village: Food establishments
not located in the Village but whose products are sold or served in the Village
must be approved by the State Department of Public Health in the state in which
such food establishment is located, or by other properly constituted enforcing
agencies. At the direction of the Director, such extraterritorial food
establishments may be required to have placed on file with the department the
latest copy of an inspection report from the State Board of Health or other
proper enforcing agency having cognizance over the nonlocal establishment
stating this food establishment is in compliance with all the requirements of
the applicable code relating to sanitation. On receipt of such report, the
department may permit the sale or serving of the products from such food
establishments in the Village as long as such establishment remains in
compliance with the requirements of the applicable code. (1981 Code)
   L.   Sanitation Requirements For Food Establishments: The sanitation
requirements for food establishments shall be regulated in accordance with the
terms of the Illinois Food Code, as may from time to time thereunder be
amended, three (3) copies of which are and shall remain on file in the office
of the Village Clerk.
   M.   Education of Food Establishment Employees. Food establishment license
holders and their employees may be required to attend a foodhandlers'
educational program at a time and place designated by the Director of Public
Health.
   N.   Inspection of Food Establishments Upon Sale or Change of Ownership;
Penalties: No existing food establishment, as defined in this Article, shall be
sold or otherwise undergo a transfer of ownership unless the seller furnishes
the buyer or prospective new owner or operator with a Health Department report
of change of ownership inspection, said report to be provided no more than
sixty (60) days prior to the sale or transfer of ownership of the business but
no later than the day of said sale or transfer of ownership. The change of
ownership inspection report shall be based on an inspection, performed by the
Public Health Department, of all food supplies, equipment and utensils,
sanitary facilities and controls, and the construction and maintenance of the
physical facilities as defined in the Code of the Village or any other
applicable code(s) adopted by reference herein. The report shall list all known
violations, if any, of applicable sanitary rules and regulations of the
Village. The request for a change of ownership inspection must be made by the
seller or seller's agent at least two (2) weeks prior to the scheduled sale or
transfer of ownership. A sale for the purpose of this Section includes contract
sales, exchanges and transfers of possession or control of a food
establishment.
   Any person participating in such a sale in violation of this Section, either
as a seller or by receipt of a sales commission in conjunction therewith, shall
be deemed in violation thereof and be subject to penalties as provided in
Section
1-1-5 of this Code. Any contract executed in violation of this Section shall be
voidable by the buyer. Nothing herein shall relieve the buyer of complying with
this Section or other applicable provisions of this Code. (Ord. 1985-0-48, 7-
15-85; amd. Ord. 18-394, 7-30-2018; Ord. 19-73, 9-3-2019)
8-24-3: ADULTERATED AND MISBRANDED FOOD; EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD
AND OTHER ARTICLES :
   A.   Rules And Regulations; Enforcement Of Article: It shall be unlawful for
any person within the Village to manufacture for sale, produce or offer for
sale or sell any article of food which is adulterated, misbranded or
insufficiently labeled or otherwise violates the provision of this article.
   The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Director of Public
Health who shall adopt such measures, prepare and prescribe such rules and
regulations, as he may deem necessary, to facilitate proper enforcement and to
carry out the purpose and intent of this article.
   B.   Food may be examined or sampled by the Health Department as often as
necessary for enforcement of this article. The Health Department may, upon
written notice to the license holder or person in charge, specifying with
particularity the reasons therefor, place a hold order on any food which it
believes is in violation of any section of this article. The Health Department
shall tag, label or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No
food subject to a hold order shall be used, sold or moved from the
establishment without permission from the Health Department.
   C.   The Health Department shall permit storage of food under conditions
specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the
public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and
accomplished.
   D.   The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed with
the Health Department within ten (10) days, and that if no hearing is
requested, the food shall be destroyed. If a request for a hearing is received,
the hearing shall be held within five (5) days after receipt of the request. On
the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated
or the license holder or person in charge of the food may be directed by
written order to denature or destroy such food or bring it into compliance with
the provisions of this article.
   E.   Specifications For Labels: The label on any bottle, package or
container of food shall correspond in size and purpose with that required by
the State.
   F.   Defacing And The Like, Marks, Labels Or Brands: It shall be unlawful
for any person to deface, change, erase or remove any mark, label or brand
required by law with the intent to mislead deceive or violate any of the
provisions of this article or statutes of the state.
   G.   Eggs: No person shall buy, sell or offer for sale, within the Village,
eggs for human consumption that are unfit for human food.
   For the purpose of this Section, an egg is unfit for human food if it is
addled or moldy; if it contains black rot, white rot or a blood ring; if it has
an adherent yolk or a bloody or green white color or if it consists in whole or
in part of a filthy, decomposed or putrid substance.
   In all advertising of shell eggs for sale at retail, the grade and size or
"ungraded" shall be stated.
   No person other than those who sell only eggs produced by their own flock,
shall sell, offer for sale or advertise for sale shell eggs as "fresh eggs" or
under the words of similar import (such as "new laid eggs") any eggs which do
not meet the minimum requirements for consumer Grade A as prescribed by state
standards for individual shell eggs.
   H.   Slaughterhouses Prohibited. No slaughterhouse shall be constructed or
permitted in any part of the Village. (amd. Ord. 19-73, 9-3-2019)
8-24-4: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Issuance of Citations. Whenever existing violations have not been
corrected within the time periods specified in Section
8-24-2H3, the Director of Public
   Health or his or her duly appointed representative are authorized to issue
citations to any person who fail to undertake or cause the correction of
violations specified in the inspection report.
   The citation may be delivered to the licensee personally, may be delivered
to a member of the licensee's household of age ten (10) years or older or may
be delivered to the licensee's address by registered or certified mail.
   B.   Penalty. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Code, a licensee who is
convicted for a violation of this Article or for resisting enforcement of any
of the provisions of this Article, shall be punished in accordance with the
provisions of Section
1-1-5 of this Code. (amd. Ord. 19-73, 9-3-2019)
ARTICLE 25
LONG TERM CARE FACILITIES
SECTION:
8-25-1: Definitions
8-25-2: License Required
8-25-3: Application
8-25-4: Processing of Application
8-25-5: License Display
8-25-6: License Transferability
8-25-7: State Regulations Adopted
8-25-8: Inspection of Records and Premises
8-25-9: General Regulations
8-25-10: Fire Regulations
8-25-11: Duty of Licensees to File Copy of Reports
8-25-12: Issuance of License
8-25-13: Application Denial
8-25-14: Revocation of License
8-25-15: Hearing
8-25-1: DEFINITIONS:
LONG TERM CARE FACILITY: A private home, institution, building, residence or
other place, whether operated for profit or not, which provides through its
ownership or management, maintenance, personal care, or professional nursing
care for more than two (2) persons who, by reason of illness or physical
infirmity, are unable to properly care for themselves. Long term care facility
definitions are:
   A.   A skilled nursing facility provides skilled nursing care, continuous
skilled nursing observations, restorative nursing, and other services under
professional direction with frequent medical supervision. Such facilities are
provided for patients who need the type of care and treatment required during
the most acute phase of illness or during reoccurrences of symptoms in long-
term illness.
   B.   An intermediate care facility provides basic nursing care and other
restorative services under periodic medical direction. Many of these services
may require skill in administration. Such facilities are for residents who have
long-term illnesses or disabilities which may have reached a relatively stable
plateau.
   C.   A sheltered care facility provides personal assistance, supervision,
oversight, and a suitable activities program. Provisions are made for periodic
medical supervision and other medical services as needed. Such facilities are
for individuals who do not need nursing care but do need the services provided
by this type of facility in meeting their needs. Examples of such individuals
are referrals from institutions for the mentally handicapped; those disabled
from aging; the chronically ill whose conditions have become stablized.
The term "long term care facility" does not include:
   A.   A home, institution or other place operated by the Federal government
or any agency thereof or by the State;
   B.   A hospital, sanitarium or other institution whose principal activity or
business is the care and treatment of persons suffering from mental or nervous
diseases;
   C.   A hospital, sanitarium or other institution whose principal activity or
business is the diagnosis, care and treatment of human illness or fragility
through the maintenance and operation of organized facilities therefor;
   D.   Any child welfare agency, maternity or lying in home required to be
licensed by the state. (Ord. 1992-0-29, 6-1-92)
8-25-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to open, conduct, manage or maintain any
"long term care facility" as defined in this article within the Village without
first having a license therefor. (Ord. 1992-0-29, 6-1-92)
8-25-3: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring the license required by the preceding section shall apply
in writing to the Village Clerk and said application shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of the Village as contained in article
1 of this chapter.
In addition to the information required by article 1 of this chapter the
application shall contain the following:
   A.   The location of the facility for which a license is sought;
   B.   The name of the person under whose management or supervision the
facility will be conducted;
   C.   The number and type of residents for which maintenance, care or nursing
is to be provided; and
   D.   The number and training of the employees of the home.
Each application shall be accompanied by a plan of each floor of the building,
drawn to a scale of not less than one-fourth of an inch to a foot (1/4" = 1'),
showing all fire escapes, stairways, halls, the location and size of habitable
rooms, the location of exits from each floor, the number of persons intended to
be accommodated in each room, and the intended use of every room in the
building legibly written on such plan. (Ord. 1992-0-29, 6-1-92)
8-25-4: PROCESSING OF APPLICATION:
Upon receipt of the application and plan as provided for in the preceding
section, it shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to submit the application
and plan to the Director of Public Health, the Director of Building and Zoning
and the Chief of the Fire Department, each of whom shall make or cause to be
made a proper inspection of the premises, and no license shall be issued by the
Clerk until the written approval of the application and plan from each of such
officials mentioned has been received.
Before approving an application for a license, each of such officials shall
determine that the long term care facility meets, with respect to the
official's department, the minimum standards from time to time prescribed for
long term care facilities by the Illinois Department of Public Health and in
addition:
   A.   The Director of Public Health shall determine that the long term care
facility complies with all of the rules and regulations of the Department of
Public Health and with all sanitary and health requirements of this code;
   B.   The Director of Building and Zoning shall determine that the building
or structure complies with the requirements of the chapter of this code
relating to "buildings" and that the building is located within an area in
which long term care facilities are permitted.
   C.   The Chief of the Fire Department shall determine that no fire hazards
exist in the building or on the premises, that firefighting equipment has been
installed and that all fire regulations set forth in this article in regard to
long term care facilities are complied with. (Ord. 1992-0-29, 6-1-92)
8-25-5: LICENSE DISPLAY:
The license required by this article shall be displayed in a conspicuous place
in the hall or near the main entrance inside the long term care facility. (Ord.
1992-0-29, 6-1-92)
8-25-6: LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY:
The license required by this article shall be valid only in the hands of the
person to whom it is issued and shall not be the subject of sale, assignment or
other transfer, voluntary or involuntary, nor shall a license be valid for any
premises other than those for which it was originally issued. (Ord. 1992-0-29,
6-1-92)
8-25-7: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
   A.   The requirements of the Nursing Home Reform Act of 1979 1  are adopted
as a part of this article. The rules and regulations of the Illinois Department
of Public Health entitled "Minimum Standards, Rules And Regulations For
Classification And Licensure Of Skilled Nursing Facilities And Intermediate
Care Facilities" and Sheltered Care Facilities Code are also adopted by
reference and made a part of this article.
   B.   The Rules and Regulations of the Illinois Department of Public Health
relating to the Licensing and Regulation of Assisted Living and Shared Housing
Facilities as set forth in title 77 of the Illinois administrative code
entitled public health, chapter 1 entitled department of public health,
subchapter c entitled Long Term Care Facilities, part 295 entitled Assisted
Living and Shared Housing Establishment as amended as of October 21, 2004, are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof. (Ord. 2007-0-22, 4-9-07)
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq.
8-25-8: INSPECTION OF RECORDS AND PREMISES:
Every long term care facility conducted and managed by any person licensed as
provided in this article, and the books and records of such home shall at all
times be open to the inspection of the Director of Public Health, the Director
of Code Enforcement and the Chief of the Fire Department and their respective
duly appointed assistants or inspectors. The aforementioned Village officials
are hereby authorized and empowered to inspect, or cause to be inspected any
long term care facility licensed under this article at least once a year or as
often as they or any of them deem necessary. (Ord. 1992-0-29, 6-1-92)
8-25-9: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
The following regulations shall be observed with respect to every long term
care facility licensed under this article:
   A.   Patients may be housed on any floor, other than the basement, of a
fireproof building. In nonfireproof buildings:
      1.   Bedridden, nonambulatory and blind patients may be housed only on
the first or ground floor;
      2.   No patient shall be permitted on any floor above the second, and no
basement room shall be used for the accommodation of any resident or patient;
and
      3.   Additional floors may be used for sleeping accommodations for
employees of the long term care facility.
   B.   Each employee personnel file shall contain pertinent health records:
      1.   Each employee shall have a physical examination which has been
conducted within a period ten (10) days before or after employment and annually
thereafter. This shall include findings that permit certification that the
employee is free of communicable, contagious or infectious diseases. Additional
physical examinations may be requested at the discretion of the Department
according to the rules for "The Control of Communicable Diseases" (77 Illinois
Administrative Code 690), Illinois Department of Public Health. This initial
physical exam shall include documentation regarding past or present
tuberculosis infection determined by either a tuberculosis skin test or chest
X-ray taken within one year prior to or ten (10) days after initial employment.
      2.   Repeat skin tests and/or chest X-rays are not required unless the
employee is exposed to a person with tuberculosis in its contagious stage or
has signs and symptoms of disease. However, they are highly recommended,
especially for persons residing or working in high risk areas of the State.
      3.   It is also recommended that employees who have been infected with
tuberculosis (positive skin reaction) and have not had a full course of
chemoprophylaxis or chemotherapy should complete one year of daily isoniazid
(INH) unless contraindicated because of age or physical condition. Depending on
their risk of developing disease, as determined by their physician, employees
who have been infected and have not been able to complete a full course of
preventive treatment should have an X-ray annually.
      4.   An employee diagnosed or suspected of having a contagious or
infectious disease shall not be on duty until such time as a written statement
is obtained from a physician that the disease is no longer contagious or is
found to be noninfectious.
   C.   1. Single resident bedrooms shall contain at least one hundred (100)
square feet. Multiple resident bedrooms shall contain at least eighty (80)
square feet per bed. Multiple bedrooms of not less than seventy (70) square
feet per bed may be approved by the Department if services can be provided.
Minimum usable floor area shall be exclusive of toilet rooms, closets, lockers,
wardrobes, alcoves, vestibules, or clearly definable entryways.
      2.   Maximum room capacity shall be four (4) residents. Beds shall be at
least three feet (3') apart, and no more than three (3) beds deep from an
outside wall. There shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') between walls or a
wall and any built in furniture or storage space.
   D.   A bathroom, lavatory and toilet shall be provided on each occupied
floor.
   E.   Owners and/or operators of facilities licensed and/or operating under
this article and in accordance with State law as sheltered care facilities are
prohibited from holding such facilities out to the public as providing nursing
care to residents of such facilities. (Ord. 1992-0-29, 6-1-92)
8-25-10: FIRE REGULATIONS:
The following fire regulations shall be observed with respect to every long
term care facility licensed under this article:
   A.   The building shall be equipped with fire extinguishing equipment as
specified from time to time by the Chief of the Fire Department.
   B.   No fire hazard shall be permitted to exist in the building or about the
premises.
   C.   Whenever any building or structure or part thereof of any chimney,
smokestack, stove, oven, furnace or thing connected with the building or
structure or located in or upon the premises is deemed a fire hazard or an
additional hazard in case of fire, the Fire Chief is authorized to give written
notice of the existence of such hazard to the person operating such long term
care facility, and such person shall proceed to carry out the instructions of
the Chief of the Fire Department to alleviate such hazard within five (5) days
from receipt of the notice.
   D.   The building shall comply with all regulations and recommendations of
the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Village.
   E.   The building or structure shall be heated only by means of central
heating plant properly installed to safeguard against inherent fire hazards.
The use of portable heaters is prohibited.
   F.   The heating plant shall be enclosed in a fireproof room in the basement
of the structure, which shall be fully sealable with a metal clad door.
Approval of the condition of the heating plant shall be obtained from the
Bureau of Fire Prevention before application for a license is approved. (Ord.
1992-0-29, 6-1-92)
8-25-11: DUTY OF LICENSEES TO FILE COPY OF REPORTS:
Every licensee under the provisions of this article shall file with the Oak
Park Department of Public Health copies of all reports submitted to the
Illinois Department of Public Health in compliance with its rules and
regulations issued pursuant to 210 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1-101 et seq.,
and shall keep such records and make such additional reports as may be required
from time to time by the Village Clerk. (Ord. 1992-0-29, 6-1-92)
8-25-12: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
If the premises and operators of the proposed long term care facilities conform
to the requirements of this article and all other applicable ordinances of the
Village and requirements of the State of Illinois, then upon payment of the
required fee specified in article 2 of this chapter the license will be issued.
(Ord. 1992-0-29, 6-1-92)
8-25-13: APPLICATION DENIAL:
An application for the license required by this article may be denied for
failure to meet any of the requirements for long term care facilities
prescribed by this article or the Illinois Department of Public Health. (Ord.
1992-0-29, 6-1-92)
8-25-14: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A long term care facility license may be denied or revoked if, upon inspection,
the Director of Public Health, Director of Code Enforcement or Chief of the
Fire Department finds that such a long term care facility is conducted and
managed:
   A.   In violation of any of the rules and regulations of the Oak Park
Department of Public Health; or
   B.   In violation of any of the provisions of this code; or
   C.   In violation of the minimum standards, rules and regulation promulgated
by the Illinois Department of Public Health.
License revocation and appeal thereof shall be in accordance with article 1 of
this chapter. (Ord. 1992-0-29, 6-1-92)
8-25-15: HEARING:
A hearing on issues related to the licensing of long term care facilities shall
be held before the Board of Health which shall be designated as the "hearing
board" by the Board of Trustees. The Board of Health shall prepare findings of
fact and make recommendations to the President and Board of Trustees with
regard to its final decision on the licensing, license suspension or revocation
under consideration.
Said hearing shall follow all provisions of section 8-1-15 of this chapter
except as modified by specific language contained in this section. (Ord. 1992-
0-29, 6-1-92)
ARTICLE 26
MASON CONTRACTORS, GENERAL
SECTION:
8-26-1: Definitions
8-26-2: Eligibility
8-26-3: Permit
8-26-4: Bond
8-26-1: DEFINITION:
The terms "masonry" and "mason work" are hereby defined to mean all work in
brick, stone, concrete, terra-cotta, tiles and fireproofing, or any combination
of these materials, as used in and about the construction of buildings or
structures above or below the surface of the ground, with the exception of
laying brick or concrete sidewalks, and brick or concrete paving. Mason
contractors constructing sidewalks are covered in
Chapter 22 of this Code.
8-26-2: ELIGIBILITY:
Every applicant for a mason contractor's license shall be at least twenty one
(21) years of age, a citizen of the United States, and a person of good
character, and shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Code of the
Village.
8-26-3: PERMIT:
All masonry or mason work placed in, upon, or in connection with any building
or structure in the Village shall be done in accordance with the provisions of
this Article and
Chapter 7 of this Code entitled "Buildings" regulating materials, construction,
alteration and inspection of such work. No masonry or mason work shall be done,
placed in or upon, or in connection with any building or structure in the
Village without a permit being first issued therefor by the department charged
with the enforcement of the provisions of this Article pertaining thereto.
In every case where any masonry or mason work forms a part of the work to be
done in, upon, or in connection with the construction of a building or
structure for which a permit is required under the provisions of this Code,
such permit shall be issued only upon the application of a person licensed as a
mason contractor or employing mason as provided in this Article, or upon an
application containing a statement that all mason work on such building or
structure will be performed by a properly licensed mason contractor or
employing mason. In case any mason work on any such building or structure shall
be performed by any contractor or employing mason not licensed as herein
provided, such permit shall be revoked, and the masonry work on such building
or structure shall be stopped by order of the head of the department charged
with the enforcement of the provisions of this Code pertaining thereto, and the
person performing such work and the person having such work done shall be
subject to the penalty hereinafter prescribed; provided, however, that any
property owner doing his own masonry work on his own premises shall not be
required to obtain a license, or post a bond. Said property owners shall be
required to install said masonry work in accordance with the Village Code, and
said work shall be approved by the department charged with the enforcement of
this Article pertaining thereto.
8-26-4: BOND:
No license or permit shall be issued to any mason contractor unless the
applicant shall file a performance bond in the penal sum of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) guaranteed by a surety company satisfactory to the Board
of Trustees, and said bond to be conditioned upon the performance of all
contracts within the Village by said contractor in compliance with the
requirements of
Chapter 7 of this Code entitled "Buildings" and all other applicable ordinances
of the Village.
ARTICLE 27
PUBLIC CARRIERS
SECTION:
8-27-1: Definitions
8-27-2: Authority to Operate Required; Transferability
8-27-3: Authority to Operate; Application
8-27-4: Payment for Use of Public Ways; Certified Statement to be Filed with
Director of Finance
8-27-5: Stopping Places
8-27-6: Temporary Routes
8-27-7: Operating Schedules
8-27-8: Records
8-27-9: Penalties
8-27-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings and are hereby defined,
as follows:
PUBLIC CARRIER: Any person engaged in the business of carrying passengers for
hire by any vehicle other than a public passenger vehicle as defined in
Chapter 24 of this Code and includes all public utilities for local
transportation of passengers within the Village and also all intrastate and
interstate transportation of passengers into, out of and through the Village.
RAILROAD: A public carrier operating on rails mainly on private rights of way
by fuel locomotive and used principally for transportation of persons and
property through, or from a point within the Village to a point outside the
Village.
ELEVATED RAILROAD: A public carrier operating on rails mainly upon elevated
structures or in subways within the Village by electric power and used
principally for local transportation of passengers within the Village and from
points in the Village to points in the City of Chicago or other suburbs.
REVENUE MILE OF OPERATION: The operation of a vehicle by a public carrier for a
distance of one mile while transporting or offering to transport passengers.
8-27-2: AUTHORITY TO OPERATE REQUIRED; TRANSFERABILITY:
It is unlawful for any public carrier to use any public way in the Village for
its operations, except on rails, unless authorized by ordinance designating the
routes of operations and the stopping places on such routes. The license,
permit or authority for such operations shall be a personal privilege of the
licensee, permittee or grantee and shall not be transferable by operation of
law.
8-27-3: AUTHORITY TO OPERATE; APPLICATION:
Applications for authority to operate any public carrier as required by Section
8-27-2 of this Code shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
In addition to the information required by Section 8-1-2, all such applications
shall contain a complete list of the routes, setting forth for each route, the
public ways on which it is proposed to operate; the stopping places on each
route; the points between ways and the distance between such points in miles or
fractions thereof.
All such applications shall be presented by the Village Clerk to the Board of
Trustees for consideration and such action thereon as the Board of Trustees may
determine.
8-27-4: PAYMENT FOR USE OF PUBLIC WAYS; CERTIFIED STATEMENT TO BE FILED WITH
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE:
Every public carrier shall monthly pay compensation for the use of public ways
in accordance with the following schedule of rates:
Class A: Vehicles having capacities of less than thirty (30) passenger seats at
the rate of three-quarters of one cent ($.0075) for each revenue mile of
operation.
Class B: Vehicles having capacities of from thirty (30) to thirty nine (39)
passenger seats, both inclusive, at the rate of one cent ($.01) for each
revenue mile of operation.
Class C: Vehicles having capacities of forty or more passenger seats at the
rate of one and one-half cents ($.015) for each revenue mile of operation.
On or before the fifteenth day of each month each public carrier shall file
with the Director of Finance a certified statement on such form as the Director
of Finance shall prescribe showing the number of revenue miles of operation for
each class vehicle for each route during the last preceding month and the
amount of compensation computed as owing for such revenue miles.
Such compensation shall be paid on or before the fifteenth day of each month
for the total revenue miles of operation during the last preceding month.
8-27-5: STOPPING PLACES:
No public carrier shall make service stops on the public ways of the Village
for the receipt and discharge of passengers at
points other than those listed in the original or amended license application
and which shall from time to time be authorized by the Board of Trustees.
8-27-6: TEMPORARY ROUTES:
The authority granted to any public carrier shall be confined to the public
ways designated by ordinance, but if any department of the Village requires
that vehicular traffic shall be temporarily diverted from any such public ways
for any reason or cause, then the public carrier shall comply with such
regulations as may be prescribed by the Police Department and shall accept such
temporary routes as may be prescribed.
8-27-7: OPERATING SCHEDULES:
Current operating schedules shall be filed with the Village Clerk by the public
carrier in advance of any operations and new schedules likewise shall be filed
in advance of any change in such schedules.
8-27-8: RECORDS:
Each public carrier shall keep accurate records of the revenue miles of
operation on the public ways of the Village which have been authorized by the
Board of Trustees and shall, at any time when required by the Director of
Finance or his authorized representative, furnish additional information with
respect to such revenue miles of operation and compensation.
8-27-9: PENALTIES:
Any public carrier violating this Article or any requirements, provision or
condition of any license, permit or authority under this Article shall be
punished as provided in Section
1-1-5 of this Code. In addition to the penalties hereby imposed, the police
officers of the Village have the power and duty to temporarily stop any such
operation.
ARTICLE 28
BARBERS AND BARBERSHOPS
SECTION:
8-28-1: License Required
8-28-2: Definitions
8-28-3: Sanitary Regulations
8-28-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall establish, maintain or operate any barbershop as defined in
this Article without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in Article
1 of this Chapter.
8-28-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
BARBER: The term "barber" shall mean any person engaging in the practice of
barbering as defined in Illinois Revised Statutes, 1979, chapter 111, paragraph
1608.
BARBERSHOP: The term "barbershop" means a fixed place of business wherein
barbering is practiced and carried on.
8-28-3: SANITARY REGULATIONS:
   A.   Every barbershop shall be located in a building or room which is well
ventilated and well lighted and of such construction that it may be easily
cleaned.
   B.   All barbershops, together with the furniture, fixtures, instruments and
linen, shall be kept in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times.
   C.   All barbershops shall be at all times supplied with hot and cold
running water. All bowls, basins, jars and like receptacles shall be
antiseptically cleaned immediately after using.
   D.   Combs and hair brushes shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all
times and shall be cleaned thoroughly with soap and hot water after each use.
All razors, shears, clippers and appliances shall be sterilized, immediately
after being used, by boiling water or steam sterilization or by proper use of
approved liquid germicides.
   E.   Glass or metal articles which cannot be boiled shall be cleaned in soap
and water, wiped in alcohol, or immersed in an approved germicidal solution for
not less than one hour.
   F.   Only unused, freshly laundered towels, including dry towels, steam
towels or wash clothes shall be used for each patron. All clean linen must be
kept in a closed cabinet until used. The headrest must be covered with a
freshly laundered towel or fresh paper before using for each patron. In cutting
the hair of any person, a freshly laundered towel or fresh paper neck strip
shall be placed about the neck so as to present the hair cloth from touching
the skin.
   G.   The use of lump alum, styptic pencils, finger bowls, shaving mugs,
powder puffs and sponges is prohibited. The use of styptic or alum in powder or
liquid form and individual applicators is permitted.
   H.   No barber having a contagious or infectious disease shall be permitted
to work in a barbershop.
   I.   No barbershop shall be used as a place in which to sleep.
   J.   All tools, instruments or appliances shall be thoroughly sterilized
immediately after their use upon any sick person.
   K.   Every barber or other employee shall wash his hands thoroughly
immediately before and after serving each customer and shall, while serving
customers, wear a clean, washable apron or coat.
   L.   A copy of these regulations shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
each barbershop for the information and guidance of persons working or employed
therein and for the public at large.
   M.   For the purpose of regulating the sanitary conditions in barbershops,
the sanitary rules for barbershops promulgated by the Illinois Department of
Registration and Education are hereby adopted insofar as they are not
inconsistent with the requirements of this Article. Three (3) copies of such
regulations shall be on file in the office of the Village Clerk for public
inspection.
   N.   It shall be the duty of every barber to conspicuously display his
certificate of registration as issued by the Illinois Department of
Registration and Education at all times in front of his work stand or mirror
where it may readily be seen by all persons whom he serves. (Ord. 1981-0-70,
10-5-81)
ARTICLE 29
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES
SECTION:
8-29-1: Adoption of State Code
8-29-2: Termination of Lease
8-29-3: Business to Terminate
8-29-1: ADOPTION OF STATE CODE:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of regulating "going out of business
sales", an Act of the State of Illinois, entitled: "An Act to Regulate the
Sale, Representation and Advertising of Goods, Wares or Merchandise to Prevent
the Fraudulent Sale Thereof, to Provide Penalties Therefor and to Repeal Act
Therein Named" 1 , approved July 23, 1959, as amended. Three (3) copies of such
Act have been and now are on file in the office of the Village Clerk, and
available for public use, inspection and examination.
 
Notes
  1. Chapter 121 /2, Illinois Revised Statutes, sections 157.1 to 157.12,
1 inclusive.
   
8-29-2: TERMINATION OF LEASE:
In addition to the requirements of said State Act, if the applicant having a
going out of business license is a lessee on the premises where the business is
conducted, no such license shall be issued hereunder and no such sale shall be
conducted unless the applicant has advised the lessor of the premises, in
writing, that the applicant requires that the existing lease be terminated and
that such request to terminate shall be irrevocable during the period covered
by the license.
8-29-3: BUSINESS TO TERMINATE:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to continue in business or to
have an interest in any continuing business on the premises where the going out
of business sale took place for a period of two (2) years after said sale. Each
day that the licensee continues in business in violation of this Section shall
be a separate offense. (Ord. 1981-0-70, 10-5-81)
ARTICLE 30
CURRENCY EXCHANGES
SECTION:
8-30-1: Finding
8-30-2: Definition
8-30-3: Hours
8-30-1: FINDING:
That the operation of currency exchanges during the early morning hours tends
to increase parking on public streets when such night parking is prohibited by
Village Ordinance and tends to increase the incidence of crimes against the
patrons, employees, and/or owners of currency exchanges by reason of the
darkness and dearth of passers-by.
8-30-2: DEFINITION:
The term "currency exchange" means any person, except banks incorporated under
the law of the United States, engaged in the business of providing facilities
for cashing checks, drafts, money orders and all other evidences of money
acceptable to such currency exchange for a fee or service charge, or other
consideration. Provided, however, nothing herein shall be held to apply to any
person engaged in the business of transporting for hire, bullion, currency,
securities, negotiable or non-negotiable documents, jewels or other property of
great monetary value, nor to any person engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail who, in the course of such business and as
an incident thereto, cashes checks, drafts, money orders or other evidences of
money.
8-30-3: HOURS:
No currency exchange shall be operated after the hour of two thirty o'clock (2:
30) A.M. or before the hour of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day. (Ord. 1983-
0-11, 3-7-83)
ARTICLE 31
HORSE DRAWN CARRIAGE RIDE
SECTION:
8-31-1: Definition
8-31-2: License Required
8-31-3: Routes
8-31-4: Sanitation
8-31-5: Stabling
8-31-6: Insurance
8-31-7: Marking and Lighting of Carriage
8-31-8: Carriage Stands
8-31-9: Applicability of Taxicab Requirements
8-31-10: Driving Regulations
8-31-11: Penalties Imposed
8-31-1: DEFINITION:
HORSE DRAWN CARRIAGE RIDE: A service whereby a carriage, drawn by a horse
controlled by a carriage driver, is made available to the public for a fee.
8-31-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall establish, maintain or operate the business of horse drawn
carriage rides as defined in this Article without first obtaining a license
therefor as provided in Article 1 of this Chapter. The license of each horse
and carriage shall be displayed at all times. License applicants shall present
veterinary certificates to the office of the Village Clerk, documenting the
fact that the individual horses are in good health and disease free.
8-31-3: ROUTES:
Proposed routes must be approved by the Village Manager. No regular carriage
route may be established to include the peripheral roadways of the Village,
left turns at signalized intersections, or the three hundred (300) and four
hundred (400) blocks of North Kenilworth and Forest Avenues. Permission may be
granted by the Chief of Police to use an unapproved route for a specific
purpose on a one-time basis.
8-31-4: SANITATION:
All horses must be equipped with manure bags, of sufficient capacity to hold
manure droppings for one day, which must be emptied at the location at which
the horse is stabled, and in no case within the Village. In the event that the
pavement becomes soiled by manure or urine, the operator shall immediately
remove the deposits and wash the pavement with a portable water supply. All
horse and carriage stands and loading areas shall be washed down as needed, but
no less than two (2) times per week with water and disinfectant to remove
organisms, debris and odor.
8-31-5: STABLING:
No horse may be stabled within the Village. Horses must be brought to the
starting point of an approved route by a horse trailer. Feed and water may only
be stored within the horse trailer. No horse shall draw a carriage or be
harnessed to a carriage for more than eight (8) hours in any twenty four (24)
hour period.
8-31-6: INSURANCE:
A certificate of liability insurance in the amount of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) for each carriage must be filed with the office of the
Village Clerk and must name the Village as additionally insured. The policy
shall, by its terms, provide that it can neither be canceled nor materially
changed until after ten (10) days written notice to the Village.
8-31-7: MARKING AND LIGHTING OF CARRIAGE:
   A.   The marking and lighting required for an animal drawn vehicle, under
the Illinois Vehicle Code, chapter 951/2 Illinois Revised Statutes, must be
prominently displayed on the carriage.
   B.   Red lights on the side and rear of the carriage must be lit at sundown.
8-31-8: CARRIAGE STANDS:
Locations for carriage stands must be approved by the Village Manager after
application for the location has been received and recommended by the Director
of Public Works.
8-31-9: APPLICABILITY OF TAXICAB REQUIREMENTS:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the terms and provisions of Articles 1 and
2 of Chapter 24 of this Code relating to taxicabs and taxicab drivers shall
apply to and govern the operators and business of ''horse drawn carriage
rides." The schedule of rates set forth in Section
24-1-2 shall not be applicable hereto. The provisions of this Article shall
apply whenever a conflict between the provisions of Articles 1 and 2 of Chapter
24 and the provisions of this Article shall arise.
8-31-10: DRIVING REGULATIONS:
Carriage drivers will adhere to all regulations applicable to drivers of
vehicles under the state of Illinois vehicle code and this code. (Ord. 1988-0-
25, 4-18-88)
8-31-11: PENALTIES IMPOSED:
Persons violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to the
general penalty provisions set forth in section
1-1-5 of the Village Code. (Ord. 1988-0-25, 4-18-88)
ARTICLE 32
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
8-32-1: Definitions
8-32-2: License
8-32-3: License Issuance And Renewal
8-32-4: Standards
8-32-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, and are
hereby defined as follows:
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: A residence, in which the owner either resides
or which the owner controls while residing in a residence adjacent thereto,
providing accommodations for a charge to the public with no more than five (5)
guest units for rent, in operation for more than ten (10) nights in a twelve
(12) month period. Only the breakfast meal may be provided to the registered
guests. The service of food to the public for a charge is otherwise prohibited.
Bed and breakfast establishments shall not include motels, hotels, boarding
houses, or food service establishments.
BED AND BREAKFAST GUEST: Person or persons staying in a bed and breakfast guest
unit overnight, but not to exceed fifteen (15) consecutive days, and having a
permanent residence at an address other than the address of the bed and
breakfast guest unit temporarily occupied. A bed and breakfast guest may not
stay overnight in any portion of the dwelling unit not designated as a guest
unit.
BED AND BREAKFAST OPERATOR: The owner of the bed and breakfast establishment,
who is required to reside in or adjacent to the bed and breakfast
establishment.
GUEST UNIT: A sleeping room or group of rooms within a residential dwelling
unit, forming a separate area, used or intended to be used for living or
sleeping, but not for cooking purposes, by no more than two (2) transient
guests per night for a continuous period not in excess of fifteen (15) days per
guest. (Ord. 2009-0-061, 9-8-09)
8-32-2: LICENSE:
No person shall operate a bed and breakfast establishment without first
obtaining a license therefor as provided in article 1 of this chapter. Licenses
shall be issued by the Village Clerk for a period of one year from the date of
issuance, unless sooner revoked, and may thereafter be renewed for successive
one year periods. No license shall be transferable to another person or
location or to other bed and breakfast guest units. (Ord. 2009-0-061, 9-8-09)
8-32-3: LICENSE ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL:
No license shall be issued or renewed until the building and facilities have
been inspected and approved by the Village to assure compliance with the
standards set forth herein. (Ord. 2009-0-061, 9-8-09)
8-32-4: STANDARDS:
In addition to the requirements set forth in article 1 of this chapter and
applicable provisions of the Municipal and Building Codes and Zoning Ordinance,
including section 4.5.2DD thereof, no license shall be issued unless the
following standards are met:
   A.   The occupancy limitation for a guest unit shall be as follows: The
guest unit may not be less than seventy (70) square feet for one guest and one
hundred (100) square feet for two (2) guests.
   B.   One off street parking space shall be provided for each authorized
guest unit, plus one additional off street space for the dwelling unit if owner
occupied. This off street parking requirement may be satisfied by the owner
acquiring at least a five (5) year leasehold interest in the requisite number
of off street parking spaces, renewable off street Village parking permit
spaces or any combination of owned, leased or permit spaces within five hundred
feet (500') of the bed and breakfast establishment they are intended to serve.
   C.   The owner of the bed and breakfast must occupy the bed and breakfast or
adjacent property whenever bed and breakfast guests are present.
   D.   The owner of a bed and breakfast establishment shall have liability
insurance coverage for bed and breakfast guests in the amount of at least one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00), and a copy of such insurance coverage shall be
submitted to the Village with application for license or renewal of license.
   E.   One professionally painted sign of no more than eighteen inches (18")
in height and twenty four inches (24") in width which is consistent in design
and material with the building's architecture, shall be permitted to be affixed
flat to the front facade of the building near the front entrance. Such signs
shall only display the name of the bed and breakfast establishment and must be
reviewed and approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals for compliance with the
above stated standards before a permit may be issued for same.
   F.   Guest units shall be permitted only in buildings of type 1A, 1B, 2A,
2B, 3A and 5A construction, as specified in the 2003 edition of the
international building code.
   G.   Each bed and breakfast guest shall be provided individual soap and
clean individual bath cloths and towels. Clean bed linen in good repair shall
be provided for each guest who is provided accommodations and shall be changed
between guests and as often as necessary. Clean linen shall be stored and
handled in a sanitary manner.
   H.   Bed and breakfast establishments shall meet the state fire marshal's
requirements for one- and two-family dwellings to the extent that said
requirements are consistent with this article. In the event of a conflict
between the provisions of this article and the state fire marshal's
requirements, the provisions of this article shall prevail. In addition, the
following standards shall be required:
      1.   Manual extinguishing equipment shall be provided on each floor in
accordance with NFPA 10 - standards for the installation of portable fire
extinguishers.
      2.   No door which must be used as a required means of escape shall be
locked against egress when the building is occupied. All locking devices which
impede or prohibit egress or which cannot be easily disengaged shall be
prohibited.
      3.   All combustibles or flammable liquids shall be stored in approved
metal containers. No combustible storage shall be allowed in or under
stairways.
      4.   All trash containers shall be metal.
      5.   No cooking facilities or portable heaters shall be permitted in
guestrooms.
      6.   No means of escape shall be so located as to be blocked in case of
fire arising from the malfunctioning of a stove or other heating device.
      7.   All heating equipment shall be inspected and serviced at least
annually by a competent heating contractor.
      8.   All hallways and stairways shall be adequately lighted (a minimum of
1 foot-candle [11 lux]) while the building is occupied by guests.
      9.   Guestrooms shall not be permitted in the basement or above the
second floor of the building.
      10.   An integrated, supervised fire alarm system consisting of a
hardwired or UL approved wireless automatic fire detection system which
complies with national fire alarm code NFPA 72, shall be installed and shall
include the following:
         a.   One pull station shall be provided at each required exit and on
each floor containing guest sleeping rooms; and
         b.   Smoke detectors with light and horn strobes shall be installed in
each guestroom used for sleeping, in each hallway in the immediate vicinity of
rooms and on each building level, including the basement and habitable attic
space and shall be tested regularly in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
      11.   Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in accordance with the
residential building code on each building level including the basement and
owner habitable attic space.
      12.   Exit and emergency lighting shall be provided in accordance with
the 2003 edition of the international building code on each floor containing
guest sleeping rooms.
      13.   Exit signage shall be installed in accordance with the 2003 edition
of the international building code at each stairway, on each floor containing
guest sleeping rooms and at each exit door.
      14.   Storage, such as in a basement, shall be in a one hour rated
enclosure when deemed by the Village to be in sufficient quantities to be
hazardous.
      15.   A floor plan of the bed and breakfast establishment shall be
submitted to the Fire Department for approval, which shall indicate: the size
of proposed building, exits, location of emergency exit signage and lighting,
fire alarms, smoke and carbon monoxide detectors, and location of extinguishing
devices.
      16.   All bed and breakfast units shall have posted on the inside of the
entry door to each unit, a drawing showing the direction of exit travel, the
approximate distance in feet, and the allowable occupant load of that unit.
      17.   Travel distance from any guest unit to an exit shall not exceed
seventy five feet (75').
Exception: If two (2) separate primary exits are provided from a guest unit,
then the travel distance to the exits shall not exceed one hundred feet (100')
in either direction.
      18.   Fireplaces may be operated in the bed and breakfast establishment
provided that the following conditions are met:
         a.   Fireplaces and chimneys are to be inspected by competent chimney
contractors on an annual basis and a copy of the chimney contractor's
inspection report shall be submitted to the Fire Department for review and
approval prior to the issuance or renewal of the business license;
         b.   Fireplaces are fitted with suitable screens or doors to prevent
passage of sparks or embers; and
         c.   No combustibles shall be stored within five feet (5') around the
fireplace opening. This shall include, but not be limited to, bedding,
curtains, pillows and kindling.
      19.   A bathroom shall be provided on each floor used by guests for
sleeping.
      20.   Habitable rooms, hallways, corridors and bathrooms shall have a
minimum ceiling height of seven feet (7').
      21.   Staircases between the first and second floors shall have a minimum
ceiling height of six feet eight inches (6'8").
      22.   Rooms used for sleeping shall have self-closing, minimum twenty
(20) minute fire rated doors. Standard six (6) panel solid wood doors satisfy
this requirement.
      23.   A handrail shall be provided on at least one side of each stairway.
   I.   Bed and breakfast establishments shall comply with the requirements of
article 24 of this chapter entitled "Foods And Food Establishments". Bed and
breakfast establishments which serve meals consisting of more than a
continental breakfast shall comply with all of the requirements of the Illinois
state food service sanitation code. Bed and breakfast establishments which
serve only a continental breakfast (a continental breakfast is one limited to
only coffee, tea, and/or juice, whole/uncut produce and/or commercially
prepared sweet baked goods) are exempt from the requirements of the Illinois
state food service sanitation code, however, they shall comply with the
following minimum standards:
      1.   Food shall be clean, wholesome, free from spoilage, free from
adulteration and misbranding and safe for human consumption. Containers of food
shall be stored above the floor, on clean racks, shelves or other clean
surfaces in such a manner as to be protected from splash or other
contamination. Milk of only pasteurized grade A may be used. Use of home canned
food is prohibited.
      2.   Food shall be protected from contamination while being stored,
prepared and served, and during transportation. Potentially hazardous food
shall be maintained at safe temperatures of forty one degrees Fahrenheit (41°F)
or below, or one hundred thirty five degrees Fahrenheit (135°F) or above, as
appropriate, except during necessary periods of preparation and serving.
Potentially hazardous frozen food shall be thawed at forty one degrees
Fahrenheit (41°F) or below, under refrigeration, quick thawed as part of the
cooking process, or thawed by another method approved by the Health Department.
Raw fruits and vegetables shall be washed thoroughly before use. Portions of
food once served to an individual may not be served again. Laundry facilities
shall be separated from the food preparation areas. Live animals shall be
excluded from food preparation areas.
      3.   Food on display shall be protected from consumer contamination by
the use of packaging or by the use of easily cleanable counter, serving line or
salad bar protector devices, display cases or by other effective means.
      4.   To avoid unnecessary manual contact with food, suitable dispensing
utensils shall be used by employees or provided to consumers who serve
themselves. Between uses during service, dispensing and incidental utensils
shall be stored in the food with the dispensing utensil handle extended out of
the food.
      5.   Condiments, seasonings, and dressings for self-service use shall be
provided in individual packages or from dispensers. Condiments provided for
table or counter service shall be individually portioned, except that catsup
and other sauces may be served in the original container or pour type
dispenser. Sugar for consumer use shall be provided in individual packages or
in pour type dispensers.
      6.   Once served to a consumer, portions of leftover food shall not be
served again except that packaged food, other than potentially hazardous food,
that is still packaged and is still in sound condition, may be re-served.
      7.   Each mechanically refrigerated storage facility storing potentially
hazardous food shall be provided with a numerically scaled indicating
thermometer, accurate to plus or minus three degrees Fahrenheit (±3°F), located
to measure the air temperature in the warmest part of the facility and located
to be easily readable.
      8.   No person knowingly infected with a communicable disease that may be
transmitted by food handling may work in a bed and breakfast establishment.
      9.   If the bed and breakfast operator suspects that any employee, family
member or the operator himself or herself has a reportable communicable
disease, as defined in the Illinois department of public health and rules and
regulations for the control of communicable diseases, the operator shall notify
the local Health Department immediately.
      10.   Persons preparing food shall:
         a.   Maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness and shall conform
to good hygienic practices during all working periods in the food service
establishment.
         b.   Keep their hands and the exposed portions of their arms clean.
They shall keep their fingernails clean and trimmed, filed, and maintained so
that the edges and surfaces are cleanable and not rough. Unless wearing intact
gloves in good repair, a person preparing food may not wear fingernail polish
or artificial fingernails when working with exposed food. Persons preparing
food shall clean their hands and exposed portions of their arms for at least
twenty (20) seconds, using a cleaning compound prior to handling food and after
hands become soiled.
         c.   Prepare food with the least possible manual contact, with
suitable utensils and on surfaces that prior to use have been cleaned, rinsed
and sanitized to prevent cross contamination.
         d.   Avoid direct contact (i.e., using bare hands) with ready to eat
food whenever possible and, to the extent possible, shall handle ready to eat
food only with suitable utensils such as deli tissue, spatulas, tongs, or
single use gloves. Handling of ready to eat food with suitable utensils is not
a substitute for proper hand washing. Use of utensils, including deli tissue,
spatulas, tongs or single use gloves, shall be preceded by thorough hand
washing.
         e.   If gloves are used to handle ready to eat food, they shall be
single use gloves, i.e., shall be used for only one task (preparing/handling
ready to eat food), shall be used for no other purpose and shall be discarded
when damaged or soiled or when interruptions occur in operations. Hands shall
be washed with soap and water prior to and between glove use.
         f.   Drink only from a closed beverage container. The container shall
be handled to prevent contamination of:
            (1)   The food preparer's hands;
            (2)   The container; and
            (3)   Exposed food; clean equipment, utensils and linens; and
unwrapped single service and single use articles.
         g.   Not wear jewelry on their arms and hands while preparing food,
except for a plain ring such as a wedding band or medical information jewelry.
      11.   Cleaned and sanitized utensils and equipment shall be stored at
least six inches (6") above the floor in a clean, dry location in a way that
protects them from contamination by splash, dust and other means. The food
contact surfaces of fixed equipment shall also be protected from contamination.
Equipment and utensils shall not be placed under exposed sewer lines, or water
lines except for automatic fire protection sprinkler heads that may be required
by law.
      12.   Utensils shall be air dried before being stored or shall be stored
in a self-draining position.
      13.   Glasses and cups shall be stored inverted. Other stored utensils
shall be covered or inverted wherever practical. Facilities for the storage of
knives, forks and spoons shall be designed and used to present the handle to
the employee or the consumer. Unless tableware is prewrapped, holders for
knives, forks, and spoons at self-service locations shall protect these
articles from contamination and present the handles of the utensils to the
consumer.
      14.   Residential sinks and home style mechanical dishwashing machines
are acceptable facilities for washing multiuse eating and drinking utensils.
Sinks and dishwashing machines shall be supplied with hot and cold potable
running water. For manual cleaning and sanitizing, multiuse eating and drinking
utensils shall be washed in a hot detergent solution that is kept clean, and
shall be rinsed free of detergent in clean water.
      15.   Immediately following either manual or mechanical washing of eating
or drinking utensils, and pots, pans and other cooking utensils, these utensils
shall be sanitized for at least one minute in a clean solution containing fifty
(50) to two hundred (200) parts per million of available chlorine as a
hypochlorite and having a temperature of at least seventy five degrees (75°),
or another approved sanitizing solution which shall be used at the
concentration tested and approved by the local Health Department. Dishpans may
be used to accomplish the final sanitizing rinse. Utensils shall be air dried.
      16.   Nonfood contact surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned as often as
is necessary to keep the equipment free of accumulation of dust, dirt, food
particles and other debris.
      17.   The reuse of single service utensils is prohibited.
      18.   Effective measures intended to minimize the presence of rodents,
flies, cockroaches, and other insects on the premises shall be utilized. The
premises shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the harborage or feeding
of insects or rodents.
      19.   All garbage and refuse shall be stored and collected in accordance
with the provisions of chapter 20, article 7 of the Oak Park Village Code.
      20.   Containers of poisonous or toxic materials necessary for
operational maintenance of the establishment shall be prominently and
distinctly labeled in accordance with law. Insecticides and rodenticides shall
be stored and located to be physically separated from detergents, sanitizers,
related cleaning or drying agents and other chemicals in cabinets or similar
physically separated compartments or facilities used for no other purpose. To
preclude potential contamination, poisonous or toxic materials shall not be
stored above or intermingled with food, food utensils and equipment and single
service articles. (Ord. 2009-0-061, 9-8-09; amd. Ord. 25-112, 3-4-2025)
ARTICLE 33
ACCESSORY USE TOUR HOUSES
SECTION:
8-33-1: Definitions
8-33-2: License
8-33-3: License Issuance And Renewal
8-33-4: Standards
8-33-5: Hours Open To The Public
8-33-6: Ancillary Commercial Operations
8-33-7: Food Sales Prohibited
8-33-8: Tour Groups; Number Of Persons Per Group Limited
8-33-9: Signage; Advertising Not Permitted; Informational Permitted
8-33-10: Ticket Sales; Reservations
8-33-11: Transportation And Parking
8-33-12: Tour House Accessibility For People With Disabilities
8-33-13: Training
8-33-14: Inspections
8-33-1: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY USE TOUR HOUSE: The use of a private, owner occupied principal-use
dwelling unit, which possesses special architectural and/or historical
significance, for tours by members of the public during limited hours and days
of the week, conducted by the owner/resident of the dwelling unit for a fee.
For the purposes of this Section, a house shall qualify as "owner-occupied" and
an owner shall qualify as an "owner/resident" only if the owner of the house
resides in the house as the owner's principal place of residence; and there are
to be no extended absences from the tour house by the owner(s) during the
primary tour season, beginning on Memorial Day and ending on Labor Day, each
year in which the licensed tour house is in operation. Also, for purposes of
this Section, tours shall be considered as "conducted by the owner/resident" if
such tours are conducted by: 1) the owner/resident; 2) any person who
volunteers to conduct tours on behalf of the owner/resident without
remuneration; or 3) any person who is paid as an employee of the owner/resident
to conduct tours on behalf of the owner/resident. (Ord. 1995-0-20, 3-20-95)
8-33-2: LICENSE:
No person shall operate an accessory use tour house without first obtaining a
license therefor as provided in Article 1 of this Chapter. Licenses shall be
issued by the Village Clerk for a period of one year from the date of issuance,
unless sooner revoked, and may thereafter be renewed for successive one year
periods. No license shall be transferable to another person or location or to
other accessory use tour house units. Such license shall be subject to the
general licensing provisions of
Chapter 8 of the Village Code, including the license suspension and revocation
provisions set forth therein. (Ord. 1995-0-20, 3-20-95)
8-33-3: LICENSE ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL:
No license shall be issued or renewed until the building and facilities have
been inspected and approved by the Village to assure compliance with all local,
State and Federal laws and with the standards set forth herein. (Ord. 1995-0-
20, 3-20-95)
8-33-4: STANDARDS:
In addition to the requirements set forth in Article 1 of this Chapter and the
requirement that the applicant shall comply with all applicable provision of
the Municipal and Building Codes, Zoning Ordinance. State and Federal laws,
including the Americans With Disabilities Act, no license shall be issued
unless the following standards are met:
   A.   The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Oak Park must
authorize the accessory use tour house as a special use by ordinance before the
Village may issue a license therefor, although the Village can give preliminary
approval of the license, contingent upon the issuance of the special use
permit.
   B.   The maximum occupancy for the accessory use tour house shall be
established by the Fire Department and shall at all times be adhered to by the
accessory use tour house owner/operator.
   C.   The owner of an accessory use tour house shall have liability insurance
coverage covering tour guests of the accessory use tour house in the aggregate
amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), naming the Village, the
Visitors Center and the Visitors Bureau as additional insureds; and a copy of
the current certificate indicating such insurance coverage shall be submitted
to the Village with application for a license or renewal of license. The owner
shall notify the Village immediately of any change in insurance coverage. A
change in insurance shall also necessitate the filing of a new certificate of
insurance with the Village evidencing such changes.
   D.   In addition to meeting all fire, building and housing code requirements
for one- and two-family dwellings, accessory use tour house shall also be
required to meet the following standards:
      1.   Manual extinguishing equipment shall be provided on each floor in
accordance with NFPA standards for the installation of portable fire
extinguisher.
      2.   No door which must be used as a required means of escape shall be
locked against egress when tour guests occupy the building. All locking devices
which impede or prohibit egress or which cannot be easily disengaged shall be
prohibited.
      3.   All combustibles or flammable liquids shall be stored in approved
metal containers. No combustible storage shall be allowed in or under
stairways.
      4.   All heating equipment shall be inspected and serviced at least
annually by a competent heating contractor. Heating and ventilating systems
should be contained in an equipment room isolated from the remainder of the
building by fire resistant partitions and ceilings and protected doorways and
other openings.
      5.   All hallways and stairways shall be adequately lighted (a minimum of
3 lumens) while the building is occupied by guests.
      6.   Smoke detectors shall be installed on each building level, including
the basement. Battery powered smoke detectors shall be tested regularly in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
      7.   Storage, such as in a basement, shall be in a one hour rated
enclosure when deemed in sufficient quantities to be hazardous.
      8.   An evacuation plan, including a floor plan of the accessory use tour
house shall be submitted to the Fire Department for approval, which shall
indicate the size of the building, exits, location of smoke detectors and
location of extinguishing devices.
      9.   A drawing showing the direction of exit travel and the approximate
distance in feet shall be conspicuously posted on each floor of the accessory
use tour house which is open to the public.
      10.   Adequate exists from all parts of the structure should be provided
in accordance with the NFPA life safety code.
      11.   No open flames (candles, lanterns, oil lamps, etc.) shall be
permitted during the hours that an accessory use tour house is open to the
public. Fireplaces, however, may be operated in the accessory use tour house
during tour hours, provided that the following conditions are met:
         a.   Fireplaces and chimneys are to be inspected by competent chimney
contractors on an annual basis and a copy of the chimney contractor's
inspection report shall be submitted to the Fire Department for review and
approval prior to the issuance or renewal of the business license;
         b.   Fireplaces are to be fitted with suitable screens or doors to
prevent passage of sparks or embers; and
         c.   No combustibles shall be stored within five feet (5') around the
fireplace opening. This shall include, but not be limited to, bedding,
curtains, pillows and kindling.
      12.   No smoking shall be permitted in the accessory use tour house
during the hours that the house is open to the public.
   E.   The license applicant shall submit a business plan at the time of
submission of the license application which describes the activities planned
under the proposed use, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Number of tours planned annually and the distribution of those tours
throughout the days and weeks of the year.
      2.   Plan and layout for areas of the tour house to be toured and manner
in which house tours will be conducted.
      3.   Hours and days of operation.
      4.   Amount of entry fee.
      5.   Merchandise offered and design of sales area.
      6.   Insurance coverage.
      7.   Certification of ADA compliance.
      8.   Staffing to conduct tours.
      9.   Marketing plans.
      10.   Signage.
      11.   Number of persons per tour.
      12.   Overflow crowd plans.
      13.   Emergency evacuation plans.
      14.   Traffic flow through house.
      15.   Transportation of tourists to and from tour house.
      16.   Vacation schedule and schedule of other known absences of the owner
(s) from the tour house during the primary tour season, beginning on Memorial
Day and ending on Labor Day. The schedule must be submitted to the Village
annually prior to the beginning of the primary tour season and shall be amended
as necessary to reflect changes in the schedule as they become known.
As part of the application process, the Visitors Bureau staff will be available
to assist an owner/applicant in preparing his or her business plan. Whether
that assistance is provided or not, the Bureau shall review the completed
business plan and sign off on the business plan with a recommendation to
approve or reject the plan. If the recommendation is to reject the plan, the
Bureau must state the reasons therefor and what the applicant can do to correct
the stated problems. The applicant will then be given an opportunity to make
the necessary correction to the plan and to resubmit it to the Bureau for their
review and recommendation. Once the Village Clerk has received the finalized
plan of the applicant and the recommendation of the Visitors Bureau, the Clerk
shall submit the plan and recommendation to the Village Board who will
determine the sufficiency of the applicant's plan and will approve, reject or
return the plan to the applicant through the Village Clerk with recommendations
for revision and resubmittal. (Ord. 1995-0-20, 3-20-95)
8-33-5: HOURS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC:
No tour house shall be open to the public more than six (6) days per week, and
no tour house shall be open to the public earlier than ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
or later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on any given day. (Ord. 1995-0-20, 3-20-
95)
8-33-6: ANCILLARY COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS:
No ancillary commercial operations or retail sales shall be permitted, except
that souvenirs and mementos which portray a likeness or image of the tour house
or some portion thereof, or convey information specifically related to the tour
house as the primary content of such souvenir or memento may be sold within the
tour house by the owner/resident of the tour house to members of the public
touring such tour house. A token souvenir, such as a postcard or poster, may be
offered without charge by the owner/resident of a tour house to each member of
the public touring the tour house. The maximum floor area within the tour house
devoted to the sale of such souvenirs and mementos shall be no greater than
fifty (50) square feet. The Visitors Center may sell merchandise developed by
tour house owners for sale at the tour house. (Ord. 1995-0-20, 3-20-95)
8-33-7: FOOD SALES PROHIBITED:
No food service to members of the public touring a tour house shall be
permitted. (Ord. 1995-0-20, 3-20-95)
8-33-8: TOUR GROUPS; NUMBER OF PERSONS PER GROUP LIMITED:
Except as otherwise restricted by the maximum occupancy limitation established
under subsection 8-33-4B of this Chapter, the number of persons permitted to
tour a tour house at one time shall be limited to thirty (30) persons; however,
no single tour group touring a tour house together as a group shall exceed
fifteen (15) persons. No tourist will be permitted in a tour house unless
accompanied at all times during the tour by an authorized tour guide. (Ord.
1995-0-20, 3-20-95)
8-33-9: SIGNAGE; ADVERTISING NOT PERMITTED; INFORMATIONAL PERMITTED:
   A.   Exterior advertising signs shall not be permitted.
   B.   The following signs shall be permitted on the premises of an accessory
use tour house:
      1.   On plaque of no more than eighteen inches (18") in height and width,
located at eye level in the front of the property, constructed of material,
design and color approved by the Design Review Commission and, containing the
name of the home, architect and date built;
      2.   One informational sign directing inquiries for tour information to
the Visitors Center and containing the Visitors Center address and phone
number. Such sign shall be no more than eighteen inches (18") in height and
width and shall be visible from the walk approaching the front entrance. The
material, design and color of the sign shall also require the approval of the
Design Review Commission.
If any provision contained in this Section conflicts with the Village sign
ordinance or any other Village ordinance or regulation, this Section shall take
precedence over such other conflicting ordinance or regulation. (Ord. 1995-0-
20, 3-20-95)
8-33-10: TICKET SALES; RESERVATIONS:
   A.   All tickets for tours of accessory use tour houses shall be sold at the
Visitors Center. The ticket price shall be established by the accessory use
tour house, and the Visitors Center shall deduct seven percent (7%) from the
sale price of each ticket as reimbursement to the Visitors Center for the costs
associated with performing the ticket sales and reservations function on behalf
of the accessory use tour house owner.
   B.   Groups of ten (10) or more person will be required to make reservations
through the Visitors Center. (Ord. 1995-0-20, 3-20-95)
8-33-11: TRANSPORTATION AND PARKING:
The accessory use tour house owner, in conjunction with the Visitors Bureau and
the Visitors Center, shall prepare a transportation and parking plan for
implementation which minimizes the impact of the tour house on the residential
neighborhood in which it is located and shall submit same to the Village as a
part of the tour house business plan. (Ord. 1995-0-20, 3-20-95)
8-33-12: TOUR HOUSE ACCESSIBILITY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES:
   A.   All tour houses shall be physically accessible to persons with
disabilities unless the structural changes required for accessibility would
threaten or destroy the historic significance of the tour house. In such cases,
alterative methods of access will be provided by the owner/operator.
   B.   Except as stated above, the tour house must provide persons with
disabilities with access to the main floor of the tour house. If, however,
additional floors of the house are open to the public and are not otherwise
accessible to persons with disabilities, the owner/operator may comply with the
accessibility requirement for these areas by providing person with disabilities
with a video taped and/or photographic tour of the inaccessible upper floors of
the tour house. The tour house owner/operator shall provide all necessary
auxiliary aids and services for persons with disabilities. The tour house
owner/operator shall also submit a certificate of compliance with the ADA as a
part of the business plan submitted in accordance with subsection 8-33-4E7.
(Ord. 1995-0-20, 3-20-95)
8-33-13: TRAINING:
Owners and tour conductors of all tour houses shall attend a training session
on overall tourism issued conducted by the Visitors Bureau. (Ord. 1995-0-20, 3-
20-95)
8-33-14: INSPECTIONS:
Fire Code and Standard Code inspections shall be conducted by the Fire
Department twice annually, with inspections occurring at six (6) month
intervals. (Ord. 1995-0-20, 3-20-95)
ARTICLE 34
TOUR TROLLEYS
SECTION:
8-34-1: Definitions
8-34-2: License Required; License Fee
8-34-3: Routes And Stops
8-34-4: Tour Season And Schedule
8-34-5: Services And Ticket Price; Visitors Center
8-34-6: Tour Trolley Appearance; Marking, Lighting And Advertising
8-34-7: Insurance
8-34-8: Applicability Of Taxicab Requirements
8-34-9: Accessibility
8-34-10: Nuisances Prohibited
8-34-11: Driving Regulations
8-34-12: Penalties Imposed
8-34-13: Exhibits
8-34-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article the following words and/or phrases will have
the following meanings. All other words and phrases will have the meaning given
them in the general provisions article of this code 1  or, if not defined
therein, then the common meaning ordinarily ascribed to them:
TOUR TROLLEY: A motorized bus type vehicle with rubberized tires designed to
give the appearance of an old fashioned rail trolley.
TOURIST SEASON: That period of time running from May 15 through September 15 of
each year. (Ord. 1995-0-42, 7-5-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 1-1-2 of this code.
8-34-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; LICENSE FEE:
No person shall establish, maintain or operate the business of providing tour
trolley rides and tours without first obtaining a license therefor as provided
in article 1 of this chapter. The license of each tour trolley shall be
displayed at all times. License applicants shall present documentation to the
office of the Village Clerk identifying the tour trolleys to be used within the
Village and evidencing that the tour trolleys are properly licensed and
registered with current emission control and safety stickers in accordance with
state and local law. The annual license fee shall be as set forth in section 8-
2-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1995-0-42, 7-5-1995; amd. Ord. 2014-0-52, 8-4-2014)
8-34-3: ROUTES AND STOPS:
The approved trolley route and stops are established on the map designated as
exhibit A, and set out at the end of this chapter. The approved tour trolley
stops are as set forth on the site designation plans designated as exhibit B,
and set out at the end of this chapter. Proposed changes in routes and/or stops
must be by ordinance amendment. No regular carriage route may be established to
include the three hundred (300) and four hundred (400) blocks of North
Kenilworth and Forest Avenues. Permission may be granted by the Chief of Police
to use an unapproved route for a specific purpose on a onetime basis.
Permission shall be requested in writing sufficiently in advance to allow time
for a reasonable review of the request. The operator shall provide the Chief
with any information requested by the Chief in relation to the proposed onetime
use. The Chief shall respond to the operator's request within five (5) working
days of receiving all requested information, except under extenuating
circumstances identified by the Chief in writing to the operator. The Chief
shall indicate to the operator the amount of additional time which will be
necessary to review the request due to the extenuating circumstances. (Ord.
1995-0-42, 7-5-1995)
8-34-4: TOUR SEASON AND SCHEDULE:
   A.   The operator shall provide daily trolley sightseeing tour service from
ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. seven (7) days per
week, from May 15 to September 15, inclusive.
   B.   During the period September 16 to May 14, inclusive, the operator shall
provide daily trolley sightseeing tour service from ten thirty o'clock (10:30)
A.M. to five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. at a minimum of two (2) days per week.
During this period, at the sole option of the operator if it shall deem it
necessary, the trolley sightseeing tour service may be in service more than the
minimum of two (2) days per week.
   C.   The operator shall run tour trolleys at a maximum interval of one every
hour and at a minimum interval of one every half (1/2) hour during any given
day of operation. Any deviation from the intervals established herein for a
given day or event shall require Board approval. (Ord. 1995-0-42, 7-5-95)
8-34-5: SERVICES AND TICKET PRICE; VISITORS CENTER:
   A.   Adult passengers shall be charged six dollars ($6.00), with a senior
fare of five dollars ($5.00) and a child fare (5–14 years of age) of three
dollars ($3.00). The operator shall have a representative present at the Oak
Park Visitors Center during all hours of operation to sell tickets for all
trolley tours. The operator may petition the Board for increases in ticket
prices. The petition shall be accompanied by documentation supporting the need
for the increase and should be submitted during the preceding calendar year to
go into effect at the beginning of the next tourist season on May 15 of the
following year. The Village shall act on all valid applications for increases
in ticket prices within thirty (30) days of receipt of same.
   B.   In exchange for the payment of the above established fare, each
passenger shall be entitled to transportation on a tour trolley for one
complete trip around the established tour trolley route. The passenger shall be
entitled to leave the trolley at each designated trolley stop and reboard
another trolley to travel to the next stop at no additional charge. The tour
trolley driver shall also act as a guide and provide relevant tour information
to the passengers during their transport from one location to the next and, in
particular, at each stop. (Ord. 1995-0-42, 7-5-95)
8-34-6: TOUR TROLLEY APPEARANCE; MARKING, LIGHTING AND ADVERTISING:
Tour trolleys shall be maintained in like new condition and shall be permitted
to display advertising on the inside of the trolleys in a tasteful manner and
to state the name of the tour trolley company on the exterior of the trolley
but shall not be permitted to display any other advertising on the outside of
the trolley. All markings and lighting shall be in accordance with the Illinois
Motor Vehicle Code 1 . (Ord. 1995-0-42, 7-5-95)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 625 ILCS.
8-34-7: INSURANCE:
A certificate of comprehensive liability insurance in the minimum amount of one
million dollars ($1,000.000.00) for each tour trolley must be filed with the
office of the Village Clerk and must name the Village as additionally insured.
The policy shall, by its terms, provide that it can neither be canceled nor
materially changed until after ten (10) days written notice to the Village.
(Ord. 1995-0-42, 7-5-95)
8-34-8: APPLICABILITY OF TAXICAB REQUIREMENTS:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the terms and provisions of Article 1 and
2 of
Chapter 24 of this Code relating to taxicabs and taxicab drivers shall apply to
and govern the operators and business of tour trolleys. The schedule of rates
set forth in Section
24-1-20 shall not be applicable hereto. The provisions of this Article shall
apply whenever a conflict between the provisions of Articles 1 and 2 of
Chapter 24 and the provisions of this Article shall arise. (Ord. 1995-0-42, 7-
5-95)
8-34-9: ACCESSIBILITY:
All licensed tour trolleys shall be accessible to people with disabilities and
shall contain at least two (2) tie-down locations per tour trolley and shall
otherwise operate in compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act. All
designated tour trolley stops shall be designed and located to be accessible to
people with disabilities and to otherwise be in compliance with the Americans
With Disabilities Act. (Ord. 1995-0-42, 7-5-95)
8-34-10: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
The operator shall conduct the tour trolley business within the Village in such
a manner as to not create a nuisance. A public address system which is audible
in homes adjacent to the tour trolley route shall be considered a public
nuisance within the meaning of this Code. The operator shall inform the Chief
of Police in writing of all nuisance complaints received, including the name of
the complainant, the nature and location of the complaint, and what, if any,
corrective action was taken by the operator to address the complaint. (Ord.
1995-0-42, 7-5-95)
8-34-11: DRIVING REGULATIONS:
Trolley drivers will adhere to all regulations applicable to drivers of
vehicles under the State Vehicle Code and the Code of the Village. Trolley
drivers shall operate tour trolleys at a rate of speed consistent with the
established speed limit or flow of traffic, whichever is less, between
designated tour trolley stops. (Ord. 1995-0-42, 7-5-95)
8-34-12: PENALTIES IMPOSED:
Persons violating any provisions of this Article shall be subject to the
general penalty provisions set forth in Section
1-1-5 of the Village Code. (Ord. 1995-0-42, 7-5-95)
8-34-13: EXHIBITS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3304.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3306.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3308.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3310.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3312.gif]
 
ARTICLE 35
VALET PARKING
SECTION:
8-35-1: Definitions
8-35-2: Licenses Required; Application Fee
8-35-3: Issuance Conditions
8-35-4: General Provisions
8-35-5: Applicability Of Provisions; Exceptions
8-35-6: Permit Required; Fee
8-35-7: Parking Prohibited
8-35-8: Violations; Penalty
8-35-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
VALET PARKING OPERATOR: A person who employs one or more attendants for the
purpose of providing a valet parking service or who provides such services as a
contractor, but not in the capacity of employee, at any business establishment,
for the purpose of providing a valet parking service to such establishments.
VALET PARKING SERVICE: A parking service provided to accommodate patrons of any
business establishment, which service is incidental to the business of the
establishment and by which an attendant on behalf of the establishment takes
temporary custody of the patron's motor vehicle and moves, parks, stores, or
retrieves the vehicle for the patron's convenience. (Ord. 1995-0-80, 11-6-95)
8-35-2: LICENSES REQUIRED; APPLICATION FEE:
Except as provided in Section
8-35-5, no person shall conduct a valet parking service unless the person has a
valid valet parking operator license issued in accordance with this Chapter. A
separate license is required for each loading area served.
   A.   Applications for valet parking operator licenses shall be made to the
Village Clerk on forms provided by the Clerk for that purpose. Each valet
parking operator license issued shall be for a one year period only, commencing
on July 1, and shall have designated thereon the name and address of the
licensee and the name and address of the business establishment to be served by
the licensee.
   B.   Applications for the renewal of a valet parking operator license shall
be made to the Village Clerk on forms provided by the Clerk for that purpose
not less than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the license to be
renewed. The fee for a renewal shall be the same as for a new license.
   C.   Valet parking operator licenses shall be nontransferable, and any
attempt to transfer a license may result in the revocation of the license.
(Ord. 1995-0-80, 11-6-95)
8-35-3: ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
No valet parking operator license, or renewal thereof, shall be issued unless
the following conditions are met:
   A.   The applicant agrees to park all cars entrusted to the applicant in
legal off-street or legal on-street sites.
   B.   The applicant provides proof to the Village Clerk that the applicant
has obtained liability insurance covering all locations at which the applicant
operates or seeks to operate in the minimum amounts of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence for public liability, one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence for property damage, and one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence for garage keepers' legal
liability. The insurance policy shall be for a term at least co-extensive with
the duration of the license and shall not be subject to cancellation except
upon thirty (30) days' prior notice to the Village Clerk. Upon termination or
lapse of the licensee's insurance coverage, any license issued to the licensee
shall automatically expire.
   C.   The applicant provides proof to the Village Clerk that the business
establishment for which the valet parking service is to be provided has made
available a loading zone at least twenty five feet (25') in length immediately
adjacent to its premises for the pickup and delivery of the patrons' vehicles.
Where the loading zone is to be on-street, the business establishment shall
have applied to the Village Public Works Department for the designation of a
curb loading zone or tow zone, and no license shall be issued for the operation
of a valet parking service at that establishment unless and until the
designation has been approved and the curb loading zone or tow zone signs have
been installed. The signage shall state: "LOADING ZONE - NO PARKING WHEN VALET
PARKING LICENSE SIGN IS DISPLAYED".
   D.   No valet parking operator license, or renewal thereof, shall be issued
to any applicant who has been found in violation of any provision of Sections
8-35-2 or
8-35-4 of this Chapter two (2) or more times within the one hundred eighty
(180) day period prior to the date of the application or three (3) or more
times within the three hundred sixty five (365) day period prior to the date of
the application. (Ord. 1995-0-80, 11-6-95)
8-35-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Valet Parking License Signage: Every business establishment for which a
valet parking license is issued shall, during the hours of service, display a
twenty four inch by thirty inch (24" x 30") valet parking license sign approved
by the Village Clerk. Every licensee providing service must post the name of
the operator and rate, if any, onto the valet parking license sign in four inch
(4") lettering. The Village Clerk shall inspect such establishments to
determine that the name and rates, if any, are accurately and properly posted,
and shall suspend any valet parking operator's license as to any business
establishment being served for so long as the licensee fails to post its name
and rates as required herein.
      1.   All valet parking license signs shall comply with the following
specifications and requirements:
         a.   The entire sign assembly must be no larger than thirty inches by
thirty six inches (30" x 36") and actual surface of the sign shall not exceed
five (5) square feet in size.
         b.   The sign must be constructed of durable, weatherproof materials.
         c.   The sign cannot have sharp edges or any protrusions or features
that could be a hazard to pedestrians.
         d.   The sign must be properly designed and heavy enough to withstand
typical winds without tipping over, rocking or sliding.
         e.   The sign cannot have moving parts or electrical devices,
including lights.
         f.   The sign cannot use any images resembling official signs or
anything else that can cause it to be confused with an official traffic-control
device.
         g.   Only one sign is allowed per place of business.
         h.   The sign shall only be displayed during hours when the valet
parking service is offered.
         i.   The sign must be placed within the designated loading zone but in
no case shall it be more than eight feet (8') from the curb.
      2.   If a conflict exists between the sign regulations set forth in
subsection
8-35-4A of the Village Code with regard to valet parking license signs and any
other provision of the Village Code relating to the licensing and/or regulation
of signage within the Village, this Section shall take precedence over the
conflicting provisions of the Village Code with regard to such valet parking
license signage.
   B.   Obedience To Laws: Valet parking operator shall not park or suffer its
agent to park patrons' vehicles upon the public way except under lawful
conditions. The valet parking operator and the operator's agent shall obey all
Federal, State and local laws in the performance of their valet parking service
within the Village.
   C.   Dashboard Placard: Every valet parking operator shall place or cause
the operator's agent to place on the dashboard of each patron's vehicle a sign
or placard of a size no smaller than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches
(81/2" x 11") in such a manner so as to be conspicuously visible through the
windshield of the patron's vehicle, which sign or placard shall contain the
following information in red or black letters no less than one inch (1") high:
"This Vehicle Parked By (valet parking operator) For Customer Of (business
establishment)."
   D.   Attendant Insignia: Each attendant of a valet parking operator shall,
while on duty, wear conspicuously placed on the attendant's clothing an
insignia which identifies the valet parking operator for whom the attendant is
working.
   E.   Valet Parking Receipt: All valet parking attendants must, upon taking
custody of a patron's vehicle, issue a numbered receipt to each customer
containing the name, address, and telephone number of the company providing the
valet service, a statement that the company has liability insurance as required
by Section
8-35-3 and the charge for the valet service. (Ord. 1995-0-80, 11-6-95)
8-35-5: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
Sections
8-35-2 and
8-35-4 shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Any business establishment that provides patron parking entirely and
solely on its premises.
   B.   Any person or entity that provides valet parking service for a special
event within the Village on no more than two (2) occasions per calendar year,
with each event being no more than two (2) consecutive days in duration. Such
persons or entities shall, however, comply with permit requirements set forth
in Section
8-35-6 below. (Ord. 1995-0-80, 11-6-95)
8-35-6: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
Any person or entity providing valet parking service for a special event within
the Village must first apply for and obtain a special event valet parking
service permit which shall remain in effect for the duration of the event and
shall be available for inspection upon request by any law enforcement or code
enforcement officer of the Village.
The person or entity applying for the permit shall be the person responsible
for the event and shall provide the time, date and location of the event; the
applicant's name, address, phone number and relationship to the event; the
location from which vehicles will be taken and to which they will be returned;
and the names, addresses, and driver's license numbers of each person providing
valet service for the event. The fee for a special event valet parking service
permit shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day. (Ord. 1995-0-80, 11-6-95)
8-35-7: PARKING PROHIBITED:
No person shall park his or her vehicle in a designated valet parking loading
zone when the licensed valet parking service is in operation and the valet
parking license sign is clearly displayed near the curb, but not in the street,
between the loading zone signs. (Ord. 1995-0-80, 11-6-95)
8-35-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any provisions of Sections 8-35-2 and 8-
35-4 shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day that an offense
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In addition, the
license of each valet parking operator who has been convicted of three (3) such
offenses within a one hundred eighty (180) day period shall be revoked by the
Village Clerk. (Ord. 1995-0-80, 11-6-95)
ARTICLE 36
DONATION BOXES
SECTION:
8-36-1: Definitions
8-36-2: Permit Required; Expiration
8-36-3: Qualifications Of Permittees
8-36-4: Application
8-36-5: Permit Issuance And Placement
8-36-6: Donation Box Placement Restrictions
8-36-7: Management And Maintenance
8-36-8: Vacant Sites
8-36-9: Remedies
8-36-10: Notices
8-36-11: Violations And Penalties
8-36-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following words and combinations of words are
defined as follows:
DAYS: Calendar days.
DONATION BOX: An outdoor container made of metal or similar material for
permanent or temporary outdoor use, designed and intended for the collection of
clothing, shoes, textiles, books, electronics or other household items, for the
purpose of recycling or donation.
DONATION BOX OWNER: Any organization, firm or other entity that owns and
receives a permit to locate and operate a donation box in the Village pursuant
to this article.
PERMITTEE: The donation box owner and the site host who shall each be jointly
and severally responsible for compliance with this article.
SITE HOST: The lawful occupant, either by leasehold or ownership, of the
property on which a donation box is located. The site host must also operate a
business or other lawful activity at the site.
VILLAGE MANAGER: The Village Manager or the Village Manager's designee. (Ord.
15-075, 3-16-2015)
8-36-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXPIRATION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to erect, place, maintain, operate or host a
donation box without first applying for and obtaining a permit issued by the
Village.
   B.   The Village shall approve an application for a donation box and issue a
permit therefor if such application complies with the requirements of sections
8-36-3 and
8-36-4 of this article.
   C.   The permit shall be issued to the donation box owner and the site host
who shall be jointly and severally liable for complying with this article.
   D.   The fee for a donation box permit shall be seventy five dollars
($75.00). If the donation box owner is a not for profit corporation, as
evidenced by the proof required pursuant to subsection
8-36-4C of this article, there shall be no permit fee.
   E.   A permit issued for the operation of a donation box shall be valid for
one year except as provided in section
8-36-8 of this article. (Ord. 15-075, 3-16-2015)
8-36-3: QUALIFICATIONS OF PERMITTEES:
   A.   In order to qualify for a permit pursuant to this article, the donation
box owner must be either:
      1.   A public charity and/or not for profit organization exempt from
taxes under section 501(c)(3) of the United States internal revenue code, and
in good standing with the state of Illinois; or
      2.   A business in good standing with the state of Illinois, which
includes a for profit business.
   B.   In order to qualify for a permit pursuant to this article, the site
host must be the owner or lawful occupant of the property where the box is
proposed to be located, and must operate a business, school, church, or not for
profit organization on the property. No permit shall be issued if there is no
lawful business or other activity on the property. (Ord. 15-075, 3-16-2015)
8-36-4: APPLICATION:
An applicant for a donation box permit shall provide the following information
on forms provided by the Village:
   A.   The name, address, telephone number, e-mail address and website, if
any, of the donation box owner;
   B.   The name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of a contact
person who shall be responsible to respond to maintenance requests or
complaints regarding the donation box and who shall accept service of any
citations for a violation of this article. The permittee shall provide the
Village with updated information if the contact person's information changes;
   C.   If the donation box owner claims to be a qualified not for profit
organization:
      1.   A copy of the determination letter issued by the internal revenue
service stating that the applicant is a public charity exempt under internal
revenue code section 501(c)(3);
      2.   Evidence of registration and the filing of an annual financial
report with the Illinois attorney general's office; and
      3.   A certificate of good standing issued by the Illinois secretary of
state;
   D.   If the donation box owner is a corporation or limited liability
company, the owner shall provide a certificate of good standing issued by the
Illinois secretary of state. A certificate of good standing must not be older
than three (3) months at the time of application for a permit;
   E.   The name, address and telephone number of the site host and a
description of the business or other lawful activity conducted by the host on
the property;
   F.   The number of permits the donation box owner maintained in the Village,
as well as the number of donation boxes hosted by the site host;
   G.   The permit application must be signed by both the donation box owner
and the site host who shall be jointly and severally liable for complying with
this article; and
   H.   The applicant must provide proof to the Village of a certificate of
general liability insurance of at least five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) covering the operation of the donation box. Such insurance must
remain in full force and effect during the term of any applicable permit. (Ord.
15-075, 3-16-2015)
8-36-5: PERMIT ISSUANCE AND PLACEMENT:
The Village Manager shall be responsible for the issuance of permits pursuant
to this article and the administration of this article. A permit sticker shall
be issued for each approved permit. The sticker shall contain the information
set forth in subsection
8-36-4A of this article. The sticker shall be affixed to the donation box and
shall be clearly visible on the box at all times. Should the sticker become
damaged or removed, the Village shall issue a replacement sticker for a fee of
twenty dollars ($20.00). (Ord. 15-075, 3-16-2015)
8-36-6: DONATION BOX PLACEMENT RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Donation boxes shall not be placed in the public right of way.
   B.   Donation boxes must be placed on a parking lot or paved surface on the
private property of a business, church, school or not for profit organization.
   C.   Donation boxes must be placed in a location and manner that does not
impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow.
   D.   No more than two (2) donation boxes shall be permitted on any property.
   E.   A donation box shall adhere to the setback standards set forth in the
zoning code for the site where it is placed, and shall not be placed between
any principal structure and its front lot line.
   F.   Donation boxes shall not be placed in a required parking space or
reduce the number of parking spaces below the minimum number required by the
zoning ordinance.
   G.   Donation boxes placed on private sidewalks must allow for five feet
(5') of pedestrian walkway in front of the donation box.
   H.   Donation boxes shall not be placed within the clear sight area of an
intersection. The clear sight area of an intersection is the area within a
diamond, the corners of which are points in the centerline of each of the
intersecting streets, with the sidelines being one hundred feet (100') between
the centerline point, as illustrated in the diagram in subsection
25-1-8B of this code, as amended.
   I.   Donation boxes shall not be located within ten feet (10') of a fire
hydrant.
   J.   Donation boxes shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height or cover a
ground area of more than thirty two (32) square feet.
   K.   If the donation box is owned by a not for profit organization, a
statement must be conspicuously displayed on the front of the donation box with
a minimum typeface of two inches (2") that indicates that the donation box is
owned and operated by a not for profit organization, the name of the
organization and a description of the charitable causes that the donations will
benefit.
   L.   If the donation box is owned by a for profit company, the front of the
donation box shall conspicuously display a statement with a minimum typeface of
two inches (2") that indicates the name of company, that it is a for profit
company and that deposits are not tax deductible. (Ord. 15-075, 3-16-2015)
8-36-7: MANAGEMENT AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   A permittee must maintain the donation box in good working order free
of rust, rot, crumbling or decay and functioning properly.
   B.   A permittee must maintain the aesthetic appearance of the donation box,
including fresh paint, readable signage with lettering not greater than six
inches (6") in height.
   C.   A permittee must collect the contents of the donation box on a regular
basis.
   D.   A permittee shall not allow items to remain placed around, beside, or
on top of the donation box.
   E.   A permittee must maintain the donation box in a watertight and
animalproof condition and secured so as to prevent wind from disbursing its
contents.
   F.   No hazardous materials or items may be deposited or collected in a
donation box. (Ord. 15-075, 3-16-2015)
8-36-8: VACANT SITES:
If the primary business or activity of the site host has ceased, the donation
box permit shall automatically expire. In such event, the Village shall provide
notice to the permittee that the permit has expired. The permittee shall have
seven (7) days after service of said notice to remove the donation box from the
property. (Ord. 15-075, 3-16-2015)
8-36-9: REMEDIES:
   A.   If a permittee does not maintain a donation box in accordance with this
article, the Village may serve a notice of noncompliance to the permittee to
remedy the condition of noncompliance within five (5) days of service of the
notice.
   B.   If a permittee fails to remedy any condition of noncompliance within
five (5) days after notice, the Village is authorized to remove the donation
box to a secure location. The Village shall notify the donation box owner that
it must collect the donation box from the secure location within ten (10) days
following service of the notice. If the donation box owner does not collect the
donation box from its secure location within ten (10) days following notice,
the Village is authorized to dispose of the donation box and its contents in
any lawful manner. The donation box owner shall be liable for the reasonable
costs of removal and disposal incurred by the Village. (Ord. 15-075, 3-16-2015)
8-36-10: NOTICES:
Notices provided pursuant to this article shall be in writing and shall be sent
by regular mail and e-mail with a read receipt to the contact person provided
pursuant to subsection
8-36-4B of this article. (Ord. 15-075, 3-16-2015)
8-36-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Violations of this article are punishable by a minimum fine of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) and a maximum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Each day a violation shall continue shall be a separate and distinct
offense.
   B.   In addition, if a donation box owner or site host is found to have
violated the provisions of this article on more than three (3) occasions in a
calendar year, the applicable permit shall be revoked and the permittee shall
be deemed ineligible to obtain a donation box permit for a period of five (5)
years. (Ord. 15-075, 3-16-2015)
ARTICLE 37
SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS
SECTION:
8-37-1: Definitions
8-37-2: Compliance Required
8-37-3: License Required
8-37-4: Application; Investigation; Approval; Issuance
8-37-5: License Fee
8-37-6: Business Location; Zoning; Inspection; Code Compliance
8-37-7: Duty To Report Stolen Or Lost Articles
8-37-8: Identification Required; Recordkeeping
8-37-9: Inspection Of Records
8-37-10: Transactions With Prohibited Parties
8-37-11: Violation Penalty
8-37-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, and the interpretation and enforcement
thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have
the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall
indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the
plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number. The
words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not
defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
GIFT CARD: A card, or a stored value card or other physical medium, containing
stored value primarily intended to be exchanged for consumer goods and
services.
JEWELRY: Any "precious metal" as defined in this section or any "precious stone
or gem" as defined in this section, including, but not limited to, earrings,
chains, pendants, pins, brooches, bracelets, armbands, rings, head or hair
ornaments, diadems, cuff links or similar objects comprising or containing
precious metals or precious stones. The term "jewelry" also includes articles
comprising or containing precious metals or precious stones, including, but not
limited to, optical frames, pens, pencils, flatware or hollowware.
PRECIOUS METAL: Gold, silver or platinum.
PRECIOUS STONE OR GEM: Any genuine diamond, emerald, sapphire or pearl of any
value and any other genuine stone or gem with a value of more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
SECONDHAND GOODS: Goods, wares and merchandise which were previously owned or
used by any person other than the manufacturer, wholesaler, or retailer,
including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Cameras and other photographic instruments and equipment.
   B.   Cellular or smart phones and other satellite signal devices.
   C.   Gemstones or gems.
   D.   Gift cards.
   E.   Jewelry.
   F.   Laptop or desktop computers and tablets.
   G.   Precious metals as defined herein.
   H.   Precious stones as defined herein.
SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER: Any individual, corporation, business, partnership or
other entity who: a) engages in the business of purchasing, selling, receiving,
trading, consignment selling or otherwise transferring for value any
"secondhand goods", as defined herein; or b) who purchases any "secondhand
goods", as defined herein, for purposes of recycling or salvaging such items. A
secondhand goods dealer shall not include: a) sales or exchanges of used
articles and materials conducted or controlled by charitable, religious, or
community organizations, including, but not limited to, schools, Boy Scouts,
Girl Scouts, and youth athletic groups, which accept donated items to resell
for fundraising activities; and b) residents of the Village conducting garage
sales as permitted by this code. A secondhand goods dealer licensed hereunder
is also referred to as "licensee" in this article. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-37-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No person shall hereafter locate, build, construct, keep, conduct, operate or
maintain a place of business in which secondhand goods are handled, sold,
exchanged, purchased, delivered, bartered, or transferred within the Village
except in compliance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-
2016)
8-37-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or maintain a business in which secondhand goods are
handled, sold, exchanged, purchased, delivered, bartered, or transferred within
the Village without first obtaining a license. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-37-4: APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION; APPROVAL; ISSUANCE:
   A.   Application for a license required by this article shall be to the
Chief of Police and shall state:
      1.   The full name and address of such applicant and in the case of a
firm the full name and address of each member of the firm, and in case of a
corporation the full name and address of each officer of said corporation;
      2.   That none of the persons named in said application has ever been
convicted of a crime;
      3.   The exact location of such proposed place of business; and
      4.   The nature of applicant's title to said premises or to a right to
occupy the same.
   B.   The Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation of each license
applicant under this article and determine whether or not such applicant has
complied with the laws of the state of Illinois and the provisions of this
article applicable to said business, and whether the applicant is a person of
good character and repute.
   C.   No license shall be issued to any person, partnership, corporation or
other entity, in the discretion of the Chief of Police if any owner, manager,
partner, officer, director, employee or shareholder owning more than five
percent (5%) of the shares of stock in the corporation has been convicted of
any felony offense or convicted of the offense(s) of possession of stolen
goods, burglary, robbery, or who has been convicted of any criminal offense
involving dishonesty or moral turpitude.
   D.   Every applicant for a license under this article, as well as every
owner, partner, manager, officer, director, employee, and in the case of a
corporate applicant, every shareholder owning more than five percent (5%) of
the shares of stock in the corporation shall undergo a criminal background
investigation, which investigation may include fingerprinting, prior to the
issuance of a license. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-37-5: LICENSE FEE:
The fees for a license required by this article shall be based upon the
schedule set forth in subsection
8-2-1C1 of this chapter, as amended. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-37-6: BUSINESS LOCATION; ZONING; INSPECTION; CODE COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Prior to issuing any license required hereunder, any applicable
building and premises used or proposed to be used for such business shall be
inspected by the appropriate village official or officials for compliance with
all Village codes, ordinances, rules and regulations, including the
requirements of this article, as well as the laws of the state of Illinois and
all other applicable governmental rules and regulations.
   B.   Such building and premises shall comply with all Village zoning,
building, fire and health codes, ordinances, rules and regulations, as well as
all other applicable Village codes, ordinances, rules and regulations and shall
be maintained in good repair, free of litter and debris and kept in a safe
condition for employees, customers and other persons present therein or
thereon.
   C.   Any business or person licensed under this article shall comply with
all laws of the state of Illinois and all other applicable governmental rules
and regulations and shall not be conducted, operated, maintained or carried on
so as to constitute a nuisance. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-37-7: DUTY TO REPORT STOLEN OR LOST ARTICLES:
Each licensee or employee or agent shall report to the Chief of Police any
article sought to be sold to the licensee or placed on consignment with the
licensee, if the licensee or its employee or agent reasonably believes that
said article was stolen or that the article was lost and found by the person
attempting to sell it or place it on consignment. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-37-8: IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED; RECORDKEEPING:
   A.   A licensee, agent or employee of a licensee shall require
identification to be shown by each person selling any article to the licensee
or placing such article on consignment with the licensee. One form of
identification shall be a valid driver's license or identification card issued
by a governmental entity which contains a photograph of the person identified,
as well as the person's address.
   B.   If the photograph identification is not government issued, then two (2)
forms of identification must be shown, and at least one of the two (2) forms
must contain a photograph, and at least one form of identification must include
the person's residence address.
   C.   The licensee, agent, or employee of the licensee shall photocopy all
forms of identification presented and retain such photocopies as records
pursuant to this article.
   D.   In addition to a valid driver's license or government issued
identification card, other acceptable forms of photographic identification
shall include, but not be limited to, an employee or student identification
card, pictured credit card, or a pictured civic, union or professional
association membership card.
   E.   If the person selling an article to the licensee or placing an article
on consignment with the licensee does not present identification issued by a
governmental entity, the licensee shall digitally photograph such person in
color, print and record such person's name, residence address, date of birth,
gender, height and weight on the reverse side of the photograph.
   F.   A licensee shall subscribe to and participate in LeadsOnline or a
computerized reporting system designated by the Chief of Police. Any article
purchased or received on consignment shall be entered into the LeadsOnline
database or designated computerized recordkeeping system within twelve (12)
hours of receipt of the article. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-37-9: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
Any records, books, computer generated records, video surveillance records, or
digital photographs taken, as well as every article or other thing of value
purchased or received on consignment shall at all times be open to inspection
by the Chief of Police or any sworn law enforcement officer during the
licensee's business hours and shall be maintained for a period of three (3)
years after the date on which the record was prepared. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-37-10: TRANSACTIONS WITH PROHIBITED PARTIES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or its agent or employee, to
purchase any article or receive on consignment any article from a person under
the age of eighteen (18) years, or the ownership of which is claimed by such
minor, or which may be in the possession or control of any minor without the
written consent of such minor's parent or legal guardian. The consent must be
signed by such minor's parent or legal guardian in the presence of the licensee
or the licensee's employee or agent.
   B.   It shall be further unlawful for any licensee to purchase any article
or receive any article on consignment from any person appearing to be
intoxicated or under the influence of any drug or controlled substance or from
any person known to have been convicted of theft, burglary, deceptive
practices, robbery or armed robbery.
   C.   It shall be the duty of every licensee, or agent or employee thereof,
to return any article purchased or received on consignment to the lawful owner
of such article without the payment of the money paid therefor by the licensee,
or any other cost or charge of any kind, in cases where such article has been
stolen from or lost by its lawful owner. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
8-37-11: VIOLATION PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not
less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each violation in
regard to a separate transaction shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. 16-019, 2-16-2016)
ARTICLE 38
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE SERVICES
SECTION:
8-38-1: Definitions
8-38-2: Massage Establishment License - Required
8-38-3: Criminal Background Check; Application
8-38-4: Operating Requirements
8-38-5: Massage Establishment License - Issuance Conditions - Term
8-38-6: Employment Of Massage Therapists
8-38-7: Premises
8-38-8: Advertising Restrictions
8-38-9: Inspections And Enforcement
8-38-10: Transfer Of Licenses - Restricted
8-38-11: License - Display
8-38-12: Suspension And Revocation Of License
8-38-13: Penalty
8-38-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases set forth below are hereby defined as follows for the
purposes of this article:
LICENSEE: The operator of a massage establishment.
MASSAGE: A system of structure palpitation or movement of the soft tissue of
the body or parts of the body, including but not limited to any method of
pressure on, friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping,
pounding, bathing, touching, binding, painting, irritating, or stimulation of
external soft parts of the body with hands or with the aid of any manual,
mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptic oils, powder,
creams, lotions, soaps, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used
in this practice.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place of business where any person, for any
consideration, engages in the practice of massage as defined above, but does
not include any hospitals, nursing homes, facilities or offices at which a
health care worker duly licensed by the State of Illinois provides, on an
ongoing basis, professional health services to individuals.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person who, for any consideration, engages in the
practice of massage as above defined.
PERSONS: Any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company,
corporation, or any combination of individuals of whatever form or character.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA: The genital, pubic area, anus or perineum of any
person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. (Ord. 18-382, 7-9-2018)
8-38-2: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE - REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to
permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, upon any premises in the
Village the operation of a massage establishment as defined in section 8-38-
1 of this article without first having obtained a license from the Village.
(Ord. 18-382, 7-9-2018)
8-38-3: CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK; APPLICATION:
A criminal background check shall be required of applicants, unless the
applicant is a licensed massage therapist by the State of Illinois. At the
discretion of the Village Manager or the Manager's designee, fingerprints of
the applicant and any employees may also be required as part of the initial
application or the renewal of a license. Fingerprints shall be processed by the
Illinois State Police in conjunction with the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The cost of fingerprinting shall be paid by the applicant and any applicable
background check shall be without charge. An applicant shall also provide the
Village with a list of services and corresponding prices and such other
information as determined by the Village as part of a written application for
the issuance or renewal of a license. (Ord. 18-382, 7-9-2018)
8-38-4: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Cleanliness: Every portion of the massage establishment, including
appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated under sanitary
conditions.
   B.   Clothing: A massage establishment shall require its employees, agents
and independent contractors to wear clean, nontransparent outer garments
covering their sexual and genital areas while on the licensed premises, and no
massage establishment shall allow its employees, agents, and independent
contractors to disrobe, or offer or agree to disrobe, either wholly or
partially, while on the licensed premises. Any such failure to be or remain
clothed, or offer or agreement to disrobe, is a violation of this article for
which the licensee is strictly liable for purposes of license revocation and
suspension and any penalty set forth in this Code.
   C.   Sheets And Towels: A massage establishment shall provide clean
laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity which shall be laundered
after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
   D.   Touching: No massage establishment shall allow its employees, agents
and independent contractors to touch, or offer or agree to touch, the sexual or
genital areas of any person while on its licensed premises and any such
touching, offer or agreement is a violation of this article for which the
licensee is strictly liable for purposes of license revocation and suspension;
provided, however, that the breast area may be touched during clinical massage
therapy for post-mastectomy scar tissue, including myofascial release therapy,
or for therapeutic treatment of breast tissue and muscles for pre- and post-
surgical mastectomy, lumpectomy, or breast reconstruction; and the perineal
area of a woman may be touched for clinical perineal massage therapy for a
pregnant woman to ease the pain of childbirth; and the lower abdominal area may
be touched for clinical lower abdominal massage therapy to relieve reproductive
or digestive related pain or dysfunction.
   E.   Body Coverage: The sexual or genital areas of all customers shall be
covered at all times when in the presence of an employee, agent or independent
contractor; provided, however, that such areas may be uncovered during clinical
massage therapy for post-mastectomy scar tissue, including myofascial release
therapy, or for therapeutic treatment of breast tissue and muscles for pre- and
post-surgical mastectomy, lumpectomy, or breast reconstruction; during clinical
perineal massage therapy for a pregnant woman to ease the pain of childbirth;
and during clinical lower abdominal massage therapy to relieve reproductive or
digestive related pain or dysfunction.
   F.   Maintenance: All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bath and
steam rooms and any other physical facilities shall be in good repair, and
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
   G.   Storage Of Preparations: Oils, creams, lotion and other preparation
used in administering massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or
cabinets.
   H.   Entrance: A massage establishment shall maintain clear glass, which is
not painted over, darkened or blocked by any cloth or obstruction, at the
entrance to such establishment so that the front area where patrons are greeted
is visible from the outside. A massage establishment which is located in a
facility that does not have any glass on the front of the licensed premises is
required to notify the Village in writing of such condition.
   I.   No Habitation: No massage establishment shall allow its employees,
agents and independent contractors to use the licensed premises for habitation.
   J.   Anti-Sexual Harassment Policy: Every massage establishment that employs
massage therapists other than the license holder, shall develop, maintain and
comply with a written anti-sexual harassment policy to protect employees,
agents, and independent contractors against sexual assault and sexual
harassment by clients. Such policy shall:
      1.   Encourage employees, agents, and independent contractors
("complaining employee") to immediately report to the licensee instances of
alleged sexual assault and sexual harassment by clients ("offending client");
      2.   Describe the procedures that the complaining employee and licensee
shall follow in such cases;
      3.   Instruct the complaining employee to cease work and to leave the
immediate area where danger is perceived;
      4.   Permit the complaining employee to refuse to treat the offending
client should the client return to the massage establishment in the future;
      5.   Provide the complaining employee with necessary paid time off to:
         a.   Sign a complaint with the Village's Police Department or other
applicable law enforcement agency against the offending client; and
         b.   Testify as a witness at any legal proceeding that may ensue as a
result of such complaint, if the complaining employee is still in the
licensee's employ at the time such legal proceeding occurs;
      6.   Inform the complaining employee that the Illinois Human Rights Act,
Cook County human rights ordinance and title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 provide additional protections against sexual harassment in the workplace;
and
      7.   Inform the employee that subsection
8-38-4J6 of this section makes it illegal for an employer to retaliate against
any employee who reasonably alleges sexual assault or sexual harassment, or in
good faith avails himself or herself of the requirements set forth in
subsection
8-38-4J5 of this section, or discloses, reports or testifies about any
violation of this section or rules promulgated thereunder.
   K.   Anti-Sexual Harassment Policy Provided To Employees: The establishment
shall provide all employees with a current copy of the massage establishment's
anti-sexual harassment policy in English and the native language of each
employee, agent, and independent contractor, and post such policy in English
and the native language of each employee, agent, and independent contractor in
conspicuous places in areas of the establishment, such as supply rooms or
employee lunch rooms, where employees, agents, and independent contractors can
reasonably be expected to see it.
   L.   Anti-Trafficking Notice Required: Each licensed massage establishment
which employs two (2) or more employees or independent contractors shall post a
notice printed in English, and in the primary language that is spoken by said
employees or independent contractors of the establishment if other than English
which shall be at least 81/2 inches by 11 inches in size, written in 16-point
font and shall provide as follows:
If you or someone you know is being forced to engage in any activity and cannot
leave, whether it is commercial sex, housework, farm work, construction,
factory, retail, or restaurant work, or any other activity, call the National
Human Trafficking Resource Center at 1-888-373-7888 to access help and
services.
Victims of slavery and human trafficking are protected under the United States
and Illinois law. The hotline is:
Available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week;
Toll Free;
Operated by non-profit non-governmental organization;
Anonymous and confidential;
Accessible in more than 160 languages; and
Able to provide help, referral to services, training and general information.
(Ord. 18-382, 7-9-2018)
8-38-5: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE - ISSUANCE CONDITIONS - TERM:
No license shall be issued pursuant to this article upon any of the following:
   A.   The operation of the massage establishment as proposed by the applicant
would if permitted not comply with the applicable laws of the State of Illinois
and the Village, including but not limited to Building, Health, Housing, and
Fire Prevention Codes and the Village's zoning ordinance; or
   B.   The applicant, or any other person who shall be directly or indirectly
engaged in the management or operation of the massage establishment, is not of
good moral character. In determining good moral character, the Village may take
into consideration the following:
      1.   The applicant's conviction of a felony or misdemeanor under the laws
of the United States or any state or territory thereof, or any offense directly
related to the practice of the massage therapist profession;
      2.   The applicant or any other person has been directly or indirectly
engaged in the management or operation of the massage establishment and has
been found to have violated subsection
8-38-4B, D, or E of this article;
      3.   The applicant's massage establishment business license has been
revoked by the Village of Oak Park or has had a massage establishment business
license revoked by any other local governmental entity or agency; or
      4.   The operation of the massage establishment as proposed by the
applicant, if permitted, would violate the provisions of this article or any
other provision of this Code.
   C.   An applicant's conviction for a violation of any provision of law set
forth in this section shall not be an automatic bar to a finding of good moral
character unless the conviction is for: 1) any of the sex offenses contained in
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11; or 2) any provision of 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/10-9 related to trafficking in persons, or if the applicant
is a registered sex offender.
   D.   An applicant who has been convicted of a violation of any provision of
law not set forth in this section may request a hearing before the Village
Manager to demonstrate that he or she has been sufficiently rehabilitated to
warrant the public trust. The burden of proving such rehabilitation shall be
upon the applicant. (Ord. 18-382, 7-9-2018)
8-38-6: EMPLOYMENT OF MASSAGE THERAPISTS:
   A.   A massage establishment may not employ any persons as a massage
therapist who does not hold a current, valid license issued by the Illinois
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation as required by the Illinois
Massage Licensing Act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 57/1 et seq., or which is
suspended, revoked, or temporarily suspended by the department under said Act
or unless the person so employed is exempt from said Act pursuant to 225
Illinois Compiled Statutes 57/25, as amended.
   B.   A massage establishment shall provide to the Village and maintain on-
site a current list of all licensed massage therapists who perform massage
services at the licensed premises and proof of a valid and current Illinois
massage therapist license issued by the Illinois Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation. In addition, a massage establishment shall maintain a
copy of a State-issued photo identification card for each massage therapist
licensee. The massage establishment must allow inspection of such records at
any reasonable time upon request of the Village. (Ord. 18-382, 7-9-2018)
8-38-7: PREMISES:
No massage establishment shall receive a license or be operated, established or
maintained upon any premises unless the establishment shall comply with the
following:
   A.   All massage tables, lavatories and floors shall have surfaces which may
be readily disinfected;
   B.   Toilet facilities shall be provided within the massage establishment,
or within the facility that includes the massage establishment, and otherwise
complies with occupancy requirements; and
   C.   Closed cabinets shall be provided for use in the storage of clean
linens, towels and other materials used in administering massages. All soiled
linens, towels and other material shall be kept in properly covered containers
or cabinets which shall be kept separate from clean storage areas. (Ord. 18-
382, 7-9-2018)
8-38-8: ADVERTISING RESTRICTIONS:
No massage establishment issued a license under this article shall depict,
place, publish, distribute or cause to be depicted, placed, published or
distributed any advertising matter that suggest to prospective patrons that any
services are available that would constitute a felony or misdemeanor under
Federal, State or Village law or would otherwise violate this Code. (Ord. 18-
382, 7-9-2018)
8-38-9: INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
All massage establishments must be in compliance with this article on or before
July 1, 2018. Massage establishments shall be subject to inspection by the
Village to assure compliance with this article and all applicable laws and
regulations. It shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of
the licensed premises to allow such inspection and admit, for purpose of making
the inspection, any officer or employee of the Village who is authorized or
directed to make such inspection. (Ord. 18-382, 7-9-2018)
8-38-10: TRANSFER OF LICENSES - RESTRICTED:
A massage establishment license shall not be transferable. (Ord. 18-382, 7-9-
2018)
8-38-11: LICENSE - DISPLAY:
A licensee shall post a valid current massage establishment license pursuant to
section
8-1-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 18-382, 7-9-2018)
8-38-12: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended
pursuant to section 8-1-14 of this chapter. (Ord. 18-382, 7-9-2018)
8-38-13: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in
accordance with the provisions set forth in section
1-1-5 of this Code except, however, that any violation of subsection
8-38-4B, D or E of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day for each day an
offense occurs.
   B.   It shall be an affirmative defense for an employee or massage therapist
that the employee or massage therapist was under duress or was coerced into
violating any provision of this article. A victim of trafficking in persons
pursuant to applicable State or Federal law shall not be deemed criminally
liable for any violation of this article committed as a direct result of, or
incident related to, being trafficked. Where such affirmative defense is
applicable to an employee or massage therapist, such affirmative defense shall
not apply to the licensee if the licensee participated in creating such
coercion or duress, or knew or should have known of the existence of such
coercion or duress. (Ord. 18-382, 7-9-2018)
ARTICLE 39
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
8-39-1:    Definitions
8-39-2:    Business Registration Certificate Required
8-39-3: General Provisions
8-39-4:    Application
8-39-5:    Change In Information Contained In Application
8-39-6: Registration Fee
8-39-7:    Term Of Registration; Renewal
8-39-8:    Registration Certificate And State Licenses Display
8-39-9:    Operating Without Registration
8-39-10: Inspection
8-39-11: Operation Requirements
8-39-12: Control Of Emissions; Disposal Of Materials
8-39-13: Hours Of Operation
8-39-14: Advertising
8-39-15: Report To Village Police
8-39-16: Discontinuance Of Cannabis Business Establishment
8-39-17: Sale Or Delivery Of Cannabis
8-39-18: Cannabis Paraphernalia
8-39-19: Underage Person; Prohibition
8-39-20: Signage And Warnings
8-39-21: Additional Regulations For Adult Use Cannabis Transporters
8-39-22: Transporting Agents
8-39-23: Consumption At Or In A Cannabis Business Establishment
8-39-24: Consumption In Parking Lot Adjacent To Cannabis Business Establishment
8-39-25: Violations; Penalties
8-39-26: Adoption Of State Act; Conflict
8-39-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases set forth below are hereby defined as follows for the
purposes of this article:
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure, and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, per the Act, as it may be amended from time
to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport, and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Act, as it may be amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Act, as it may be amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Act, as it
may be amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR: A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Act, as it may be
amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER: An organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Act, as it may be amended from time to time,
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADVERTISE: To engage in promotional activities including, but not limited to,
newspaper, radio, internet and electronic media, and television advertising,
the distribution of fliers and circulars, billboard advertising, and the
display of window and interior signs. "Advertise" does not mean exterior
signage displaying only the name of the licensed cannabis business
establishment.
AGENT-IN-CHARGE: As required by the Act, a full-time agent or principal officer
of the cannabis business establishment that is responsible for opening and
closing the establishment, delivery acceptance, oversight of sales and agents,
recordkeeping, inventory, training, and compliance with state and local law.
CANNABIS: Cannabis shall be as defined in the Act, 410 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 7-5/1-10, as amended, as marijuana, hashish, and other substances that
are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and
including derivatives or subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of
cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from
any part of the plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin, including
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other naturally produced cannabinol
derivatives, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction; however,
"cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from
the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks
(except the resin extracted from it), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized
seed of the plant that is incapable of germination. "Cannabis" does not include
industrial hemp as defined and authorized under the Industrial Hemp Act.
"Cannabis" also means cannabis flower, concentrate, and cannabis infused
products.
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: An adult-use cannabis cultivation center,
craft grower, processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing
organization, or transporting organization.
CANNABIS CONCENTRATE: A product derived from cannabis that is produced by
extracting cannabinoids from the plant through the use of propylene glycol,
glycerin, butter, olive oil, or other typical cooking fats; water, ice, or dry
ice; or butane, propane, CO2, ethanol, or isopropanol. The use of any other
solvent is expressly prohibited unless and until it is approved by the
Department of Agriculture.
CANNABIS-INFUSED PRODUCT: A beverage, food, oil, ointment, tincture, topical
formulation, or another product.
CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA: Equipment, products and materials which are intended to
be used for planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, ingesting or otherwise
introducing cannabis into the human body.
CLONE: A plant section from a female cannabis plant not yet rootbound, growing
in a water solution or other propagation matric that is capable of developing
into a new plant.
DEPARTMENT: The Village's Development Customer Services Department.
LIMITED ACCESS AREA: A building, room, or other area under the control of a
cannabis dispensing organization licensed under the Act and upon the licensed
premises with access limited to purchasers, dispensing organization owners and
other dispensing organization agents, or service professionals conducting
business with the dispensing organization.
ORDINARY PUBLIC VIEW: Within the sight line with normal visual range of a
person, unassisted by visual aids, from a public street or sidewalk adjacent to
real property, or from within an adjacent property.
PERSON: A natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian, or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
STATE ACT OR ACT: The Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act of Illinois, 410 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 705/1 et seq., as amended.
TINCTURE: A cannabis infused solution, typically comprised of alcohol glycerin,
or vegetable oils, derived either directly from the cannabis plant or from a
processed cannabis extract. A tincture is not an alcoholic liquor as defined in
the Liquor Control Act of 1934. A tincture shall include a calibrated dropper
or other similar device capable of accurately measuring servings.
UNDERAGE PERSON: An individual under the age of twenty one (21) years old.
VILLAGE: The Village of Oak Park. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-2: BUSINESS REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
A cannabis business establishment must apply for and obtain a business
registration certificate from the Village prior to operating within the
Village. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   A separate registration is required for each cannabis business
establishment location and each cannabis business establishment operating
within the Village.
   B.   The cannabis business establishment registration requirement shall be
in addition to, and not in lieu of, any licensing and permitting requirements
imposed by any other federal, state, or local law. No cannabis establishment or
craft grower may operate in the Village without first receiving all required
approvals for the operation of a cannabis business establishment, including but
not limited to, approvals from the Village, the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation and the Illinois Department of
Agriculture as applicable. Proof of receipt of all required approvals must be
provided to the Village prior to the operation of a cannabis business
establishment.
   C.   By registering with the Village, a cannabis business establishment
consents to all inspections by the Village that are necessary to ensure that
the cannabis business establishment is maintained and operated in compliance
with all applicable ordinances and regulations and in accordance with the
information contained in the cannabis business establishments' application.
   D.   A cannabis business establishment registration certificate may be
denied, non-renewed, suspended, and revoked pursuant to the terms of this
chapter.
   E.   A cannabis business registration certificate for a cannabis business
establishment is not transferable or assignable, including without limitation,
non- transferable to a different location, to a different type of business, to
a different cannabis business classification, or to a different owner. (Ord.
20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-4: APPLICATION:
Each cannabis business establishment shall complete a written cannabis business
registration application in a form provided by the Department which must
contain the following minimum requirements:
   A.   If the owner is an individual, the name, date of birth, home address,
telephone number, email address, and a copy of a valid state identification of
the person registering the business.
   B.   If the owner is a partnership/non-corporate entity, the name, date of
birth, home address, telephone number, email address, and a copy of a valid
state identification for each partner, principal, or member thereof.
   C.   If the owner is a corporation, the name, date of birth, home address,
telephone number, email address, and a copy of a valid state identification of
each principal officer and registered agent thereof.
   D.   The legal name of the cannabis business establishment and any other
names it may operate under.
   E.   The location of the cannabis business establishment.
   F.   The classification of the cannabis business establishment.
   G.   The volume of cannabis the establishment is authorized to store or
cultivate.
   H.   A copy of the cannabis business establishment's state issued license.
   I.   A copy of the special use permit issued by the Village Board.
   J.   A copy of the site plan as submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals, or
other applicable public body.
   K.   The hours of operation for the cannabis business establishment.
   L.   The name, address, date of birth, and copy of state issued agent
identification for the designated agent-in-charge.
   M.   The property owner's name, address, telephone number and email address
and a valid copy of the lease agreement if applicable.
   N.   Whether the cannabis business establishment qualifies as a social
equity applicant by the State of Illinois. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-5: CHANGE IN INFORMATION CONTAINED IN APPLICATION:
If any of the information contained in the cannabis business registration
application changes during the term of the business registration certificate,
the cannabis business establishment must inform the Village Manager in writing
within ten (10) days of such change. This shall include any change with regard
to the agent-in-charge. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-6: REGISTRATION FEE:
There shall be no registration fee for a cannabis business establishment to
obtain a registration certificate from the Village. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-7: TERM OF REGISTRATION; RENEWAL:
   A.   A cannabis business establishment registration shall be valid for a
period of one (1) year from April 1 to March 31.
   B.   A cannabis business establishment must renew its registration on an
annual basis pursuant to a renewal application in a form provided by the
Department. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-8: REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE AND STATE LICENSES DISPLAY:
A cannabis business establishment must display its Village registration
certificate and any and all required state licenses in plain view in a
conspicuous place on the premises. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-9: OPERATING WITHOUT REGISTRATION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to maintain
or operate a cannabis business establishment in the Village without having
first registered the establishment with the Village pursuant to the
requirements of this article.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to conduct
business activities outside the classification for which the business was
registered. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-10: INSPECTION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to refuse
entry or otherwise refuse inspection by the Village Manager or the Village
Manager's designee or by any member of law enforcement or inspectional
services.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to maintain
any more cannabis within the establishment than the amount stated on the
cannabis business establishment's state license. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-11: OPERATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to be so
conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance. No building, vehicle,
structure, yard, lot, premises, or part thereof shall be used, kept,
maintained, or operated in connection with a business, occupation, or the
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance or so as to be dangerous to life
or detrimental to health.
   B.   All cannabis business establishments must be equipped with a secure
unloading space for the reception of deliveries of recreational cannabis and
recreational cannabis infused products which must be:
      1.   Located within an enclosed principal structure in which the cannabis
business establishment operates;
      2.   Secured by doors that are closed and locked during all times that
deliveries of recreational cannabis or recreational cannabis infused products
are unloaded; and
      3.   A restricted access area.
   C.   A cannabis business establishment may only have cannabis unloaded, and
accept deliveries of cannabis and cannabis infused products, in the secure
unloading space required above.
   D.   All activities of any cannabis business establishment shall be
conducted indoors and out of ordinary public view.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to operate
if the point of sale equipment, video surveillance, or state electronic
verification system is inoperative.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to operate
if less than two (2) licensed employees are present.
   G.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to dispense
cannabis through vending machines, drive-through windows, or delivery services.
   H.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to obtain
cannabis from outside the state.
   I.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to transport
cannabis outside the state.
   J.   It shall be unlawful for any retail cannabis, cannabis products, or
paraphernalia to be displayed or kept in a cannabis business establishment so
as to be visible by ordinary public view outside of the premises.
   K.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to accept
cannabis deliveries through public or limited access areas. All deliveries must
be accepted into a restricted access area.
   L.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to accept
cannabis from a cultivation center, craft grower, infuser, dispensary or
transporter unless it is prepackaged and labeled.
   M.   During hours of operation, all cannabis shall be stored in an enclosed
locked room or cabinet and accessible only to specifically authorized
dispensing organization agents.
   N.   When a cannabis business establishment is closed, all cannabis and
currency shall be stored in a reinforced vault room in a restricted access area
and in a manner as to prevent diversion, theft, or loss.
   O.   No outside storage of cannabis, cannabis products, related supplies, or
cannabis educational materials shall be permitted.
   P.   All components of the cannabis business establishment's security system
shall be in good working order, monitored, and secured twenty four (24) hours
per day.
   Q.   No cannabis business establishment shall give away without payment,
directly or indirectly, any cannabis either by the owner or through any
servant, agent, employee or person on behalf of the establishment, including
samples or tastings of any cannabis for retail sales or other purposes or in
connection with the promotion of the establishment. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-12: CONTROL OF EMISSIONS; DISPOSAL OF MATERIALS:
   A.   A cannabis business establishment shall take sufficient measures and
means of preventing smoke, odors, debris, dust, fluids, and other substances
from exiting a cannabis business establishment at all times.
   B.   A cannabis business establishment shall properly dispose of all such
materials, items, and other substances in a safe, sanitary and secure manner
and in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and
regulations. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-13: HOURS OF OPERATION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to open
earlier than six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to close
later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   C.   Hours of operation shall apply to all sales, delivery, and dispensing
activities for the business.
   D.   No cannabis business establishment shall permit any person other than
themselves or employees to remain in the premises where cannabis is offered for
sale, longer than thirty (30) minutes after the closing hour. (Ord. 20-013, 2-
24-2020)
8-39-14: ADVERTISING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or cannabis business establishment
to engage in advertising that is false or misleading, promotes over-consumption
of cannabis or cannabis products, depicts the actual consumption of cannabis or
cannabis products, depicts a person under twenty one (21) years of age
consuming cannabis, makes any health, medicinal, or therapeutic claims about
cannabis or cannabis infused products, includes the image of a cannabis leaf or
bud, includes any image designed or likely to appeal to underage persons,
including cartoons, toys, animals, or children or any other likeness to images,
characters, or phrases that is designed in any manner to be appealing to or
encourage consumption by persons under twenty one (21) years of age.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment or any other
person or entity to place or maintain an advertisement of cannabis or a
cannabis infused product in any form or through any medium:
      1.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of the perimeter of school
grounds, a playground, a recreation center or facility, a child care center, a
public park or public library, or a game arcade;
      2.   On or in a public transit vehicle or public transit shelter; or
      3.   On or in publicly owned or publicly operated property. (Ord. 20-013,
2-24-2020)
8-39-15: REPORT TO VILLAGE POLICE:
Every cannabis business establishment must promptly within twenty four (24)
hours report any loss, theft, security breach, or criminal activity to the
Village's Police Department, in addition to any other state law requirements.
(Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-16: DISCONTINUANCE OF CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT:
Any registered cannabis business establishment under this chapter shall remove
all material, cannabis products, equipment, signs, and other paraphernalia
prior to the expiration of its business registration certificate or immediately
following revocation or voiding of its business registration certificate. If
the cannabis business establishment discontinues use, it shall immediately
notify the Village Manager. A bond shall be posted in an amount determined by
the Village at the time of application, but not exceeding five thousand dollars
($5,000.00), insuring compliance with this section. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-17: SALE OR DELIVERY OF CANNABIS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to give,
sell, or deliver to any underage person, directly or indirectly, any cannabis
or cannabis paraphernalia, unless they are a qualifying patient under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, 410 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 130/1 et seq., as amended.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to sell or
furnish cannabis or cannabis paraphernalia to a person under the age of twenty
one (21), unless the agent or employee was shown adequate written evidence of
age and identity, unless they are a qualifying patient under the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 130/1 et
seq., as amended.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to accept
written evidence of age and identity knowing it to be false or fraudulent.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to sell:
      1.   Cannabis seeds, except to those showing valid identification as a
qualifying patient under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act,
410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 130/1 et seq., as amended;
      2.   Clones or other live plant material; or
      3.   Any products containing alcohol, with the exception of tinctures as
allowed by state law.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business establishment to conduct
any retail sales of cannabis that are not made in person at the designated
location within the cannabis business establishment. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-18: CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA:
Devices, contrivances, instruments, and paraphernalia for inhaling or otherwise
consuming cannabis, including but not limited to, rolling papers and related
tools, water pipes, and vaporizers may lawfully be sold at cannabis
dispensaries. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-19: UNDERAGE PERSON; PROHIBITION:
   A.   Prohibited: No cannabis business establishment, or any officer,
associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such establishment,
shall sell, give or deliver cannabis to an underage person. No person, after
purchasing or otherwise obtaining cannabis, shall sell, give or deliver the
cannabis product to an underage person.
   B.   Underage Person Not Allowed: No licensee, or any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall permit an
underage person to be or remain on or in any portion of a licensed premises
unless the underage person is: (i) accompanied by his or her parent or guardian
who is over twenty one (21) years of age; or (ii) on the premises for the
purchase of authorized medicinal cannabis for the personal use of the underage
person.
   C.   Prohibited Gift Or Delivery: No underage person shall accept a gift or
delivery of cannabis.
   D.   Photo Identification: If a cannabis business establishment, or any
officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such
establishment, believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of
cannabis is prohibited because of the insufficient age of the prospective
purchaser, he or she shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand
presentation of adequate written evidence of identity, including, but not
limited to, a photograph, and of the fact that the purchaser or recipient is
over the age of 21 years (hereinafter "identification card"), issued by a
federal, state, county, or municipal government or subdivision or agency
thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operations license or
identification card issued to a member of the Armed Services.
   E.   No Sale: If a licensee, or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee, believes or has reason to
believe that the ultimate recipient of cannabis to be purchased is of
insufficient age or is using a forged or false identification card, he or she
shall not make the sale.
   F.   Forged Or False Identification: No person shall transfer, alter or
deface an identification card; use the identification card of another; carry or
use a false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by
means of false information. No person shall purchase, accept the delivery, or
have the possession of cannabis in violation of this section. (Ord. 20-013, 2-
24-2020)
8-39-20: SIGNAGE AND WARNINGS:
   A.   All cannabis business establishment signage and advertising shall
comply with all applicable state and Village requirements.
   B.   A cannabis business establishment must post all applicable placards and
notices as required by state law.
   C.   There shall be no electronic message board or any temporary signs on
the exterior of the property or the interior of a property facing a public
right-of-way where a cannabis business establishment is located.
   D.   There shall be no signage on the exterior of a cannabis business
establishment that contains cannabis imagery, such as cannabis leaves, plants,
smoke, or cannabis paraphernalia.
   E.   Warning Displayed: In the interior of a cannabis business
establishment, a sign must be posted that is clearly legible and conspicuously
located that includes the following language:
      WARNING TO ALL PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE. YOU ARE SUBJECT TO CRIMINAL
ARREST AND A FINE IF YOU PURCHASE, OR ACCEPT A GIFT OF CANNABIS OR HAVE
CANNABIS IN YOUR POSSESSION, OR IF YOU HAVE IN YOUR POSSESSION A FALSE, FORGED,
ALTERED OR DEFACED IDENTIFICATION CARD WHICH MISREPRESENTS YOUR AGE.
   F.   Posting Of Sign: A cannabis business establishment must post a sign at
any public entrance where the establishment is located that is clearly legible
and conspicuous immediately adjacent to all entrances that includes the
following language:
      PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 ARE PROHIBITED FROM ENTERING UNLESS SUCH
PERSON IS ACCOMPANIED BY A PARENT OR GUARDIAN OVER 21 YEARS OF AGE OR IS A
QUALIFYING PATIENT WITH A PRESCRIPTION ISSUED UNDER THE COMPASSIONATE USE OF
MEDICAL CANNABIS PROGRAM ACT.
   G.   Posting Of Sign: A cannabis business establishment must post a sign on
the exterior of the property where the establishment is located that is clearly
legible and conspicuous immediately adjacent to all entrances that includes the
following language:
      PURSUANT TO THE OAK PARK VILLAGE CODE, IT IS UNLAWFUL TO CONSUME ANY
CANNABIS IN ANY PARKING LOT OR OPEN AREA ADJACENT TO THIS CANNABIS BUSINESS
ESTABLISHMENT.
   H.   Posting Of Sign: A cannabis business establishment must post signs
provided by the Village in English and Spanish which summarize the rights of
persons with regard to their immigration status who use or possess cannabis or
who benefit financially from the sale or manufacture of cannabis or who invest
in the cannabis industry. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-21: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTERS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a licensed cannabis
transporting organization agent to be present in a commercial vehicle or
trailer engaged in the transportation of cannabis for a cannabis transporting
organization.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for anyone under the age of twenty one (21) years
old to be present in a commercial vehicle or trailer engaged in the
transportation of cannabis for a cannabis transporting organization.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis transporting organization agent to
transport cannabis anywhere other than to a cultivation center, craft grower,
infuser organization, dispensing organization, testing facility, or otherwise
authorized by law.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis transporting organization agent to
use a commercial motor vehicle with a weight rating over ten thousand one
(10,001) pounds.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis transporting organization agent to
operate as a cannabis transporter without a copy of the registration and
manifest for the cannabis delivery in the vehicle.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for an adult use cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to transport cannabis so it is visible or
recognizable from outside the vehicle.
   G.   It shall be unlawful for a vehicle transporting cannabis to bear any
markings to indicate the vehicle contains cannabis or bear the name or logo of
the cannabis business establishment.
   H.   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis transporting organization agent to
transport cannabis unless it is stored in an enclosed, locked, storage
compartment that is secured or affixed to the vehicle. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-22: TRANSPORTING AGENTS:
A cannabis transporting organization agent must keep its identification card
visible at all times when on the property of a cannabis business establishment
and during the transportation of cannabis when acting under their duties as a
cannabis transporting organization agent and must provide the identification
card upon request to any law enforcement officer engaged in their official
duties. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-23: CONSUMPTION AT OR IN A CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT:
Cannabis shall not be consumed within a cannabis business establishment for any
purpose and in any form, including but not limited to samples, tastings, edible
products or byproducts or by smoking. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-24: CONSUMPTION IN PARKING LOT ADJACENT TO CANNABIS BUSINESS
ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   Parking Lots: Cannabis may not be consumed in any parking lot or open
area adjacent to any cannabis business establishment for any purpose and in any
form, including, but not limited to samples, tastings, edible products or
byproducts or by smoking.
   B.   Responsibility Of Owner And/Or Manager: No cannabis business
establishment, or officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee
of such establishment, shall permit the consumption of cannabis in violation of
this article. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-25: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Any violation of this article shall be deemed an ordinance violation
and may be subject to administrative adjudication as provided for in this Code.
   B.   Every act or omission constituting a violation of any of the provisions
of this article, by any officer, director, manager, agent, or employee of any
cannabis business establishment shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
employer or owner and the employer or owner shall be subject to punishment in
the same manner as if the act or omission had been done or omitted by them
personally.
   C.   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a special use permit
issued by the Village Board that is not abated within seven (7) days after
proper notice shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
violation per day in addition to any and all other applicable remedies or
penalties. (Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
8-39-26: ADOPTION OF STATE ACT; CONFLICT:
The State Act is adopted in its entirety, as amended. In the case of a conflict
with any provision of the Act and a provision of this article, this provision
of this article shall govern and control to the extent permitted by law. (Ord.
20-013, 2-24-2020)
ARTICLE 40
SHORT-TERM RENTALS
SECTION:
8-40-1: Definitions
8-40-2: License Required
8-40-3: License Issuance And Renewal
8-40-4: License Fee
8-40-5: Standards
8-40-6: Maximum Occupancy
8-40-7: Penalties
8-40-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings, and are hereby defined as follows:
                                       One or more rooms, including
                                       individualized bathroom and kitchen
DWELLING UNIT:                         facilities, which are arranged,
                                       designed, or used as living quarters for
                                       a household.
GUEST:                                 A person who rents or occupies a short-
                                       term rental.
HOST:                                  An owner or owners engaged in providing
                                       short term rentals.
                                       A marketplace entity, in whatever form
                                       or format which facilitates short term
                                       rentals through advertising, matchmaking
                                       or other means, using any medium or
HOSTING PLATFORM:                      facilitation, or from which the operator
                                       of the hosting platform derives revenue,
                                       including booking fees or advertising
                                       revenues from providing or maintaining
                                       the marketplace information.
                                       A short term rental property that is not
NON-OWNER-OCCUPIED SHORT-TERM RENTALS: owner-occupied and is rented using a
                                       hosting platform for any short-term
                                       rental period.
                                       A person holding title or co-title of an
                                       abode, dwelling unit or residence that
OWNER:                                 they may lease as a short-term rental
                                       but only in accordance with the terms of
                                       this article.
                                       A short term rental property that is
                                       primarily owner-occupied, except for the
OWNER OCCUPIED SHORT-TERM RENTALS:     duration when the property or a portion
                                       thereof as defined herein is rented
                                       using a hosting platform for any short-
                                       term rental period.
                                       A period of time of one hundred and
SHORT-TERM RENTAL PERIOD:              eighty-two (182) or lesser calendar
                                       days.
                                       A residential dwelling unit, including a
                                       single-family home in its entirety or an
                                       individual room within a single-family
                                       home or an accessory structure of a
                                       single-family home, townhomes,
                                       condominiums and rooming house dwelling
                                       units or any residential dwelling unit
                                       included within a building containing
SHORT TERM RENTALS:                    two (2) or more residential units, a
                                       building containing three (3) or more
                                       residential units, or a multi-family
                                       building containing four (4) or more
                                       units that are rented out using a
                                       hosting platform for any short-term
                                       rental period. (Ord. 21-54, 11-1-2021;
                                       amd. Ord. 2022-55, 9-6-2022; Ord. 2022-
                                       76, 11-7-2022)
 
8-40-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct, keep, manage or operate or cause to be conducted,
kept, managed or operated a short-term rental without a license therefor as
provided in article 1 of this chapter. A license shall be obtained for each
short-term rental and shall not be transferable. All such licenses are required
to be renewed annually, subject to the same condition as the original license.
Such license shall be issued by the Village upon payment of the fee as provided
in chapter 8 of this code. Such fee shall accompany the license application.
(Ord. 21-54, 11-1-2021)
8-40-3: LICENSE ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL:
No license shall be issued or renewed until the short-term rental premises has
been inspected and approved by the Village to assure compliance with this
article. (Ord. 21-54, 11-1-2021)
8-40-4: LICENSE FEE:
The license fees to be paid annually to the Village pursuant to this article
shall be as follows:
   A.   A non-owner-occupied short-term rental applicant who is a not a
resident of the Village shall pay the same fee as a bed and breakfast for each
short-term rental set forth in section
8-2-1 of this Code.
   B.   A non-owner-occupied short-term rental applicant who is a Village
resident shall pay a fee of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
   C.   An owner-occupied short-term rental applicant shall pay an annual
license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 21-54, 11-1-2021)
8-40-5: STANDARDS:
In addition to the requirements set forth in article 1 of this chapter, no
license shall be issued unless the following standards are met:
   A.   All owners must use a hosting platform to market a short-term rental.
The hosting platform shall be responsible for determining the guest's
identification information and the accuracy of that information;
   B.   No owner shall rent any short-term rental for any period of time
shorter than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours and for any period of time
greater than one hundred and eighty-two (182) days;
   C.   The owner must inform a guest if parking is provided by the owner and
if not, inform the guest that Village parking passes are available through the
Village's overnight parking application. The short-term rental owner must also
provide the guest with instructions on how to obtain Village parking passes
through the Village's overnight parking application. Guests shall not park
vehicles on Village streets overnight unless otherwise permitted;
   D.   The owner must provide proof of homeowner's insurance or host
protection insurance in the amount of at least five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) to the Village as part of its application;
   E.   Every short-term rental shall be subject to inspection by staff members
of the Village's Fire, Health and/or Development Customer Services Departments;
   F.   The owner shall keep a guest register in which the name of every guest
and the guest's arrival and departure dates shall be recorded in written form.
The owner shall make the guest register freely accessible to any authorized
Village employee; and
   G.   The owner shall post, inside the front entrance to every short-term
rental dwelling unit, a short-term rental license issued by the Village stating
the owners name, a twenty-four (24)-hour telephone number to reach the owner
and the maximum occupancy of the dwelling unit as allowed by this article.
(Ord. 21-54, 11-1-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-55, 9-6-2022)
8-40-6: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY:
No owner shall permit the occupancy of any short-term rental unit to exceed the
maximum number of persons in a dwelling unit as set forth below.
 
Number of Bedrooms Maximum Number of Persons in a Dwelling Unit At One Time
1                  3
2                  5
3                  7
4                  9
5                  11
6                  13
 
(Ord. 21-54, 11-1-2021)
8-40-7: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any owner, guest or other person who shall be found to have violated
any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense punishable
as follows:
      1.   The fine for a first violation is two hundred dollars ($200.00);
      2.   The fine for a second violation is five hundred dollars ($500.00);
and
      3.   The fine for a third or subsequent violation is seven hundred and
fifty dollars ($750.00).
   B.   Each day a provision of this article is found to have been violated
constitutes a separate violation subject to the fine schedule set forth in this
section.
   C.   Any fines shall be debts due and owing to the Village that the Village
may collect by any means allowed by law, including, but not limited to, filing
a lien against the subject property.
   D.   The fines provided for herein shall not be construed as limiting the
power of a court of competent jurisdiction or an administrative hearing officer
to impose other penalties and/or remedies as provided for by law. In addition,
an owner found to have violated any provisions of this article may be subject
to the revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of a license pursuant to the
provisions of article 1 of this chapter. (Ord. 21-54, 11-1-2021)
ARTICLE 41
LAWN MAINTENANCE/LANDSCAPING
SECTION:
8-41-1: Definitions
8-41-2: License Required
8-41-3: License Fee
8-41-4: Equipment Restrictions
8-41-5: Exemptions
8-41-6: Penalties
8-41-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings, and are hereby defined as follows:
 
ELECTRIC LEAF BLOWER:                   A leaf blower which is powered by an
                                        electric motor.
                                        A leaf blower which is powered by
                                        gasoline or propane, including an
GAS-POWERED LEAFBLOWER:                 electric leaf blower powered by stand-
                                        alone fossil fuel powered generators or
                                        generators powered by vehicle engines.
                                        The care of lawns and yards, including
                                        but not limited to establishing a new
                                        lawn by seeding or sodding,
                                        fertilizing, aeration, mowing, lawn
LAWN MAINTENANCE/ LANDSCAPING:          disease treatment, weed control, leaf
                                        removal, trimming or planting of
                                        shrubs, hedges or similar plantings,
                                        mulching and installing decorative rock
                                        or bark.
                                        Any person, entity, limited liability
                                        company, corporation, partnership or
LAWN MAINTENANCE/ LANDSCAPING BUSINESS: association who perform lawn
                                        maintenance/landscaping as part of a
                                        business.
                                        Any device which is used or designed to
                                        move leaves, grass clippings, dust,
LEAF BLOWER:                            dirt, or other matter by blowing them
                                        with air emitted by such device. (Ord.
                                        23-19, 3-13-2023)
 
8-41-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall own or operate within the Village any lawn maintenance/
landscaping business without first obtaining a license in accordance with this
article, including a home-based business from which a lawn maintenance/
landscaping business is operated. (Ord. 23-19, 3-13-2023)
8-41-3: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for a lawn maintenance/landscaping business shall be as set
forth in section
8-2-1 of this Code. (Ord. 23-19, 3-13-2023)
8-41-4: EQUIPMENT RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Prior to June 1, 2025, the operation of gasoline-powered leaf blowers
is prohibited between June 1 to September 30. Electric leaf blowers may be used
year-round, subject to the time restrictions in subsection B below.
   B.   Prior to June 1, 2025, gasoline-powered and electric leaf blowers shall
be permitted to be operated on the following days and times between October 1
and May 31:
      1.   Monday through Friday from the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. to
six o’clock (6:00) P.M.
      2.   Saturday and Sunday from the hours of nine o’clock (9:00) A.M. to
four o’clock (4:00) P.M.
   C.   No gas-powered leaf blower shall be permitted to be operated in the
Village on or after June 1, 2025, except as provided in section
8-41-5 of this code.
   D.   The use of portable generators to power electric leaf blowers or to
recharge batteries used in leaf blowers is prohibited. (Ord. 23-19, 3-13-2023)
8-41-5: EXEMPTIONS:
Gas-powered leaf blowers shall be permitted to be operated as follows:
   A.   At the direction of Police or Fire Department sworn personnel of the
Village for the purpose of responding to an emergency, or in order to restore,
preserve, protect or save lives or property from imminent danger of loss or
harm; or
   B.   To clear fallen trees in order to provide emergency clearance for
public safety. (Ord. 23-19, 3-13-2023)
8-41-6: PENALTIES:
Any person or business violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined
in accordance with the provisions of section
1-1-5 of this code. (Ord. 23-19, 3-13-2023)
ARTICLE 42
INTOXICATING HEMP AND KRATOM
SECTION:
8-42-1:    Definitions
8-42-2:    Underage Sales; Prohibition
8-42-3:    Display; Packaging; Signage
8-42-4:    Violations; Penalties
8-42-1:   DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases below are defined as follows for the purposes of this
article:
INTOXICATING HEMP DISPENSING ESTABLISHMENT: A person engaged in the sale at
retail, giving away, or delivery with the intent of selling at retail of
intoxicating hemp.
INTOXICATING HEMP: Any product, material, compound, isomer, acid, salt,
mixture, or preparation:
   A.   Used or intended for human consumption;
   B.   That is not made, manufactured, sold, given away, bartered, exchanged,
distributed, furnished, marketed, advertised, or otherwise held out for sale by
cannabis business establishments duly licensed under, and in accordance with,
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1, et seq.)
or the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1, et seq.); and
   C.   That contains or claims to contain: (1) any amount of synthetic
cannabinoids of any kind, inclusive of acid forms, regardless of name, and
including but not limited to THC-O, delta- 8 THC, and delta-10 THC, (2) a total
delta-9 THC content concentration level in excess of 0.3% on a dry weight
basis, (3) a total delta-9 THC content in excess of 0.5 milligrams per labeled
serving or individual unit or 2.5 milligrams per package regardless of the
number of labeled servings or individual units therein, or (4) Kratom.
KRATOM: Any parts of the plant Mitragyna speciosa, whether growing or not, and
any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative mixture, or preparation of that
plant, including but not limited to mitragynine and 7-hydroxymitragynine, as
defined in Section 5(a) of the Kratom Control Act, 720 ILCS 642/5(a), as may be
amended.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company,
joint venture, public or private corporation, limited liability company, or a
receiver, executor, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by
order of any court.
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID: A cannabinoid-like compound that was produced using
chemical synthesis, chemical modification, or chemical conversion, including in
vitro biosynthesis or other bioconversion of such a method. Synthetic
cannabinoids include the conversion of cannabinoids from one chemical structure
to another, such as THC that was produced by the conversion of cannabidiol.
TETRAHYDRO- CANNABINOL OR "THC": Any naturally occurring or synthetic
tetrahydrocannabinol, including its salts, isomers, and salts of isomers
whenever the existence of such salts, isomers, and salts of isomers is possible
within the specific chemical designation and any preparation, mixture, or
substance containing, or mixed or infused with, any detectable amount of
tetrahydrocannabinol or tetrahydrocannabinolic acid ("THCA"), including,
without limitation, delta-8-THC, delta-9-THC, delta- 10- THC,
tetrahydrocannabolic acid, tetrahydrocannabipherol, or hexahydrocannabinol,
however derived. For the purposes of this definition, "isomer" means optical,
position, and geometric isomers.
TOTAL DELTA-9 THC CONTENT: The value determined after the process of
decarboxylation, or the application of a conversion factor if the testing
methodology does not include decarboxylation, that expressed the potential
total delta-9 THC content derived from the sum of the THC and THCA content and
reported on a dry weight basis, to be calculated either by using a
chromatograph technique using heat, such as gaschromatography, through which
THCA is converted from its acid form to its neutral form, or by using a liquid
chromatograph technique, which keeps the THCA intact, and using the following
conversion: [Total THC = (0.877 x THCA) + THC] which calculates the potential
total THC in a given sample.
UNDERAGE PERSON: An individual under the age of 21 years old. (Ord. 25-137, 3-
18-2025)
8-42-2:   UNDERAGE SALES; PROHIBITION:
   A.   Underage Sale Prohibited: No person and no intoxicating hemp dispensing
establishment, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or
employee of such establishment, may sell, give, or deliver intoxicating hemp to
an underage person.
   B.   Photo Identification: If an intoxicating hemp dispensing establishment,
or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of such
establishment, believes or has reason to believe that a sale, giving, or
delivery of intoxicating hemp is prohibited because of the insufficient age of
the prospective purchaser, they must, before making such sale or delivery,
demand presentation of adequate written evidence of identity, including,
without limitation, a photograph, and of the fact that the purchaser or
recipient is over the age of 21 years ("identification card"), issued by a
federal, state, county, or municipal government or subdivision or agency
thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operations license or
identification card issued to a member of the Armed Services.
   C.   No Sale: If an intoxicating hemp dispensing establishment, or any
officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of such
establishment, believes or has reason to believe that the ultimate recipient of
intoxicating hemp to be purchased is of insufficient age or is using a forged
or false identification card, they may not make the sale. (Ord. 25-137, 3-18-
2025)
8-42-3:   DISPLAY; PACKAGING; SIGNAGE:
   A.   Display: Products containing intoxicating hemp must be displayed in an
intoxicating hemp dispensing establishment from behind a sales or service
counter so that no person may access it without assistance by an establishment
employee.
   B.   Prohibited Packaging: An intoxicating hemp dispensing establishment
cannot display, sell, give, or deliver any product containing intoxicating hemp
which includes (i) packaging or labeling with images designed or likely to
appeal to children, including, without limitation, cartoons, toys, fruit,
animals, or children, or any other likeness to images, characters, or phrases
that are popularly used to advertise to children, or (ii) packaging or labeling
that imitates any product available for consumption without intoxicating hemp
as a commercially available candy or snack food.
   C.   Signage: An intoxicating hemp dispensing establishment must post a sign
informing the public of the age restrictions in this article at or near every
display of intoxicating hemp. Each sign must be plainly visible and state:
   THE SALE OF INTOXICATING HEMP TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY- ONE YEARS OF AGE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW.
   The text of such signs must be in red letters on a white background with
letters at least one inch in height. (Ord. 25-137, 3-18-2025)
8-42-4:   VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Any violation of this article may be subject to administrative
adjudication as provided for in this Code.
   B.   Every act or omission constituting a violation of any provision of this
article, by any officer, director, manager, agent, or employee of an
intoxicating hemp dispensing establishment is deemed to be an act of the owner
of such establishment, and the owner is subject to punishment in the same
manner as if the act or omission had been done or omitted by them personally.
   C.   A violation of Section
8-42-2  is punishable by a fine not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A violation of Section
8-42-3  is punishable by a fine in the amount set forth in Section
1-1-5  of the Village Code. (Ord. 25-137, 3-18-2025)
CHAPTER 9
FIRE DEPARTMENT
General Provisions   1
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Composition; Office Of Firefighter Created
9-1-2: Appointment, Promotion, Discipline And Discharge Of Members
9-1-3: Adoption Of Firemen's Pension Fund
9-1-4: General Authority Of Chief
9-1-5: Chief To Have Custody Of Department Property
9-1-6: Power Of Chief To Enter Premises For Investigation; Stop Construction,
Etc.
9-1-7: Examination By Chief Of Dangerous Buildings, Etc.
9-1-8: Exclusion Of Bystanders At Fire Scene
9-1-9: Removal Of Property From Fire Scene
9-1-10: Destruction Of Buildings, Etc., To Control Fire
9-1-11: Hindering Firefighters And Injuring Equipment
9-1-12: Removal Of Property Saved From Fire
9-1-13: Driving Over Unprotected Fire Hose
9-1-14: Obstructing Use Of Fire Hydrants
9-1-15: Impersonating A Firefighter
9-1-16: Pipeline And Power Line Incidents
9-1-1: COMPOSITION; OFFICE OF FIREFIGHTER CREATED:
The Fire Department of the Village shall consist of a Chief and such number of
assistants, firefighters, engineers, pipemen, truckmen and other firemen as the
Board of Trustees may from time to time direct. There is hereby created and
established a distinct and separate office for each firefighter provided for in
the annual appropriation ordinance, each of which is to be entitled the office
of "firefighter". (Ord. 1990-0-34, 6-18-1990)
9-1-2: APPOINTMENT, PROMOTION, DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE OF MEMBERS:
The Village Manager is authorized to appoint, suspend or discharge the Chief of
the Fire Department. The Village Manager is also authorized to appoint, suspend
or discharge, and the Chief of the Fire Department is authorized to recommend
to the Village Manager, the appointment, suspension or discharge of two (2)
Deputy Chiefs, one assistant to the Chief, and six (6) Battalion Chiefs of the
Fire Department.
In the event the Village Manager discharges the Chief of the Fire Department, a
Deputy Chief, Battalion Chief or assistant to the Chief of the Fire Department,
the persons discharged from these positions shall revert to their permanent
ranks, if any, in the Fire Department as established under the fire and police
commission act.
Two (2) Deputy Chiefs and a Battalion Chief of the Fire Department, with the
exception of the Battalion Chief/Emergency Medical Services Coordinator, shall
be appointed solely from the officers of the Oak Park Fire Department. The
position of Battalion Chief/Emergency Medical Services Coordinator shall be
filled solely from the members of the Oak Park Fire Department.
The power of appointment, to all entry level positions, and the power of
promotion to the ranks of lieutenant and inspector shall be in the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners of the Village, heretofore created and now acting
pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois municipal code, except as amended in
this code.
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the Village of Oak Park shall
exercise its powers of appointment and promotion in consultation with the Human
Resources Director for the Village, who shall also serve as the Village's Equal
Employment Opportunity Coordinator, and in accordance with the equal employment
opportunity/affirmative recruitment plan for the Village as set forth in
appendix V of the personnel manual for the Village of Oak Park, adopted as
ordinance 1989-0-21 on April 3, 1989, and as hereafter amended.
The power of discharge or discipline in accordance with this code, of all
officers and members of the Fire Department, other than the Chief of the Fire
Department, Deputy Chiefs, Battalion Chief or assistant to the Chief of the
Fire Department, shall be in the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the
Village, heretofore created and now acting pursuant to the provisions of the
Illinois municipal code, except as amended in this code.
Persons who are not qualified as Illinois state licensed paramedics may submit
themselves to examination for the position of firefighter with the Oak Park
Fire Department. Once such persons have been appointed to the position of
firefighter/paramedic with the Oak Park Fire Department, they shall, however,
be required by the Department, as a condition of continued employment with the
Department, to qualify as Illinois state licensed paramedics and to obtain
licensure in the emergency medical service system under which the Oak Park Fire
Department operates as an advanced life support service in accordance with the
terms and conditions set forth in the collective bargaining agreement then in
effect between the Village of Oak Park and the Oak Park firefighters.
On and after March 3, 1997, persons must be qualified as Illinois state
licensed paramedics at the time of their appointment to the position of
firefighter with the Oak Park Fire Department. Once such persons have been
appointed to the position of firefighter/paramedic with the Oak Park Fire
Department, they shall be required by the Department, as a condition of
continued employment with the Department, to maintain their qualifications as
Illinois state licensed paramedics and to obtain and maintain licensure in the
emergency medical service system under which the Oak Park Fire Department
operates as an advanced life support service in accordance with the terms and
conditions set forth in the collective bargaining agreement then in effect
between the Village of Oak Park and the Oak Park firefighters. (Ord. 16-074, 6-
6-2016)
9-1-3: ADOPTION OF FIREMEN'S PENSION FUND:
The provisions of the "firemen's pension fund act" for municipalities of five
hundred thousand (500,000) and under found in the pension code of the Illinois
Compiled Statutes 1 , establishing a firemen's pension fund and a board to
administer it, are hereby adopted by the Village. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.
9-1-4: GENERAL AUTHORITY OF CHIEF:
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have sole and absolute control and
command over all persons connected with the Fire Department of the Village
while on duty. He shall possess full power and authority over the organization,
government and discipline of the Fire Department, and the direction and control
of the Bureau of Fire Prevention pursuant to section
9-1-2 of this article, and to that end he may prescribe and establish from time
to time such rules and such regulations as he may deem advisable, subject to
the approval of the Village Manager.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to suspend any firefighters
from duty for not to exceed five (5) days, but he shall report such suspension
to the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners at its next regular meeting and
the reasons for his action.
Any firefighter so suspended shall not be entitled to pay while so suspended.
The firefighter may appeal the suspension to the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners as provided in the Illinois municipal code. (1981 Code)
9-1-5: CHIEF TO HAVE CUSTODY OF DEPARTMENT PROPERTY:
The Chief of the Fire Department shall be responsible for the custody of the
engines, hoses, trucks, ladders and all other property and equipment belonging
to the Fire Department. (1981 Code)
9-1-6: POWER OF CHIEF TO ENTER PREMISES FOR INVESTIGATION; STOP CONSTRUCTION,
ETC.:
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to enter upon the premises
wherein any fire has occurred, if necessary, in order to investigate the origin
of the fire, and shall have power to stop the construction of any building when
the same is being done in a reckless or careless manner or in violation of any
provisions of this code or any other ordinance of the Village. (1981 Code)
9-1-7: EXAMINATION BY CHIEF OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS, ETC.:
The Chief of the Fire Department shall be responsible for the examination of
all buildings and walls reported dangerous or damaged by fire or accident and
shall, when requested by the Village Manager, also be responsible for the
examination of all buildings under application for permit to raise, enlarge,
alter or rebuild, and may make a report of the condition thereof to the
Director of Code Enforcement. (1981 Code)
9-1-8: EXCLUSION OF BYSTANDERS AT FIRE SCENE:
The Chief of the Fire Department, or other officer in command, may prescribe
limits in the vicinity of any fire within which no persons, except
firefighters, police and those admitted by order of any officer of the Fire
Department, shall be permitted to go. (1981 Code)
9-1-9: REMOVAL OF PROPERTY FROM FIRE SCENE:
The Chief of the Fire Department, or other officer in command, shall have power
to cause the removal of any property, whenever it shall become necessary, for
the preservation of such property from fire, to prevent the spreading of fire,
or to protect adjoining property. (1981 Code)
9-1-10: DESTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS, ETC., TO CONTROL FIRE:
The Chief of the Fire Department, or in his absence, the officer in command,
may direct the members of the Fire Department to cut down and remove any
building, erection or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any
fire. The Chief of the Fire Department, or other officer in command, shall have
the power to blow up or cause to be blown up, with powder or otherwise, any
building or erection during the progress of a fire for the purpose of
extinguishing or checking the same. (1981 Code)
9-1-11: HINDERING FIREFIGHTERS AND INJURING EQUIPMENT:
No person shall wilfully disobey or offer any hindrance to any officer or
firefighter in the performance of his duty at a fire or shall wilfully in any
manner destroy, injure or deface any fire apparatus or equipment belonging to
the Village. (1981 Code)
9-1-12: REMOVAL OF PROPERTY SAVED FROM FIRE:
No person shall be entitled to take away any property in the possession of the
Fire Department saved from any fire, until proof of ownership is made
satisfactory to the Chief of the Fire Department or acting commanding officer.
(1981 Code)
9-1-13: DRIVING OVER UNPROTECTED FIRE HOSE:
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department of
the Village when laid down by order of the Chief of the Fire Department or
other proper officer without the consent of the officer or member in charge of
such hose. (1981 Code)
9-1-14: OBSTRUCTING USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to obstruct the use of any
fire hydrant or have or place any material in front thereof or within fifteen
feet (15') from either side thereof. Any and all material found to be such an
obstruction may be immediately removed by any member of the Fire Department and
at the risk, cost and expense of the owner or claimant. (1981 Code)
9-1-15: IMPERSONATING A FIREFIGHTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person, not a member of the Fire Department, to
impersonate a firefighter or officer of the Fire Department at a fire, on going
to or returning from a fire, by wearing a cap or badge or in any other way.
(1981 Code)
9-1-16: PIPELINE AND POWER LINE INCIDENTS:
The fees set forth herein shall be assessed for services provided by the Oak
Park Fire Department in response to pipeline (includes, but is not limited to,
gas, sewer, and water pipelines) and power line incidents.
   A.   Level 1; basic response: Four hundred dollars ($400.00). Level 1
services shall include provision of basic response services, including engine
response, first responder assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations,
first responder setup and command and inspections.
   B.   Level 2; intermediate response: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Level
2 services shall include provision of level 1 services as well as the provision
of a hazardous materials certified team and appropriate equipment, level A or B
suit donning, breathing air, detection equipment, and the supervision and/or
assistance of pipeline repair.
   C.   Level 3; advanced response: Itemized claim charges. Includes provision
of levels 1 and 2 services as well as supervision and/or assistance of
intermediate to major pipeline damage, setup and removal of decontamination
center, detection, recovery and identification of material, disposal and
environmental cleanup. Charges shall be based upon hourly rates of level 1 and
level 2 responders, including the provision of a hazardous materials certified
team and appropriate equipment, cost of replacement equipment and supplies used
to mitigate the incident, and other applicable responders as deemed necessary
by the Village and any other responding agencies. (Ord. 15-169, 9-21-2015, eff.
11-1-2015)
CHAPTER 10
RESERVED
CHAPTER 11
GAMBLING
General Provisions   1
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Gambling Prohibited
11-1-2: Gambling Defined
11-1-3: Permitted Activities
11-1-4: Delivering Of Wagers Or Bets
11-1-5: Video Gaming Prohibited
11-1-6: Electronic Sweepstakes Machines Prohibited
11-1-1: GAMBLING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to commit gambling in the Village of Oak Park. (1981 Code)
11-1-2: GAMBLING DEFINED:
For purposes of this chapter, a person gambles when he:
   A.   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other things of value
(unless permitted in section
11-1-3 of this article); or
   B.   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or any political
nomination, appointment or election; or
   C.   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells,
bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures or distributes any gambling
device; or
   D.   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or apparatus by means
of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or registered, or knowingly
possesses any money which he has received in the course of a bet or wager; or
   E.   Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skills or chance,
political nomination, appointment or election; or
   F.   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell or transfers
any ticket or share for any lottery (see subsection
11-1-3D of this article for exemption); or
   G.   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or
knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record, document or
other similar device; or
   H.   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, or drafts, prints, or
publishes any lottery ticket or share, or any policy ticket, slip, record,
document or similar device or any advertisement of any lottery or public game
(see section
11-1-3 of this article for exemption). (1981 Code)
11-1-3: PERMITTED ACTIVITIES:
The following activities shall not constitute gambling:
   A.   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance
including, without limitation, contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life or
health or accident insurance; and
   B.   Offers of prizes, award or compensation to the actual contestants in
any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength or
endurance, or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such contest; and
   C.   The game commonly known as "bingo" when conducted in accordance with
"an act making lawful the conducting of bingo by certain non-profit
organizations, requiring licensing and prescribing regulations therefor"; and
   D.   Lotteries when conducted by the State of Illinois in accordance with
the "Illinois Lottery Law", enacted by the 78th General Assembly. (1981 Code)
11-1-4: DELIVERING OF WAGERS OR BETS:
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of delivering wagers or bets in
the Village of Oak Park. (1981 Code)
11-1-5: VIDEO GAMING PROHIBITED:
Video gaming, as that term is defined in the Illinois Video Gaming Act 1  is
prohibited. A video gaming license issued by the State of Illinois is not
effective within the Village of Oak Park. (Ord. 2009-0-075, 11-2-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
11-1-6: ELECTRONIC SWEEPSTAKES MACHINES PROHIBITED:
   A.   For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
   ELECTRONIC MACHINE OR DEVICE: A mechanically, electrically or electronically
operated machine or device, that is owned, leased or otherwise possessed by a
sweepstakes sponsor or promoter, or any of the sweepstakes sponsor's or
promoter's partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors, that is intended
to be used by a sweepstakes entrant, that uses energy, and that is capable of
displaying information on a screen or other mechanism.
   ENTER OR ENTRY: The act or process by which a person becomes eligible to
receive any prize offered in a sweepstakes.
   ENTERTAINMENT DISPLAY: Visual information capable of being seen by a
sweepstakes entrant that takes the form of actual game play or simulated game
play of games, including, but not limited to, a poker game or any other kind of
playing card game; a bingo game; a craps game; a keno game; a lotto game; an
eight-liner game; a pot-of-gold game; a game based on or involving the random
or chance matching of different pictures, words, numbers or symbols not
dependent on the skill or dexterity of the player; a casino or gambling game;
and any other video game the outcome of which is not in whole or in part
dependent on the skill or dexterity of the player that is played in the course
of revealing a prize as a result of an entry into a sweepstakes.
   PRIZE: Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, or anything else of
value, which may be transferred to a person, whether possession of the prize is
actually transferred, or placed on an account or other record as evidence of
the intent to transfer the prize.
   SWEEPSTAKES: Any game, advertising scheme or plan, or other promotion,
which, with or without payment of any consideration, a person may enter to win
or become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based
upon an element of chance.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or place into
operation, an electronic machine or device for the following purposes:
      1.   To conduct a sweepstakes through the use of an entertainment
display, including the entry process or the reveal of a prize; or
      2.   To promote a sweepstakes that is conducted through the use of an
entertainment display, including the entry process or the reveal of a prize.
(Ord. 18-445, 11-19-2018)
CHAPTER 12
HOUSING
Rooming Houses, Hotels And Motels   1
Residential Rental License   2
Regulation Of Condominiums And Condominium Conversions   3
Security Deposits   4
Inclusionary Housing   5
Residential Tenant And Landlord Ordinance   6
Housing Trust Fund   7
ARTICLE 1
ROOMING HOUSES, HOTELS AND MOTELS
SECTION:
Division A. Rooming Houses
12-1-1: Buildings To Conform To Other Ordinances
12-1-2: License - Required; Issuance
12-1-3: License - Application
12-1-4: License - Application Requires Floor Plans
12-1-5: License - Application - Departmental Approval
12-1-6: Application Of Zoning Regulations
12-1-7: Inspections
12-1-8: Register Required
12-1-9: Required Exits
12-1-10: Food Preparation And Light Housekeeping Prohibited
12-1-11: Use Of Accessory Buildings Prohibited
12-1-12: Interpretation Of Article
Division B. Hotels And Motels
12-1-13: Required Exits
12-1-14: General Regulations
DIVISION A. ROOMING HOUSES
12-1-1: BUILDINGS TO CONFORM TO OTHER ORDINANCES:
No house or building constructed, modified, altered or erected in the Village
shall be used as a rooming house, and no house or building heretofore erected
and not now used for such purpose, or any building, house or portion thereof
which is now used or intended to be used or occupied for rooming house purposes
shall be converted into, used as or leased for a rooming house unless such
building and every part thereof shall conform to the requirements of this
article and to such other requirements of the building, zoning and health
chapters of this code as may apply. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-1-2: LICENSE - REQUIRED; ISSUANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, keep, manage or operate or
cause to be conducted, kept, managed or operated a rooming house without a
license therefor. Such license shall be issued only to persons of good moral
character and shall not be transferable. All such licenses shall be renewed
annually, subject to the same conditions as the original license. Such license
shall be issued by the Village Manager or the Manager's designee upon payment
of the fee as provided in chapter 8 of this code. Such fee shall accompany the
application. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-1-3: LICENSE - APPLICATION:
A written application for a license required by this article upon blank forms
furnished by the Village Manager or the Manager's designee shall be filed with
the Village Manager or the Manager's designee each year and shall accurately
state the full name and address of the applicant and person in whose name such
license is to be issued, the full name and address of the owner of the building
and premises where the activity of a rooming house is proposed to be carried
on, the number of rooms in the building and which rooms in the building are to
be occupied as sleeping rooms, and the number of persons proposed to be
accommodated or allowed in each room. Yearly application for a license shall be
made on or before January 1. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-1-4: LICENSE - APPLICATION REQUIRES FLOOR PLANS:
The applicant for a license required by this article shall file with the
application, a plan of each floor of the building, which plan shall be drawn to
a scale of not less than one-fourth inch (1/4") to one foot (1') showing all
fire escapes, stairs, halls, location and size of all windows, the location and
size of habitable rooms and the exits of each floor, and a statement in
writing, showing the number of persons proposed to be accommodated or allowed
on each floor. The intended use of every room in the building must be written
in, on the plans submitted. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-1-5: LICENSE - APPLICATION - DEPARTMENTAL APPROVAL:
Upon receipt of the application and plans referred to in this article, such
application and plans shall be submitted to the Director of the Development
Customer Services Department, to the Chief of the Fire Department and to the
Director of Public Health, who shall jointly arrange for the proper inspection,
and no such license shall be issued until written approval has been received
from each of the officials named.
   A.   Building Department: The Director of the Development Customer Services
Department shall determine that all the requirements of
chapter 7 of this code are complied with and that the premises are safe and
habitable and are provided with adequate facilities for heat, light and
ventilation.
   B.   Fire Department: The Chief of the Fire Department shall determine that
all fire hazards have been eliminated from such premises; that the premises
have proper and sufficient fire extinguishing equipment; that the premises
comply with all regulations and recommendations of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, and that the occupants of the building have adequate fire
protection.
   C.   Health Department: The Director of Public Health shall determine that
all regulations and orders of the state department of health, the Department of
Health of the Village and the provisions of this article pertaining to the
sanitation of such rooming house premises and every part thereof and to the
preservation of the health of the occupants thereof have been complied with.
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Health to have printed such
portions of this article as may be deemed requisite, and cause the same to be
displayed in each room of any such rooming house, and have made such
inspections as are necessary from time to time assuring the proper healthful
occupancy of such establishment. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-1-6: APPLICATION OF ZONING REGULATIONS:
No rooming house shall provide for more than the number of persons permitted by
the zoning ordinance of the Village. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-1-7: INSPECTIONS:
At least once a year after a license required by this article has been issued
as herein provided or more often if deemed necessary and before the renewal of
any such license to conduct, keep or operate any such rooming house, it shall
be the duty of the Director of the Development Customer Services Department,
Chief of the Fire Department and the Director of Public Health to jointly
authorize the inspection of the premises and determine that the provisions of
this code and the terms and conditions of this article are being complied with.
(Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-1-8: REGISTER REQUIRED:
The landlord, proprietor, keeper, manager or clerk of every "rooming house" as
defined in section
12-1-12 of this article shall keep in the office, or other place therein, a
register in which shall be entered the name and permanent residence of every
person who becomes a lodger, boarder or guest therein. Such register shall also
show the number or location of the room or bed occupied by such person, the
date of his arrival, and the period for which he engaged board or lodging. The
register shall be accessible, without charge, to any police officer or duly
authorized agent of the Department of Health, Fire Department or Director of
the Development Customer Services Department of the Village. (Ord. 15-184, 11-
2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-1-9: REQUIRED EXITS:
Each and every rooming house in the Village housing persons on the third floor
shall be provided with at least two (2) inside stairways leading from the
ground to each floor providing habitable rooms, and further, that each and
every rooming house where less than three (3) stories are occupied shall be
provided with two (2) inside stairways in all cases when occupied by more than
five (5) persons on the second floor (including members of the family) or in
all cases where the total number of persons housed in the building exceeds
eight (8) (including members of the family). (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-
1-2015)
12-1-10: FOOD PREPARATION AND LIGHT HOUSEKEEPING PROHIBITED:
No person who shall keep, conduct, operate or maintain a rooming house shall
permit the cooking or preparation of food or meals or the storage of food, or
light housekeeping, by any person occupying said rooms. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-
2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-1-11: USE OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS PROHIBITED:
No accessory building shall be used for rooming house purposes. (Ord. 15-184,
11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-1-12: INTERPRETATION OF ARTICLE:
For purposes of this article, a "rooming house" is defined as a building or
part thereof, in which living and sleeping quarters (but not meals or cooking
facilities) are provided by prearrangement for compensation on a weekly or
longer basis for three (3) or more persons who are not members of the keeper's
family. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article
shall be held to be the minimum requirements with respect to rooming houses,
adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience
and general welfare. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon the
use of buildings or premises for rooming house purposes than are imposed or
required by the provisions of any other ordinance or this code, the provisions
of this article shall control. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
DIVISION B. HOTELS AND MOTELS
12-1-13: REQUIRED EXITS:
All premises used as a hotel or motel shall be furnished with the number of
exits and fire escapes required by the building ordinances of Oak Park for the
construction of a new hotel or motel. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-1-14: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any fugitive from justice to
stay in a hotel or motel. Each hotel or motel proprietor shall keep a register
of guests as required by state law; such registration or list shall be
available for inspection by any members of the Police Department at any time.
   B.   At least two (2) towels per person shall be placed in each occupied
room, each day.
   C.   Bedding shall be provided for each day a guest remains in a hotel or
motel, and shall be changed daily. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
ARTICLE 2
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE
SECTION:
12-2-1: License Required
12-2-2: License Application
12-2-3: Required Reports
12-2-4: License Issuance
12-2-5: License Fees
12-2-6: Inspection Of Buildings; Violations; Suspension And Revocation Of
License
12-2-7: Records
12-2-8: Tenant Responsibility
12-2-9: Inspection Fees
12-2-10: Violation Correction By Village
12-2-11: Mandatory Provision In Lease Agreements Within The Village
12-2-12: Annual Landlord Management Seminar
12-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person, corporation, partnership, business entity, or agent shall
operate or engage in the business of renting any dwelling unit to the public,
operate a rental dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit, or otherwise
allow any such property to be nonowner occupied, unless a valid residential
rental license has been issued by the Village for the specific location. A
dwelling unit may not be rented and no new lease may be entered into and no
lease may be renewed until a license is secured pursuant to this section, or
while a license is suspended or revoked.
   B.   The license requirement pursuant to this section shall not be
applicable to group homes governed by the specialized living centers act, 405
Illinois Compiled Statutes 25/1 et seq., as amended, for the developmentally
disabled, or to other similar uses governed by federal or state laws, rules or
regulations. (Ord. 16-088, 7-18-2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
   C.   All rental licenses issued in 2016 for multi-family residential
buildings with four (4) or more rental dwelling units shall expire on December
31, 2017, and shall be extended from the date of their next inspection for a
period of sixty (60) days thereafter. Said extension shall not be applicable to
a conditional license. Within fifteen (15) days following the inspection, the
Development Customer Services Department shall provide the building owner an
application for the applicable license type pursuant to this section. The
building owner must submit the completed application and license fee pursuant
to section 12-2-5 of this article within thirty (30) days thereafter. (Ord. 16-
095, 9-6-2016)
   D.   Licenses shall be issued by the Village Manager or the Manager's
designee based upon the license classifications: small rental, gold, silver,
bronze, or conditional as set forth in subsection
12-2-1J of this section. No license issued pursuant to this article shall be
transferable to another person, corporation, partnership, business entity, or
agent. No such license shall be required for condominium associations governed
by article 3 of this chapter. License fees shall be as set forth in section
12-2-5 of this article.
   E.   No rental license shall be issued or renewed unless the owner of the
building agrees that inspections shall take place pursuant to section
12-2-6 of this article.
   F.   Every licensee of a multi-family residential building with four (4) or
more rental units shall conspicuously post the current license certificate in
the main entryway or other conspicuous location of the building. For rental
dwellings of three (3) or fewer units, the licensee must provide a copy of the
license certificate to each tenant by attaching a copy to the tenants' copy of
the executed lease agreement.
   G.   License type shall be determined on the basis of established criteria
based on property and nuisance violations defined in section
7-13-1 et seq., and chapter 16 of this code.
   H.   Licenses will be issued for a time period according to the license type
in subsection
12-2-1J of this section.
   I.   All licenses may be reviewed at any time after the beginning of the
license term to determine whether the appropriate type license is maintained
for the property. (Ord. 16-088, 7-18-2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
   J.   Licenses shall be classified as follows:
 
License Type  Renewal   Application/ Inspection     Inspection     Mitigation
              Frequency Fee          Attendance     Performance    Plan
Small rental  2 years   n/a          n/a            n/a            n/a
(<4 units)
                                     Present and on Up to 0.75
Gold          4 years   On time      time           violation per  Not required
                                                    unit
                                     Present and on 0.75 - 1.5
Silver        2 years   On time      time           violations per Not required
                                                    unit
                                     Unexcused      1.5 - 3
Bronze        1 year    Late/on time late/no show   violations per Not required
                                                    unit
Conditional   6 months  Late/on time Unexcused      >3 violations  Required
                                     late/no show   per unit
 
(Ord. 16-095, 9-6-2016)
   K.   For the purposes of inspection and the determination of license type
only, each common area set forth herein shall be considered a separate unit.
Any part of a building not exclusively available to an individual tenant shall
be considered a common area including, but not limited to, building exterior,
yard, basement, stairway, laundry facility, lobby, mailroom, or roof. Each
separate common area shall be considered a separate unit for the purpose of
determining license eligibility. Each stairway shall be considered a separate
unit, but shall not be separated by flight.
   L.   Properties for which a rental license is not required due to new
construction or a change from owner occupied to rental will qualify for a
silver license. Properties found operating without a valid rental license from
the Village or failing to meet code requirements or that have been the subject
of an enforcement action(s) such as a violation of this article, shall only
qualify for a conditional license.
   M.   All rental properties are subject to review by the Village Manager or
the Manager's designee and an owner may be required to apply and qualify for a
different license type based on a property's compliance with this code and any
other applicable laws or regulations. Based on such review, the Manager may
require an owner to apply for, and meet the terms of, a conditional license if
the Manager determines that the nature of applicable property and nuisance
violations, pursuant to section
7-13-1 et seq., and chapter 16 of this code, are so severe that they require an
increased level of monitoring and an urgent need for compliance. The Manager
may determine that such a requirement is warranted even if the number of
violations per unit is equal to, or less than, three (3) as set forth for a
conditional license in subsection
12-2-1J of this section.
   N.   At any time during a license period, if a rental property does not meet
or exceed the criteria established for the current license type, the license
may be reviewed by the Village Manager and may be subject to suspension,
revocation, and/or license type review. Violations identified by inspections
other than those conducted for the purpose of license issue or renewal shall
only be included in the calculation of violations per unit, as described in
subsection
12-2-1J of this section, if they are not corrected before a citation is issued.
   O.   Rental properties for which a conditional license has been issued must
meet the requirements set forth in subsection
12-2-1P of this section.
   P.   Buildings containing three (3) rental dwelling units or fewer shall
only qualify for a small rental license type and only be subject to the license
and crime free housing requirements set forth in this section and section
12-2-12 of this article and shall not be subject to the inspection requirements
and mandatory lease provisions set forth in sections
12-2-6,
12-2-7,
12-2-9,
12-2-10 and
12-2-11 of this article except as otherwise provided. Buildings containing four
(4) or more rental dwelling units (multiple-family dwelling) shall be subject
to the inspection and records requirements and mandatory lease provisions set
forth in sections 1
12-2-6,
12-2-7,
12-2-9,
12-2-10 and
12-2-11 of this article.
   Q.   A license shall be required for buildings containing three (3) or fewer
rental dwelling units beginning January 1, 2015.
   R.   Rental properties that meet the conditional license criteria set forth
in this section are eligible only for conditional licenses. The Village should
provide by mail to each licensee a monthly report of any police and fire calls
and incidents and applicable property and nuisance violations defined in
section
7-13-1 et seq., and chapter 16 of this code.
      1.   Mitigation Plan: An applicant for a conditional license must submit
for review by the Village Manager or the Manager's designee a mitigation plan
for the license period. The mitigation plan shall describe steps proposed by
the applicant to reduce the number of property and nuisance violations, defined
in section
7-13-1 et seq., and chapter 16 of this code to a level that qualifies for a
gold, silver, or bronze license.
      2.   Village Manager Consideration: A license application that contains a
proposed mitigation plan shall be presented to the Village Manager or the
Manager's designee as to the disposition thereof. After giving the applicant an
opportunity to be heard and present evidence, the Manager shall approve,
disapprove, or approve with conditions the application and the mitigation plan.
If the Manager disapproves an application and mitigation plan or approves it
with conditions, the Manager shall state the reasons for so doing in writing.
In evaluating a mitigation plan, the Manager shall consider, among other
things, the building, its management practices, the nature and seriousness of
property and nuisance violations as defined in section 7-13-1 et seq., and
chapter 16 of this code, and the expected effectiveness of measures identified
in the plan to reduce the number of property and nuisance violations. In
evaluating a mitigation plan submitted by an applicant operating under a
provisional license, the Manager shall also consider the effectiveness of
measures identified in the applicant's previous mitigation plan and the need
for different or additional measures to reduce the property and nuisance
violations.
      3.   Compliance With Mitigation Plan: The licensee shall comply with the
mitigation plan as approved or modified by the Village Manager. No later than
the tenth day after each calendar month, the licensee shall mail or deliver to
the Village Manager a written report describing all steps taken in furtherance
of the applicant's mitigation plan during the preceding month. (Ord. 16-088, 7-
18-2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
12-2-2: LICENSE APPLICATION:
No such license shall be issued except upon written application filed with the
Village Manager or the Manager's designee. Such application shall be received
not less than thirty (30) days prior to the initial date of issuance as
determined by the Village Manager or the Manager's designee, or not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of a currently valid license. The
application shall set forth, but not be limited to, the following information:
   A.   Name and address of legal owner.
   B.   If licensee designates an agent, then the application shall set forth
the name, address and telephone number of that agent and the authority of the
agent to rent, manage and make expenditures.
   C.   Name, address and telephone number and extent of the authority of the
janitor and any other persons in addition to the owner or manager in a position
of authority with regard to the subject property.
   D.   The designation of the agent authorized by the owner to accept notices
and process.
   E.   It is the policy of the Board of Trustees to prevent discrimination
against any person on the basis of race in the rental of multiple-family
dwellings in the Village. In order to prevent owners or their agents from
renting multiple-family dwellings on the basis of the race of the lessee, it is
essential for the Village to monitor statistical data of the demographics of
tenant manager occupied units on a periodic basis. At least once a year, the
Village Manager or the Manager's designee shall present a report to the Board
of Trustees analyzing survey data compiled by the United States census bureau.
At a minimum, the report shall describe the racial and ethnic makeup of renter
occupied households and the type of structures in which those households are
located. The report shall also include a map depicting any racial or ethnic
segregation of renter occupied households in the most (smallest) geographic
detail as made available annually by the United States census bureau. The
report and underlying data shall be made available on the Village website to
the general public.
   F.   No license application shall be considered for a multi-family
residential building with four (4) or more rental units unless the building has
been inspected pursuant to section
12-2-6 of this article no more than ninety (90) days prior to Village receipt
of the application. The results of said inspection shall determine the type of
license for which the property qualifies pursuant to section
12-2-1 of this article. The Village shall notify the building owner and manager
or agent the type of license for which the property qualifies within ten (10)
days following the inspection. (Ord. 16-088, 7-18-2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
12-2-3: REQUIRED REPORTS:
The licensee shall report to the Village Manager or the Manager's designee any
change in the designation of the managing agent within seven (7) days of said
change. Any conveyance in the legal or equitable interest in the building shall
be reported to the Village Manager or the Manager's designee within seven (7)
days after execution of a contract to convey and at least fifteen (15) days
prior to said conveyance to allow ample time for the required presale
inspection. (Ord. 16-088, 7-18-2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
12-2-4: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
No license shall be issued without the approval of the appropriate Village
officials. The license may be withheld for failure to comply with applicable
statutes and ordinances, including, but not limited to, this chapter, and
chapters 13 and 20 of this code. (Ord. 16-088, 7-18-2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
12-2-5: LICENSE FEES:
License fees shall be payable on or before a due date established by the office
of the Village Manager or the Manager's designee. License fees shall be set
forth as follows:
   A.   If a license is not purchased by the due date, said fee shall be
increased by ten percent (10%); and further, the base fee shall be increased by
an additional twenty percent (20%) on the fifteenth day of each subsequent
month for which the fee remains unpaid.
   B.   If the ownership of a building changes during a licensing period, the
license fee for the new owner shall be determined on a prorated basis.
   C.   The license fee for a rental building shall be twenty dollars ($20.00)
per dwelling unit for rental buildings containing four (4) or more dwelling
units. The fee shall be due with a license application not less than thirty
(30) days prior to the initial date of issuance as determined by the Village
Manager or the Manager's designee, or not less than thirty (30) days prior to
the expiration date of a currently valid license.
   D.   The annual license fee for a small rental license type shall be ten
dollars ($10.00) per dwelling unit for buildings containing three (3) or fewer
dwelling units.
   E.   The services and inspection fee for condominiums shall be ten dollars
($10.00) for each condominium unit within the building. (Ord. 16-088, 7-18-
2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
12-2-6: INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS; VIOLATIONS; SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF
LICENSE:
   A.   Required inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the
following provisions:
      1.   The Development Customer Services Department and/or the Fire
Department shall make an annual inspection of all theaters, churches, schools,
public assembly units, and open air assembly units; and also all buildings two
(2) stories or more in height containing at least four (4) lodging or rooming
units.
      2.   The Development Customer Services Department shall also make
biennial inspections of all common areas and a minimum of one dwelling unit in
all mixed use commercial/residential buildings which are two (2) or more
stories in height and containing one to three (3) residential units and
commercial space in which the occupants engage in food preparation, food sales,
pets and pet supply sales or hazardous activities requiring (annual, quarterly,
monthly) inspections by the Fire Department in accordance with section F-102.2
of the 1984 BOCA fire prevention code. Such hazardous activities include, but
are not limited to, activities which involve the use of hazardous and/or
flammable materials and chemicals, the storage of combustible materials and the
use of potentially hazardous or dangerous equipment and/or machinery. The
annual inspection fee for the inspection of common areas and residential units
in mixed use commercial/residential buildings shall be six dollars ($6.00) for
each dwelling unit contained therein. It shall be the duty of every owner,
agent, lessee or occupant of any such building and of the person in charge or
control of the same to permit the making of such biennial inspection by a duly
authorized inspector at any time upon demand being duly made.
      3.   The Development Customer Services Department shall make inspections
of all common areas and the interior of a minimum of one-third (1/3) of the
dwelling units in multiple-family dwellings which contain four (4) or more
dwelling units. The required frequency of such inspections shall be based on
the expiration of the rental license type pursuant to section 12-2-1 of this
article. Except for a small rental license, no rental license shall be issued
or renewed until a valid inspection has been completed.
      4.   In condominiums, all common facilities and one-third (1/3) of the
dwelling units which are occupied by someone other than the owner of the unit
shall be inspected on a biennial basis.
   B.   Whenever, upon inspection of the licensed multiple-family dwelling or
of the records required to be kept by section
12-2-7 of this article, it is determined by the appropriate officials of the
Village that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of the
provisions of this or any applicable ordinance of the Village, the official
making the determination shall serve the owner or agent with a notice of
violation. Such notice shall identify the specific violations and state that
unless they are corrected within the time specified in the notice, the
operating license may be suspended. Notice pursuant to this section shall be
sent by mail to the party designated in the application to receive notices and
process.
   C.   At the end of the time allowed for correction of any violation cited,
the building shall be reinspected by the appropriate Village officials. If it
is determined that the conditions have not been corrected or they are not in
the process of being corrected, the Village may issue an order suspending the
rental license.
   D.   If, upon reinspection, it is determined by the appropriate Village
officials that the violations cited in the notice have been corrected, the
license shall be reinstated by the Village. A request for reinspection shall
not exceed the twenty one (21) day suspension period unless the official
responsible for sending the violation notice so requests.
   E.   If the licensee is convicted by a court of a violation of any
applicable ordinance of the Village in connection with the licensed building,
then the license shall be subject to revocation without further notice.
   F.   In the event a condition of extreme hazard to health or safety is found
to exist, the Village may immediately revoke the license.
   G.   Each day a building continues to operate after a license has been
revoked shall constitute a separate violation of this code subject to fine, as
provided in section 1-1-5 of this code.
   H.   Any licensee violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine as provided in section
1-1-5 of this code. (Ord. 16-088, 7-18-2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
12-2-7: RECORDS:
Every owner or agent of a licensed multiple-family dwelling shall cause to be
kept records itemizing all repairs, alterations or decorating expenses in
excess of fifty dollars ($50.00) per expenditure for a period of five (5) years
after such expenditure. Upon request, such records shall be made available
during normal business hours upon request of the Village Manager or the
Manager's authorized representatives. (Ord. 16-088, 7-18-2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
12-2-8: TENANT RESPONSIBILITY:
No tenant shall commit vandalism in the building in which the tenant's dwelling
unit is located and no tenant shall permit vandalism to occur or shall violate
any of the provisions of this code in the dwelling unit leased by the tenant.
(Ord. 16-088, 7-18-2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
12-2-9: INSPECTION FEES:
   A.   One Hundred Percent Sale Inspection Fee: When a licensed multiple-
family dwelling is inspected prior to sale as required by this code, the owner
of the building so inspected shall be charged a fee equal to the annual license
fee plus one dollar ($1.00) additional for each dwelling unit contained in the
building.
   B.   Reinspection Fees: A reinspection fee will be due immediately following
the second reinspection and each subsequent reinspection conducted thereafter.
Reinspections shall be conducted until all violations are corrected. A
reinspection fee shall also be due immediately following any scheduled
inspection for which a representative of the licensee is not present, does not
provide access to the units and common areas required for inspection, or does
not make a request to reschedule at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of
the scheduled inspection. The reinspection fee for a multi-family residential
building with four (4) or more rental dwelling units shall be twenty dollars
($20.00) per dwelling unit inspected plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per common
area inspected. (Ord. 16-088, 7-18-2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
12-2-10: VIOLATION CORRECTION BY VILLAGE:
In the event a violation which presents a condition of extreme hazard to health
and safety is found to exist and it is not corrected within the time specified
by the Village Manager's designated representative then the Village Manager's
designated representative may cause the violation to be corrected. Any expense
in connection therewith shall be collected from the licensee. In the event the
licensee shall fail to pay for said repairs within thirty (30) days after the
expense is incurred, the Village shall place a lien on the premises for the
cost of repairs. No such lien shall be effective until a notice thereof has
been recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds. The Village may foreclose this
lien in the same manner and with the same effect as in the foreclosure of
mortgages on real estate. (Ord. 16-088, 7-18-2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
12-2-11: MANDATORY PROVISION IN LEASE AGREEMENTS WITHIN THE VILLAGE:
All leases and applications for leases of dwelling units shall contain the
information set forth in subsection
12-2-11A of this section, and all leases and applications for leases of
dwelling units which are newly executed and/or renewed on or after October 1,
1991, shall contain the information set forth in subsections
12-2-11B through E of this section:
   A.   Night parking is prohibited on all Village streets from two thirty
o'clock (2:30) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and the lessee is responsible
for providing off street parking for the lessee's vehicle during those hours to
the extent such parking is not provided by the lessor.
   B.   The specific unit number of the dwelling unit to be leased.
   C.   The maximum occupancy of the dwelling unit to be leased as established
by the owner and/or operator of the dwelling unit. The owner and/or operator
shall not, however, set forth a maximum occupancy in any such lease or lease
application which exceeds the maximum occupancy for the dwelling unit
established by section
12-1-6 of this chapter and set forth in the annual building inspection report
provided to every multiple-family dwelling building owner or operator by the
Director of the Development Customer Services Department of the Village on an
annual basis.
   D.   The full names and birth dates of all occupants of the dwelling unit
leased or to be leased under the lease agreement. The individual occupancy of
the dwelling unit may not be changed without an amendment to the existing lease
agreement reflecting the change in occupancy and shall in no case exceed the
maximum occupancy set forth in section
12-1-6 of this chapter.
   E.   The name and phone number of an agent of the building owner or
management who, in emergency situations, will be accessible to tenants on a
twenty four (24) hour per day basis and capable of reasonably and effectively
responding to tenant needs in such situations.
It shall be the responsibility of the lessor to set forth the information
required herein in the lease agreement. Any lease not containing the
information required herein shall be voidable by the lessee. (Ord. 16-088, 7-
18-2016, eff. 9-1-2016)
12-2-12: ANNUAL LANDLORD MANAGEMENT SEMINAR:
   A.   A residential rental license shall not be issued until the owner or
designated agent has attended and successfully completed an annual landlord
management housing seminar conducted by the Village's Development Customer
Services Department. All license applicants shall comply with the annual
seminar requirement within one year of applying for a license or within one
year of applying for a license renewal and shall attend and complete the annual
seminar every year thereafter. Licenses shall be null and void if the owner or
designated agent fails to comply with the seminar requirement pursuant to this
section.
   B.   In the event that an owner or designated agent applies for a
residential rental license and has met all other license requirements, but a an
annual landlord management seminar is not available, a provisional license may
be issued, effective for no more than one year from the date of issuance,
subject to attendance and successful completion by the operator, or his/her
designated agent, of that seminar within that time period. Upon completion of
the seminar within that time period, a rental residential license shall be
issued for the balance of the year.
   C.   In the event that a designated agent attends the annual landlord
management seminar to comply with this section, and that agent is no longer
employed by the owner to be responsible for managing the rental residential
dwelling unit under the license, the owner or a newly designated agent shall
attend and successfully complete the seminar within twelve (12) months of that
event.
   D.   An owner or designated agent of an owner may be certified as an
operator upon issuance of a rental residential license, and a certificate of
completion of the annual landlord management seminar. The certification as an
operator shall be issued on an annual basis.
   E.   At any time after two (2) years from the date of the issuance of a
license, an operator or designated agent may be required to attend and
successfully complete the annual landlord management seminar. Such requirement
shall be subject to the determination of the Village's Development Customer
Services Department which shall consider whether the rental property that is
the subject of the license is at risk of becoming a nuisance rental property as
defined in this Code:
   F.   A rental residential license shall not be renewed if attendance is
required and not completed within three (3) months of the notice to that
effect. Such notice shall be delivered or mailed to the landlord, or designated
agent, at the address designated on the most recent license application.
   G.   The Village's Development Customer Services Department shall maintain a
list of landlords and/or designated agents who have attended the annual
landlord management seminar and/or who are certified residential operators,
along with the dates of attendance and verification that the landlord or
designated agent has otherwise complied with this code to be eligible for
issuance or renewal of a residential operator's license.
(Ord. 16-088, 7-18-2016, eff. 9-1-2016; amd. Ord. 22-45, 6-6-2022)
ARTICLE 3
REGULATION OF CONDOMINIUMS AND CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
SECTION:
12-3-1: Definitions
12-3-2: Property Report; Required Contents
12-3-3: Required Property Report Disclaimer
12-3-4: Condominium Warranty Provisions
12-3-5: Condominium Code Inspections
12-3-6: Conversion Notification Requirements
12-3-7: Relocation Assistance
12-3-8: Code Requirements
12-3-9: Condominium Sales Contract; Rider Required
12-3-10: Condominium Development Meeting; Required
12-3-11: Violation Penalties
12-3-12: State Statutory Tie-In Provisions
12-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
AGENT: Any person, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or any other
entity or combination of entities who represents or acts on behalf of a
developer in selling or offering to sell any condominium unit.
BOARD OF MANAGERS: The Board of Managers provided for and referred to in the
Illinois condominium property act.
CERTIFICATE OF CODE COMPLIANCE: A written instrument issued by the Village as
evidence of a condominium project's compliance with applicable housing code
standards of the Village.
CLOSING OF A SALES CONTRACT: The operation of transferring ownership of a
condominium unit to the purchaser from the developer.
CODE INSPECTION REPORT: A written report issued by the Village as evidence that
all units and common elements in a condominium project have been inspected for
compliance with applicable housing code standards of the Village.
COMMON ELEMENTS: All portions of a condominium property except the condominium
units unless otherwise specified. Common elements shall also include limited
common elements.
CONDOMINIUM: A form of property established pursuant to the Illinois
condominium property act.
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT: A plan by a developer to sell residential condominium
units in an existing building or building to be constructed or under
construction.
CONDOMINIUM UNIT OR UNIT: A separate three-dimensional area identified as such
in the declaration and on the condominium plat. A condominium unit shall
include all improvements contained within the unit area except those excluded
in the declaration.
CONVERSION: The offering for sale by a developer or his agent of a condominium
unit that was rented by any person prior to the commencement of a condominium
project.
DECLARATION: An instrument by which a property is submitted to the provisions
of the Illinois condominium property act.
DEVELOPER: Any person or successor or assign who undertakes to develop a
condominium project either by conversion or new construction. A developer does
not include a corporation owning and operating a cooperative apartment building
unless more than six (6) units are to be sold to persons other than current
stockholders of the cooperation.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Development Customer Services Department of the
Village of Oak Park, as provided for under chapter 2, article 8 of this code,
as amended, or the Director's designee.
LIMITED COMMON ELEMENTS: A portion of the common elements to be reserved for
the use of a certain number of condominium units. Limited common elements shall
include, but not be limited to, balconies, terraces, patios and parking spaces
or facilities.
OFFERING: Any inducement, solicitation, advertisement, publication or
announcement by a developer to the general public to encourage the purchase of
a condominium unit or prospective condominium unit.
PERSON: Any natural individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, trustee or other legal entity
capable of holding title to real property.
PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSON: A person unable to engage in any substantial
gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental
impairment which can be expected to result in death or which has lasted or can
be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than twelve (12)
months.
PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSON: A person having an impairment which is expected
to be of long continued and indefinite duration or which substantially impedes
his ability to live independently. Said impairment shall include blindness and
deafness.
PLAT: A plat or plats of survey of all the units and common elements in a
property submitted to the provisions of the Illinois condominium property act.
PROPERTY REPORT: A property report required by this article and in accordance
with the Illinois condominium property act.
PROSPECTIVE PURCHASER: A person who visits the condominium project site for the
purpose of inspection for possible purchase or who requests the property
report.
TENANT: A person who pays rent for the privilege of occupying an apartment.
(Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-3-2: PROPERTY REPORT; REQUIRED CONTENTS:
At least thirty (30) days prior to closing a sales contract on any condominium
unit in a condominium project, a developer shall prepare and file with the
Director a property report and shall certify by affidavit that all disclosures
are true to the best of his knowledge and belief. Said report shall contain at
least the following information about the condominium project:
   A.   A statement indicating the name and address of the developer of the
condominium property.
   B.   A plat of survey showing the size and dimensions of the condominium
property.
   C.   A legal description of the condominium units offered and the
proportionate percentage of individual ownership of said units.
   D.   A description of the common elements and a statement of the percentage
ownership of the common elements applicable to the condominium units offered.
   E.   A description of all existing and proposed facilities not included, or
not to be included, as part of the common elements.
   F.   A statement of the following, in capital letters, when parking
facilities are not:
      1.   Part of the common elements, or
      2.   Divided as individual parking spaces among and designated as part of
the units of a condominium property:
PARKING FACILITIES ARE NOT OWNED BY THE UNIT OWNERS. IT SHALL BE THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF CONDOMINIUM UNIT OWNERS TO OBTAIN THEIR PARKING FACILITIES.
THE VILLAGE OF OAK PARK PROHIBITS OVERNIGHT PARKING ON STREETS.
   G.   An identification of all drawings, architectural plans and other
suitable documents, including "as built" drawings, setting forth information
for the location, maintenance and repair of condominium facilities and
equipment. Said identification shall be made to the extent these documents
exist and are available to the Condominium Board of Managers.
   H.   Projected initiation and completion dates for any proposed
construction, renovation or conversion.
   I.   Copies of the following legal documents that are binding or are to be
binding upon the condominium:
      1.   The declaration and plat of survey. Prior to the recordation of the
declaration, however, a preliminary declaration and plat may be supplied,
provided they are accompanied by a written statement that the description of
units and percentage of ownership interest in common elements is preliminary
and may be changed in material respects upon the recording of the declaration
and plat.
      2.   The articles of incorporation or charter of the condominium
association, if any.
      3.   The bylaws and regulations of the condominium association.
   J.   Disclosures of the existence of other legal documents that are binding
upon the condominium, including:
      1.   Any leases on real or personal property applicable to the
condominium.
      2.   The coverage and amounts of property insurance policies maintained
on the condominium building.
      3.   Any management contract, employment contract or any other contract
affecting the use, maintenance or access to all or any part of the condominium.
Said disclosures under this subsection shall include:
         a.   The name of the management agency, if any, and the services the
agent will perform;
         b.   The length of term of any management contract and the charges and
circumstances, if any, under which the charges may be increased;
         c.   The conditions, if any, under which the contract may be canceled
or terminated; and
         d.   A statement disclosing any relationship between the developer and
the management firm.
   K.   A statement of sale prices, terms and options for condominium units.
   L.   A floor plan of the condominium unit offered for sale.
   M.   A description of any appliances and other personal property included
with a unit offered for sale.
   N.   A statement of the terms and conditions of sale, including estimated
itemized closing and settlement costs, taxes and expected special assessments
levied either by the condominium or an entity of government.
   O.   A statement of the estimated operating budget for the condominium
project, projected for a period of one year from the expected date that control
of the project would pass to the Board of Managers. The projected operating
budget shall include:
      1.   Operating costs, such as costs for utilities, heating fuels,
janitorial services, trash and garbage disposal, ground and building
maintenance, security, maintenance or recreational and other facilities,
building insurance, elevator maintenance, sidewalk and street maintenance and
taxes. Said costs shall at least be shown in the aggregate and identified as
operating costs.
      2.   Management costs, such as the costs of management fees, accounting
and bookkeeping services and legal services. Said costs shall at least be shown
in the aggregate and identified as management costs.
      3.   Reserve costs, such as reserves for improvements, unexpected repair
work, and replacement and upkeep of common areas and facilities. Said costs
shall at least be shown in the aggregate and identified as reserve costs.
   P.   A statement of the provisions the developer has made to cover the
proposed operations and maintenance budget in the event an insufficient number
of units are sold.
   Q.   A report from a professional engineer or architect, licensed by the
state, describing the condition and expected useful life of the following
structural elements at least thirty (30) days prior to closing a sales
contract:
      1.   Roof.
      2.   Foundation.
      3.   External and supporting walls.
      4.   Mechanical, electrical, plumbing, heating and structural elements.
      5.   All other common facilities.
To the extent possible, all said descriptions shall be provided together with
an estimate of repair and replacement costs at current market prices for those
elements which need repair or replacement.
   R.   A statement setting forth the maximum number of occupants permitted by
this code for each dwelling unit contained within the condominium development.
Each such dwelling unit shall be clearly and accurately identified so as to be
easily referenced by a person reading the statement.
   S.   A statement verifying the number of applications of roofing systems
existing on the building. If more than two (2) applications of roofing systems
exist, the developer shall provide an estimate of cost for a complete tear off
of the old roofing systems and the application of a new roofing system.
   T.   A statement indicating that the electrical service for each condominium
unit is in compliance with subsection
12-3-8E of this article, the condominium ordinance, and containing a list of
condominium units, identified by number, which indicates the size of the
electrical service in ampere for each unit.
   U.   A statement indicating that the electrical service for the building,
based upon the per unit electrical service requirements of subsection
12-3-8F of this article, the condominium ordinance, is equal to or greater than
the electrical service requirements set forth in article 220 of the national
electric code (1993) and setting forth service load calculations for the
condominium building which provide substantially the same information contained
in the "service load calculations" form for multiple- family dwellings included
in exhibit A of this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3316.gif]
(Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-3-3: REQUIRED PROPERTY REPORT DISCLAIMER:
Each property report shall contain on the first page the following statement,
conspicuously shown in capital letters:
THE VILLAGE OF OAK PARK MAKES NO JUDGMENT ON THE STATEMENTS IN THIS PROPERTY
REPORT. ORAL REPRESENTATIONS ARE NOT BINDING ON THE DEVELOPER. ONLY
REPRESENTATIONS MADE IN WRITING ARE BINDING ON THE DEVELOPER.
(Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-3-4: CONDOMINIUM WARRANTY PROVISIONS:
   A.   Any developer of a property submitted subject to the provisions of the
Illinois condominium property act shall be required to provide a warranty
against any defects in the following property components:
      1.   Roof.
      2.   Foundation.
      3.   External and supporting walls.
      4.   Central heating plant.
   B.   Said warranty shall cover the defects listed in this section for a
period of fifteen (15) months from the date control of the condominium property
passes to the Board of Managers.
   C.   Repair or replacement of the defects listed in this section shall be
performed in a timely manner by the developer following notification by the
Board of Managers.
   D.   Warranty coverage shall not include the cost of normal, routine
maintenance of the property components listed in this section or defects caused
by fire (not related to any breach of warranty), acts of God, vandalism or
negligence of a unit owner.
   E.   To assure compliance with this section, the developer shall, at the
time of each closing, place in escrow with a bank or trust company authorized
to do business in Illinois a sum equal to two percent (2%) of the total of each
unit sale price. The developer shall provide proof satisfactory to the Director
at the time of application for a real estate transfer tax stamp pursuant to
section 23A-1-1 et seq., of this code, as amended, that the escrow account has
been or will be established upon closing. Said sum shall remain in escrow for a
period of not less than fifteen (15) months from the date control of the
condominium project passes to the Board of Managers and all interest earnings
on the sum held in escrow shall accrue solely to the developer. The developer
shall notify the Director by registered or certified mail that control of the
condominium project has passed to the Board of Managers within five (5) days of
the passage of control. At least sixty (60) days prior to the termination of
the escrow period, the developer shall notify the Board of Managers and the
affected unit owners by certified mail of the date upon which the escrow will
terminate. If the required prior notice has been given and no notice of claim
by any unit owner is received within the fifteen (15) month period, the funds
in escrow shall be returned to the developer. If notice of claim is received by
the escrowee, funds shall be retained in escrow in the amount of the claim
until the claim is adjusted between the claimant and the developer or until the
validity of the claim is determined by court action. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015,
eff. 12-1-2015)
12-3-5: CONDOMINIUM CODE INSPECTIONS:
   A.   A developer submitting a property to the provisions of the Illinois
condominium property act shall file a notice of intent to convert with the
Director within three (3) business days from the date said notice is given to
the tenants of the property. A code inspection of the property, including all
projected condominium units and common elements and facilities, shall be
scheduled by agreement between the developer and the Director when the notice
of intent to convert is received by the Director.
   B.   Any code violations and deficiencies detected during an inspection of
projected condominium units and common elements and facilities should be
corrected by the developer at least thirty (30) days prior to the closing of a
sales contract on any condominium unit to provide the Director with adequate
time to perform a reinspection of the premises and prepare the inspection
report and certificate for delivery to the prospective purchaser by the
developer at or prior to closing as required in subsection
12-3-5F of this section. Said corrections shall be evidenced by a code
inspection report and certificate of code compliance, except as provided in
subsection
12-3-5C of this section, issued by the Director.
   C.   If substantial rehabilitation is being performed as part of a
conversion to condominium, the Director may issue a partial certificate of code
compliance to permit the closing of sales contracts for those condominium units
in which rehabilitation is complete and all code violations are corrected.
Partial certificates also may be issued for common elements and facilities on
which rehabilitation is complete and all code violations are corrected.
However, prior to the issuance of a certificate of code compliance for the
entire property, a reinspection shall be made on all common elements and
facilities and units for which sales contracts have not been closed. Any
recurrence of code violations in the common elements and facilities covered by
a partial certificate of code compliance shall be corrected by the developer at
the developer's expense unless control of the building has passed to the Board
of Managers.
   D.   Until such time as all units in a condominium property are sold, the
Director shall conduct annual building inspections of all common elements, all
common facilities, and at least ten percent (10%) (but never less than 1 unit)
of the unsold condominium units.
   E.   Subsequent to the sale of all condominium units, the Director shall
conduct an annual inspection of all the common elements and facilities of a
condominium property. The condominium building shall be subject to all
applicable Village ordinances which may be enforced as to the developer, unit
owners, Board of Managers or any other person to whom the ordinances are
applicable.
   F.   A developer shall be required to provide a prospective purchaser with a
copy of a code inspection report and a certificate or partial certificate of
code compliance prior to or at the closing of a condominium unit sales
contract. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-3-6: CONVERSION NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No less than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to recording the
declaration submitting a property to the provisions of the Illinois condominium
property act, a developer shall give notice of said intent to record to all
persons who are tenants of the property on the date notice is given.
   B.   Any person who was a tenant upon the date of receiving a notice of
intent to record a declaration of condominium and whose tenancy expires other
than for cause prior to one hundred twenty (120) days thereafter shall have the
right to extend his tenancy on the same terms and conditions and for the same
rental cost until the one hundred twenty (120) day period expires.
   C.   An exception to the requirement of subsection
12-3-6B of this section shall be provided for any tenant who is sixty five (65)
years or over or who is physically handicapped or physically disabled. Any said
tenant whose tenancy expires other than for cause prior to one hundred eighty
(180) days after receiving a notice of intent to record a declaration of
condominium shall have the right to extend his tenancy on the same terms and
conditions and for the same rental cost until the one hundred eighty (180) day
period expires.
   D.   No rental lease shall be executed between an owner or his agent and a
prospective new tenant in a property for which notice of intent to record a
declaration of condominium has been given to existing tenants unless the
prospective new tenant initially is notified in writing of the intended
recordation. No lease shall be executed so as to stipulate an expiration date
prior to one hundred twenty (120) days from the date the lease becomes
effective. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-3-7: RELOCATION ASSISTANCE:
Special consideration shall be given to tenants who would or could experience
severe hardships in relocating, if necessary, after receiving a notice of
intent to submit a property to the provisions of the Illinois condominium
property act. The following provisions are included to alleviate said
hardships:
   A.   A condominium developer shall inform all tenants electing not to
purchase condominium units that relocation counseling or assistance may be
available by contacting the Oak Park Housing Authority, Oak Park Housing Center
or other appropriate agencies.
   B.   A condominium developer shall disclose in writing the following
language to a tenant electing not to purchase a condominium unit:
Tenants who find it necessary to move may be eligible for rental assistance
payments through the Housing Authority of the Village of Oak Park located at
328 North Austin Boulevard. All tenants desiring assistance are encouraged to
inquire about the Housing Authority programs.
The Housing Authority will make every effort to help, although Federal funds
available for rental assistance payments are limited. Tenants eligible for
assistance must have an annual income not in excess of the income standards set
for this area by the Department of Housing and Urban Development. Tenants
meeting this standard shall receive some priority consideration from the
Housing Authority under its standards for tenants who are about to be without
housing due to no fault of their own.
   C.   Apartment building owners who receive rehabilitation grant assistance
from the Oak Park community development block grant program shall be required
to offer, on a priority basis, any unleased units so assisted to eligible
tenants displaced by condominium conversions within the Village. (Ord. 15-184,
11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-3-8: CODE REQUIREMENTS:
Every condominium unit shall contain the following:
   A.   Ground fault interrupted (GFI) outlets in kitchen and bathroom.
   B.   All electrical outlets shall be grounded.
   C.   A light fixture in all storage rooms or within fifteen feet (15') of
all storage areas defined by wire or other transparent wall material.
   D.   A minimum of three (3) reasonably spaced, grounded electrical outlets
in each habitable room in addition to any other electrical fixture which is
located in any such room.
   E.   Each dwelling unit in a condominium must have a minimum of sixty (60)
amp electric service. Electric service of less than sixty (60) amp must be
replaced with one hundred (100) amp electric service.
   F.   The electrical service to the condominium building shall be equal to or
greater than that required by article 220 of the national electric code (1993)
for a building which complies with the per unit electrical service requirements
of subsection
12-3-8E of this section. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-3-9: CONDOMINIUM SALES CONTRACT; RIDER REQUIRED:
The seller of every condominium unit within the Village shall include a rider
to every sales contract for the sale of a condominium unit within the Village
which must be separately executed by the seller and purchaser and which shall
read, in bold print, as follows:
The Seller has notified the Purchaser, and the Purchaser acknowledges receipt
of notification from the Seller that the Village of Oak Park has enacted a
Condominium and Condominium Conversion Ordinance, setting forth regulations
which, among other things, provide BUYER PROTECTION BENEFITS included in the
enumerated Section of the Ordinance as follows:
 
                At least 30 days prior to closing a sales contract...a
Section         developer shall prepare and file with the Director of the
12-3-2:        Development Customer Services Department a property report and
                shall certify by affidavit that all disclosures are true to the
                best of the developer's knowledge and belief...
                The maximum number of occupants permitted by the Village Code
Section        for this dwelling unit is listed in the Property Report
12-3-2R:        required to be on file with the Director of the Development
                Customer Services Department.
Section         Condominium warranty provisions...A copy of the warranty shall
12-3-4A to E:  be filed with the Director of the Development Customer Services
                Department...
                A developer submitting a property to the provisions of the
                Illinois Condominium Property Act shall file a notice of intent
Section        to convert with the Director of the Development Customer
12-3-5A:        Services Department of the Village, within three (3) business
                days from the date said notice is given to the tenants of the
                property. A code inspection...shall be scheduled....
                Any code violations and deficiencies...should be corrected by
                the developer at least 30 days prior to the closing of a sales
                contract on any condominium unit to provide the Department of
Section         Development Customer Services with adequate time to perform a
12-3-5B:       reinspection of the premises and prepare the required report
                and certificate. Said corrections shall be evidenced by a code
                inspection report and certificate, or partial certificate, of
                code compliance which shall be presented by the developer to
                the Purchaser prior to or at closing.
Section         The Purchaser has the right to rescind any sale not in
12-3-11:       substantial conformance with this Article or to seek damages
                therefor.
 
All of the above provisions must be satisfied prior to closing. If you have any
questions or need additional information, please call the Director of the
Development Customer Services Department at (708) 383-6400.
(Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-3-10: CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT MEETING; REQUIRED:
The developer shall schedule an informational meeting at the Village Hall with
the Director and Director of Community Relations at least ninety (90) days
prior to filing the declaration in the case of new construction or within
thirty (30) days of providing notice to tenants of an existing building of the
developer's intention to file a declaration to convert such building to a
condominium building in accordance with the Illinois condominium property act.
The purpose of the meeting will be for the Village to provide the developer and
developer's agents with information concerning the application of the Village's
fair housing and condominium development laws and regulations to the
developer's condominium development. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-3-11: VIOLATION PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the first
offense and not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in any one
hundred eighty (180) day period, provided, however, that all actions seeking
the imposition of fines only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject
to the provisions of the Illinois civil practice act 1 . Repeated offenses in
excess of three (3) within any one hundred eighty (180) day period may also be
punishable as a misdemeanor by incarceration in the county jail for a term not
to exceed six (6) months under the procedure set forth in section
1-2-1 .1 of the Illinois municipal code 2  under the provisions of the Illinois
code of criminal procedure in a separate proceeding.
Each failure to comply with the provisions of this article with respect to each
person shall be considered a separate offense. A separate and distinct offense
shall be regarded as committed each day on which such person shall continue or
permit any such violation.
The rights, obligations and remedies set forth in this article shall be
cumulative and in addition to any others available at law or in equity. The
Village or any prospective purchaser, purchaser or owner of a unit may seek
compliance with any provision of this article and in addition shall have the
right to rescind any sale not in substantial conformance with this article or
may seek damages therefor. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
2 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1.
12-3-12: STATE STATUTORY TIE-IN PROVISIONS:
Except where modified or supplemented by this article, all provisions contained
in the Illinois condominium property act, as amended, shall apply to properties
submitted to the provisions of said act. (Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-
2015)
ARTICLE 4
SECURITY DEPOSITS
SECTION:
12-4-1: Withholding Security Deposit; Statement Of Damages; Liability Of Lessor
12-4-2: Transferee Liability
12-4-3: Interest To Be Paid By Lessor On Security Deposits; Rate
12-4-4: Time For Payment
12-4-5: Application Of Article
12-4-1: WITHHOLDING SECURITY DEPOSIT; STATEMENT OF DAMAGES; LIABILITY OF
LESSOR:
A lessor of residential real property containing four (4) or more units, who
has received a security deposit from a lessee to secure the payment of rent or
to compensate for damage to the leased property may not withhold any part of
that deposit as compensation for property damage unless he has, within thirty
(30) days of the date that the lessee vacated the premises, furnished to the
lessee, delivered in person or by mail directed to his last known address, an
itemized statement of the damage allegedly caused to the premises and the
estimated or actual cost for repairing or replacing each item on that
statement, attaching the paid receipts, or copies thereof, for the repair or
replacement. If estimated cost is given, the lessor shall furnish the lessee
with paid receipts, or copies thereof, within thirty (30) days from the date
the statement showing estimated cost was furnished to the lessee, as required
by this section.
If no such statement and receipts, or copies thereof, are furnished to the
lessee as required by this section, the lessor shall return the security
deposit in full within forty five (45) days of the date that the lessee vacated
the premises.
Upon a finding by a circuit court that a lessor has refused to supply the
itemized statement required by this section, or has supplied such statement in
bad faith, and has failed or refused to return the amount of the security
deposit due within the time limits provided, the lessor shall be liable for an
amount equal to twice the amount of the security deposit due, together with
court costs and reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 1990-0-9, 3-19-1990, eff. 6-1-
1990; amd. Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-4-2: TRANSFEREE LIABILITY:
In the event of a sale, lease, transfer or other direct or indirect disposition
of residential real property, other than to the holder of a lien interest in
such property, by a lessor who has received a security deposit or prepaid rent
from a lessee, the transferee of such property shall be liable to that lessee
for any security deposit, including statutory interest, or prepaid rent which
the lessee has paid to the transferor. The transferor shall remain jointly and
severally liable with the transferee to the lessee for such security deposit or
prepaid rent. (Ord. 1990-0-9, 3-19-1990, eff. 6-1-1990; amd. Ord. 15-184, 11-2-
2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-4-3: INTEREST TO BE PAID BY LESSOR ON SECURITY DEPOSITS; RATE:
A lessor of residential real property, containing four (4) or more units, who
receives a security deposit from a lessee to secure the payment of rent or
compensation for damage to property shall pay interest to the lessee within
thirty (30) days of termination of the lease agreement. Such interest shall be
computed from the date of the deposit through the date of payment of the
interest at a rate equal to the interest paid by the largest commercial bank,
as measured by total assets, having its main banking premises in this state, on
minimum deposit passbook savings accounts as of December 31 of the calendar
year immediately preceding the inception of the rental agreement, on any
deposit held by the lessor for more than six (6) months. Such interest rate
shall be set forth in the rental agreement. (Ord. 1993-0-100, 12-6-1993; amd.
Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-2015)
12-4-4: TIME FOR PAYMENT:
The lessor shall, within thirty (30) days after the end of each twelve (12)
month rental period, pay to the lessee any interest, by cash or credit to be
applied to rent due, except when the lessee is in default under the terms of
the lease. (Ord. 1993-0-100, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-1-
2015)
12-4-5: APPLICATION OF ARTICLE:
This article does not apply to any deposit made with respect to public housing.
(Ord. 1990-0-9, 3-19-1990, eff. 6-1-1990; amd. Ord. 15-184, 11-2-2015, eff. 12-
1-2015)
ARTICLE 5
INCLUSIONARY HOUSING
SECTION:
12-5-1: Purpose And Intent
12-5-2: Definitions
12-5-3: Requirements
12-5-4: Compliance Procedures
12-5-5: Eligibility And Preference Of Households For Affordable Dwelling Units
12-5-6: Distribution And Attributes Of On Site Affordable Dwelling Units
12-5-7: Cash Payment In Lieu Of Providing Affordable Dwelling Units
12-5-8: Affordability Controls
12-5-9: Density And Height Bonus
12-5-10: Enforcement
12-5-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this article is to provide opportunities within the Village for
affordable housing, either within new residential developments by requiring
developers to provide a proportionate share of affordable housing, or fees in
lieu thereof, to ensure that an adequate stock of affordable housing is, and
remains, available in the Village. (Ord. 19-26, 3-11-2019)
12-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this
section for purposes of this article. Words and phrases not defined in this
section, but defined elsewhere in this Code, shall have the meanings set forth
therein. In the event that a word or phrase is not defined, it shall have the
common and ordinary meaning ascribed thereto. In interpreting the provisions of
this article, if there is a conflict between a definition in this section and
one found elsewhere in this Code, the definition in this section shall apply.
AFFORDABILITY PERIOD, OWNER OCCUPIED: The time during which the affordability
restrictions imposed by this article shall apply to owner occupied affordable
dwelling units. Owner occupied affordable dwelling units covered by this
article shall remain affordable in perpetuity or as long as allowable by law.
The affordability period begins at the time of first occupancy of the affected
unit.
AFFORDABILITY PERIOD, RENTAL: The time during which the affordability
restrictions imposed by this article shall apply to leased affordable dwelling
units. Leased affordable dwelling units covered by this article shall remain
affordable for a period of thirty (30) years, after which the requirements of
this article cease to be controlling. The affordability period begins at the
time of first occupancy of the affected affordable dwelling unit.
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT: All owner occupied or leased dwelling units in a
covered development as defined herein.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGREEMENT: The document signed by the purchaser or lessee of
an affordable dwelling unit at the time of sale or lease, along with such other
legal documents as may be required, detailing the affordability requirements of
the affordable dwelling unit.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING, OWNER OCCUPIED: Decent, safe, sanitary housing that is: a)
affordable to "households that meet AMI parameters" as set forth in this
article; and b) to be sold only to "qualified households" as defined herein.
The cost of the mortgage payment and relevant expenses (a calculation of
Property Taxes, homeowner's insurance, and, when applicable, condominium or
homeowner association fees) of owner occupied dwelling units shall not exceed
thirty three percent (33%) of the household's gross annual household income
(the total income of all adults over 18 years of age in the household).
AFFORDABLE HOUSING, RENTAL: Decent, safe, sanitary housing that is: a)
affordable to households with AMI parameters set forth in this article; and b)
to be leased only to "qualified households" as defined herein.
APPLICANT: Any developer who applies to the department to receive approval of a
covered development pursuant to this article.
AREA MEDIAN INCOME (AMI): The median income level for the Chicago primary
metropolitan statistical area, as established and defined in the annual
schedule published by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development and adjusted for household size.
CERTIFICATE OF QUALIFICATION: A certificate establishing a qualified
household's eligibility to purchase or lease an affordable dwelling unit based
on income eligibility using the HUD part 5 verification process and asset
limits, per the Village's wait list policies and procedures. Certificates of
qualification shall be valid for six (6) months.
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX: Consumer price index for all urban consumers as published
annually by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
COVERED DEVELOPMENT: A development containing twenty five (25) or more dwelling
units in a TOD area on contiguous land under common ownership or control by an
applicant at one location within the Village, when such dwelling units are to
be sold or leased to owner-occupants or leased to tenants for which zoning
relief is sought under the Village's Zoning Ordinance. The term "covered
development" and the regulations contained in this article shall not apply to a
development that is designed to provide primarily affordable dwelling units, to
condominium developments or portions of developments that contain condominiums,
as that term is defined in section
12-3-1 of this chapter, to detached single-family dwelling unit developments or
portions of developments that contain single-family dwelling units, as defined
in the Village's Zoning Ordinance or to any property that is the subject of a
redevelopment agreement approved by the Village Board prior to March 18, 2019.
The term "covered development" includes, without limitation, the following:
   A.   A development that is new residential construction or new mixed use
construction with a residential component.
   B.   A development that will change the use of an existing building from
nonresidential to residential.
DEPARTMENT: The Development Customer Services Department or any successor
unless otherwise indicated.
DEVELOPER: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, association, joint venture, or any entity or combination of entities
that develops dwelling units, but does not include any governmental entity.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Development Customer Services Department or the
Director's designee.
INCLUSIONARY HOUSING PLAN: The plan submitted as part of a zoning relief
application which details the development's compliance with the affordable
housing requirements of this article.
LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD: For homebuyers: a household with a total income equal to
or below one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the AMI. For renters: a household
with a total income equal to or below sixty percent (60%) of the AMI in TOD
areas.
MARKET RATE DWELLING UNITS: All owner occupied or rental dwelling units in a
covered development that are not affordable dwelling units as defined herein.
PRIMARILY AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT: A residential multi- family building
that may have the physical characteristics of a covered development, but will
have affordability restrictions that exceed the requirements of this article.
This may include a development in which all of the units are restricted to
households earning at or below the median income.
QUALIFIED HOUSEHOLD: A household whose income has been verified as meeting the
AMI parameters for a household as set forth in this article and has received a
certificate of qualification from a developer or a developer's designee
pursuant to this article.
TOD AREA: The area that has the designation for an identified Chicago Transit
Authority or Metra train station located in the Village and within a quarter
(1/4) of a mile from any applicable train station or located contiguous to
Madison Street west of Lombard Avenue, excluding the Austin Boulevard Blue Line
Train Station and the Austin Boulevard Green Line Transit Station and the NA
North Avenue Commercial District and the RR Roosevelt Road Form-Based District
as defined in the Village's Zoning Ordinance. The area provides for development
that is compatible with and supportive of public transit and a pedestrian-
oriented environment.
TRAIN STATION: The area including the platform which supports train usage and
that is owned and/or operated by the applicable transit agency.
TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT OR TOD: A development created around a Chicago
Transit Authority Blue Line or Green Line transit station or Metra train
station located in the Village that is characterized by higher density, mixed
uses, pedestrian environment, reduced parking, and a direct and convenient
access to the train station. (Ord. 19-26, 3-11-2019; amd. Ord. 19-30, 3-18-
2019)
12-5-3: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   An applicant shall provide ten percent (10%) of the total number of
dwelling units in a covered development as affordable. The applicant shall
provide said dwelling unit(s) for the affordability period, owner occupied, and
for the affordability period, rental, as defined in section
12-5-2 of this article.
   B.   An applicant that meets the requirements of subsection
12-5-3A of this section shall not be charged any Village building permit fees
pursuant to chapter 7, article 1, "Building Code", of this Code associated with
the initial construction of the affordable unit(s) provided by the applicant.
(Ord. 19-26, 3-11-2019)
12-5-4: COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES:
The applicant shall file as part of its zoning relief application an
inclusionary housing plan that outlines and specifies compliance with each of
the applicable requirements of this article. The inclusionary housing plan
shall specifically contain, as a minimum, the following information regarding
the covered development:
   A.   A general description.
   B.   The total number of market rate dwelling units and affordable dwelling
units.
   C.   The number of bedrooms in each market rate dwelling unit and each
affordable dwelling unit.
   D.   The square footage of each market rate dwelling unit and each
affordable dwelling unit.
   E.   The general location of each affordable dwelling unit within the
development.
   F.   The pricing schedule for each affordable dwelling unit and each market
rate dwelling unit.
   G.   A description of the marketing plan that the applicant proposes to
utilize and implement to promote the sale of the affordable dwelling units
within the development.
   H.   Any proposal to make an in lieu of cash payment pursuant to section
12-5-7 of this article in lieu of providing affordable dwelling units. (Ord.
19-26, 3-11-2019)
12-5-5: ELIGIBILITY AND PREFERENCE OF HOUSEHOLDS FOR AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   Certificate Of Qualification: The applicant shall issue a certificate
of qualification to any household whose income has been verified as meeting the
AMI threshold requirements set forth in this article.
   B.   Eligibility:
      1.   The affordable dwelling units within a covered development which are
for-sale shall be sold only to owner-occupant qualified households whose
primary residence shall be said affordable dwelling unit. All affordable units
must be sold to low income households whose incomes are one hundred twenty
percent (120%) AMI adjusted for household size.
      2.   The affordable dwelling units within a covered development for rent
shall be leased only to tenants with qualified households whose primary
residence shall be said affordable dwelling unit. For covered developments, all
affordable units must be leased to households whose incomes do not exceed sixty
percent (60%) AMI adjusted for household size.
   C.   Preference: Priority for affordable dwelling units will be given first
to qualified households who currently live in Oak Park, or who have lived in
Oak Park with a member of a household currently living in Oak Park, or to
households in which the head of the household or the spouse or domestic partner
works in Oak Park.
   D.   Waiting List: The waiting lists of households for affordable housing
may be created in advance of the construction of those units in order to
prioritize households pursuant to subsection
12-5-5C of this section. Households may complete a preliminary income screening
based on self-reported income to be placed on a waiting list for rental and
ownership units. The waiting list will be prioritized with current Oak Park
residents or with individuals who have lived in Oak Park with a member of a
household currently living in Oak Park, or to households in which the head of
the household or the spouse or domestic partner works in Oak Park. (Ord. 19-26,
3-11-2019)
12-5-6: DISTRIBUTION AND ATTRIBUTES OF ON SITE AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   Location Of Affordable Dwelling Units: Affordable dwelling units shall
be within the covered development.
   B.   Exterior Appearance: The exterior appearance of the affordable dwelling
units in any covered development shall be visually compatible with the market
rate dwelling units in the covered development.
   C.   Interior Appearance And Finishes: Affordable dwelling units may have
different interior appearance and finishes than market rate units, but the
interior finish materials shall be contractor grade or higher.
   D.   Mix Of Bedroom Types Of Affordable Units: The bedroom mix of affordable
dwelling units shall be in equal proportion to the bedroom mix of the market
rate dwelling units within the covered development or as determined by the
Director.
   E.   Energy Efficiency: Standard components related to energy efficiency,
including, but not limited to, mechanical equipment and plumbing, insulation,
windows, and heating and cooling systems, shall be the same in market rate
dwelling units and affordable dwelling units. (Ord. 19-26, 3-11-2019)
12-5-7: CASH PAYMENT IN LIEU OF PROVIDING AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS:
An applicant may pay a fee in lieu of building each affordable dwelling unit
required by section
12-5-3 of this article for a covered development as set forth below.
   A.   The fee in lieu amount per affordable dwelling unit shall be one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The fee in lieu will be adjusted
annually based on the consumer price index.
   B.   All cash payments received pursuant to this article shall be deposited
directly into the Village's Affordable Housing Fund.
   C.   Unless otherwise preempted by law, any fee in lieu shall be paid at the
same time as payment is made for a building permit(s).
   D.   The in-lieu fee shall be calculated at the time the applicant submits
an application for a building permit with the department. The fee as calculated
will be valid for two (2) years following the date it is calculated by the
department and cannot be reduced within the two-year period for a reduction in
the number of units.
   E.   An applicant that pays a fee in lieu pursuant to this section shall not
be eligible for a permit fee reduction set forth in subsection
12-5-3B of this article or to density or height bonuses pursuant to section
12-5-9 of this article. (Ord. 19-26, 3-11-2019)
12-5-8: AFFORDABILITY CONTROLS:
   A.   Affordable Housing Agreement To Ensure Compliance During The
Affordability Period: Prior to issuance of a building permit for any
development or conveyance of title of any dwelling unit in any development, the
applicant shall have entered into an affordable housing agreement with the
Village regarding the specific requirements and restrictions imposed by the
Village Board upon the approved development. The applicant shall agree to
execute any and all documents deemed necessary by the Village, including,
without limitation, deed restrictions, restrictive covenants, and other related
instruments, to ensure the continued affordability of the affordable dwelling
units in accordance with this article. The affordable housing agreement shall
set forth the commitments and obligations of the Village and the applicant, and
shall incorporate, among other documents, the inclusionary housing plan. If
applicable, the affordable housing agreement shall also detail the fee in lieu
or alternative equivalent action of providing on site affordable dwelling units
as set forth in section
12-5-7 of this article.
   B.   Rental Compliance: The developer, or its successor, assignee, or
designee, shall submit an annual compliance report to the Village describing
each affordable unit in detail including but not limited to changes in tenancy,
turnovers, and income certifications for all new tenants upon request of the
Director for the affordability period, rental as defined in section
12-5-2 of this article. The developer, or its successor, assignee, or designee
shall complete annual re-certifications of tenants renting affordable units to
the Village for the affordability period, rental as defined in section
12-5-2 of this article. (Ord. 19-26, 3-11-2019)
12-5-9: DENSITY AND HEIGHT BONUS:
   A.   A density bonus shall be permitted when affordable units are
constructed within a covered development in accordance with section
12-5-3 of this article. One bonus market rate dwelling unit shall be permitted
for each affordable unit constructed within the covered development.
   B.   If the construction of the affordable unit(s) causes the covered
development to exceed a height limitation set forth in the Village's Zoning
Ordinance, a variation shall automatically be granted for the number of feet
that the covered development exceeds the height limitation. (Ord. 19-26, 3-11-
2019)
12-5-10: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The provisions of this article shall apply to all agents, successors
and assignees of an applicant.
   B.   The Village may institute injunction, mandamus, or any other
appropriate legal actions or proceedings for the enforcement of this article.
In addition, any person, firm, or entity, whether as principal, agent, employee
or otherwise, who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall
be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day such violation or failure to
comply is permitted to exist after notification thereof shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 19-26, 3-11-2019)
ARTICLE 6
RESIDENTIAL TENANT AND LANDLORD ORDINANCE
SECTION:
12-6-1: Title, Purpose and Scope
12-6-2: Exclusions
12-6-3: Definitions
12-6-4: Rental Agreements
12-6-5: Tenant Rights
12-6-6: Tenant Remedies
12-6-7: Tenant Obligations
12-6-8: Landlord Rights
12-6-9: Landlord Remedies
12-6-10: Landlord Obligations
12-6-11: Security Deposit
12-6-12: Retaliatory Conduct
12-6-13: Prohibition Against Lockouts
12-6-14: Summary Attachment to Rental Agreement
12-6-15: Rights and Remedies Under Other Laws
12-6-16: Enforcement
12-6-1: TITLE, PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   This article shall be known and may be cited as the Residential Tenant
and Landlord Ordinance and shall be liberally construed and applied to promote
its purposes and policies.
   B.   The purpose of this article and the policy of the Village is to protect
and promote the public health, safety, and welfare of its residents, to
establish the rights and obligations of the tenant and the landlord in the
rental of dwelling units, and to encourage the tenant and the landlord to
maintain and improve the quality of housing.
   C.   This article applies to, regulates, and determines rights, obligations,
and remedies under a rental agreement, wherever made, for a dwelling unit
located within the Village. In addition, this article applies specifically to
rental agreements for dwelling units operated under subsidy programs of
agencies of the United States and/or the State of Illinois, including
specifically programs operated or subsidized by the Oak Park Housing Authority,
Housing Authority of Cook County and/or Illinois Housing Development Authority
to the extent that this article is not in direct conflict with statutory or
regulatory provisions governing such programs.
   D.   This article is subject to the home rule as established by the
Constitution of the State of Illinois Article VII Section 6. Powers of Home
Rule Units. This article regulates all residential buildings and structures
that exist or are erected, constructed, altered, demolished, or relocated
within the boundaries of the Village. (Ord. 21-60, 7-19-2021)
12-6-2: EXCLUSIONS:
   A.   The following arrangements are not governed by this article:
      1.   Transient occupancy in a hotel or motel;
      2.   Residence at a public or private medical, extended care facility,
geriatric facility, convent, monastery, religious institution, temporary
overnight shelter, transitional shelter, educational dormitory, or in a
structure operated for the benefit of a social or fraternal organization;
      3.   Occupancy under a contract sale of a dwelling unit if the occupant
is the purchaser;
      4.   Occupancy in a cooperative apartment by a shareholder of the
cooperative;
      5.   Occupancy by an employee of a landlord whose occupancy is
conditional upon employment in or about the premises;
      6.   Residential buildings in which occupancy is limited to six (6) units
or less and which are owner-occupied;
      7.   A residential unit that is a single-family home, including a single
condominium unit, provided that:
         a.   This is the only residential unit leased by the owner;
         b.   The owner or immediate family member has actually resided at the
property for at least one (1) month in the twelve (12) months prior to
marketing the property;
         c.   The owner (not a management company) personally manages the unit;
and
         d.   The owner is not a corporation;
      8.   Dwelling units in hotels, motels, inns, bed-and-breakfast
establishments, rooming houses, and boardinghouses, but only until such time as
the dwelling unit has been occupied by a tenant for thirty-two (32) or more
continuous days and tenant pays a monthly rent, exclusive of any period of
wrongful occupancy contrary to agreement with an owner. No landlord shall bring
an action to recover possession of such unit, or avoid renting periodically, in
order to avoid the application of this Article. Any willful attempt to avoid
application of this Article by an owner may be punishable by criminal or civil
actions.
   B.   If a residence is excluded from coverage by the above exclusions, the
owner shall make this exclusion known to prospective tenants in marketing
materials and shall prominently state the exclusion on any application
materials before the owner accepts any application fees, credit check fees, or
holding fees.
   C.   The anti-lockout prohibition contained in section
12-6-13 applies to all dwelling units in the Village that are otherwise
excluded by subsections 3, 5, 6, 7, and 8 of subsection A above.
   D.   A landlord shall not create a rental agreement in the form of an
excluded agreement to avoid the application of this article. (Ord. 21-60, 7-19-
2021)
12-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
DWELLING UNIT:   A structure or part of a structure that is used as a home,
residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons who maintain a household
together, with the common areas and all housing services, privileges,
furnishings, and facilities supplied in connection with the use or occupancy
thereof, including garage and parking facilities. A dwelling unit includes a
mobile or manufactured home where the tenant has entered into rental agreement
to reside in the home. Where a dwelling unit is also governed by the Mobile
Home Landlord and Tenant Rights Act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 745/1 et
seq. (MHLTRA), this article shall augment and not replace the rights of both
landlords and tenants as set out in the MHLTRA. Where there is a direct
conflict between the provisions of this article and the MHLTRA, this article
shall take precedence except for the following sections of the MHLTRA which
shall govern: Section 6 - "Obligation of Park Owner to Offer Written Lease,"
765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 745/6; Section 8 - "Renewal of Lease," 765
Illinois Compiled Statutes 745/8; and Section 9.5 - "Abandoned or Repossessed
Properties," 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 745/9.5. Section
12-6-11 of this Article ("Security Deposit") shall supersede in its entirety
Section 18 of the MHLTRA ("Security Deposit; Interest"), 765 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 745/18, in its entirety.
HARASS OR HARASSING:   Knowing conduct which is not necessary to accomplish a
purpose reasonable under the circumstances that would cause a reasonable person
emotional distress to the tenant and does cause emotional distress to another.
LANDLORD:   The owner, agent, lessor, sublessor, or the successor in interest
of any of them of a dwelling unit or the building of which it is part.
MOVE-IN FEE:   The fee that a landlord charges to a tenant that is reasonably
related to the landlord's cost for a tenant moving into the dwelling unit
including, but not limited to, additional security costs or additional trash
removal.
OWNER:   One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all or
part of the legal title to property, or all or part of the beneficial
ownership, and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises including a
mortgagee in possession.
OWNER-OCCUPIED:   The residential building, or at least a portion or one unit
thereof, condominium, or cooperative, is occupied by the owner of the
residential building as their principal residence.
PERSON:   An individual, corporation, government, governmental subdivision or
agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any other
legal or commercial entity, unless otherwise expressly excluded.
PREMISES:   The dwelling unit, and the structure of which it is a part,
facilities and appurtenances therein, and grounds, areas, and facilities held
out for the use of tenants.
RENT:   All payments to be made to the landlord under the rental agreement.
When it is used as a determination of damages, and the tenant has a subsidized
rent, such as a Housing Choice Voucher, "rent" shall mean the full market rent,
not the tenant rent based on income.
RENTAL AGREEMENT OR LEASE:   A written or oral agreement, and any valid rules
and regulations adopted pursuant to section
12-6-8(C) embodying the terms and conditions concerning the use and occupancy
of a dwelling unit and premises.
SECURITY DEPOSIT:   Funds provided to a landlord to secure payment or
performance of a tenant's obligations under a rental agreement, or the
obligations of the tenant for its guests or pets, and the identifiable proceeds
of the funds, however denominated. The term does not include rent or fees.
TENANT:   A person entitled, by written or oral agreement, subtenancy approved
by the landlord, or by sufferance, to occupy a dwelling unit to the exclusion
of others.
WRITTEN NOTICE:   Communications in writing shared as handwritten, typed, or
printed documents, mailed documents, or electronically mailed or messaged
documents. (Ord. 21-60, 7-19-2021)
12-6-4: RENTAL AGREEMENTS:
   A.   When a landlord and a tenant enter into a rental agreement, that rental
agreement shall comply with the requirements of this article regardless of the
duration of the tenancy. A landlord and tenant may include in a rental
agreement any terms and conditions that are not prohibited by this article and
other rules of law, including rent, term of the agreement, and other provisions
governing the rights and obligations of the parties.
   B.   Any written rental agreement subject to this article shall contain the
full names of all known occupants of the dwelling unit leased or to be leased
under the rental agreement. The individual occupancy of the dwelling unit shall
in no case exceed the maximum occupancy permitted by section 404.4.1 ("Room
Area") and section 404.5.1 ("Maximum Number of Occupants") of the 2009
International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by the Village pursuant to
section
7-13-2 ("Amendments") of this Code, as amended.
   C.   Rent is to be payable at the time and place agreed upon by the parties.
Unless otherwise agreed, rent is payable at the dwelling unit at the beginning
of any term of one (1) month or less and, otherwise, in equal monthly
installments at the beginning of each month. Unless otherwise agreed, rent
shall be uniformly apportionable from day to day.
   D.   Unless otherwise agreed, when a tenant pays weekly, the tenancy shall
be week to week and, in all other cases, month-to-month.
   E.   Effect of an Unsigned or Undelivered Written Rental Agreement.
      1.   If the landlord and tenant have agreed to a written rental
agreement, and the landlord fails to sign or deliver the written agreement to
the tenant, the landlord's acceptance of rent, without reservation by the
landlord, gives the rental agreement the same effect as if the landlord had
signed and delivered the written rental agreement to the tenant.
      2.   If the landlord and tenant have agreed to a written rental
agreement, and the tenant fails to sign or deliver the written agreement to the
landlord, the tenant's acceptance of possession and payment of rent, without
reservation, gives the rental agreement the same effect as if the tenant had
signed and delivered the written rental agreement to the landlord.
      3.   A written rental agreement given effect by the operation of this
section shall have a term of one (1) year.
   F.   Prohibited Provisions. A rental agreement shall not provide that the
tenant or the landlord:
      1.   Agrees to waive or to forego rights or remedies under this article,
Illinois state law, or federal law;
      2.   Authorizes a confession of judgment, or any entry of a judgment by a
court without written notice or a trial, for any claim, including but not
limited to debts, liabilities, damages, and obligations, arising out of the
rental agreement;
      3.   Agrees to a waiver of: any written termination of tenancy notice or
manner of service thereof provided under state law or this Article, summons,
copy of complaint, petition, right to notice, motion, entry of appearance, or
other documents from the court as established through judicial process in the
manner provided by the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, 735 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/2-201 et seq., or any action, regardless of good cause or cost;
      4.   Agrees to a non-disparagement clause that limits any written or oral
statements, remarks, or other communications, public or private, directly or
indirectly, made by tenants regarding the landlord, property, management,
staff, officers, directors, representatives, investors, shareholders,
administrators, affiliates, employees, affiliated corporations, divisions, or
subsidiaries;
      5.   Agrees to the limitation of any liability of the tenant or landlord
arising under law or to indemnify the tenant or landlord for that liability or
the costs connected therewith;
      6.   Agrees to waive the right of any party to a trial by jury;
      7.   Agrees that in the event of a lawsuit arising out of the tenancy the
tenant will pay the landlord's attorney's fees except as provided for by court
rules, statute or Ordinance. This paragraph shall also apply to a mobile home
owner who, as a tenant, rents a manufactured home lot in a mobile home park as
the terms "tenant," "manufactured home" or "mobile home," "lot," and "mobile
home park," are defined or used in the Mobile Home Landlord and Tenant Rights
Act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 745/1 et seq.;
      8.   Agrees that either party may cancel or terminate a rental agreement
at a different time or within a shorter time period than the other party,
unless such provision is disclosed in a separate written notice;
      9.   Agrees that a tenant shall pay a charge, fee or penalty in excess of
ten dollars ($10.00) per month for the first one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
in monthly rent plus five (5) percent per month for any amount in excess of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in monthly rent for the late payment of rent. This
paragraph shall also apply to a mobile homeowner who, as a tenant, rents a
manufactured home lot in a mobile home park as the terms, "tenant",
"manufactured home" or "mobile home," "lot," and "mobile home park," are
defined or used in the Mobile Home Landlord and Tenant Rights Act, 765 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 745/1 et seq.;
      10.   Agrees that a tenant shall receive a discount in excess of ten
dollars ($10.00) per month for the first one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in
monthly rent plus five (5) percent per month for any amount in excess of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in monthly rent if the tenant pays rent before a
specified date or within a specified time period in the month;
      11.   Agrees that a landlord may apply rent payments to a charge other
than rent, including but not limited to utilities, fines, late fees or other
charges; or
      12.   Agrees that the landlord shall not impose a fee in excess of the
reasonable cost of that expense, including, but not limited to, credit-check
fees and move-in fees. A landlord shall not rename a fee or charge to avoid
application of this prohibition.
   G.   A landlord shall not enforce a provision prohibited by section
12-6-4. If a landlord deliberately uses a rental agreement containing any
provision known by the landlord to be prohibited, the tenant may recover actual
damages or two (2) months' rent, whichever is greater.
   H.   The provisions, provided in section
12-6-4(F), apply to new rental agreements starting on or after June 1, 2021.
(Ord. 21-60, 7-19-2021)
12-6-5: TENANT RIGHTS:
   A.   In addition to any rights provided under federal or state law, a tenant
shall have the rights specified in this section under the circumstances set
forth herein.
   B.   Tenant Right to Disclosure of Costs:
      1.   The tenant shall have the right to disclosure of utility costs. A
landlord shall disclose to the tenant whether the landlord or tenant bears the
responsibility for payment of the cost of a utility for the dwelling unit.
      2.   In rental agreements in which the tenant pays the cost of a utility
for a dwelling unit and is directly responsible to the utility company, the
utility service shall be individually metered to the dwelling unit, and the
landlord shall disclose to the tenant in the rental agreement the annual cost
of service from the utility providing the primary service during the previous
twelve (12) months, if known.
      3.   In rental agreements in which the tenant pays the cost of a utility
for a dwelling unit to the landlord, the landlord shall disclose to the tenant
in the rental agreement the annual cost of service from the utility providing
the primary service during the previous twelve (12) months. If the landlord did
not own the dwelling unit during the previous twelve (12) months or did not pay
the utility costs to the utility provider on behalf of the tenant during the
previous twelve (12) months, the landlord may satisfy this requirement by
providing cost of service for a similar dwelling unit, if known, or disclose to
the tenant that the utility costs are unknown to the landlord.
      4.   When the landlord charges a move-in fee, the landlord shall provide
the tenant with an itemized list of the landlord's reasonable estimate of the
costs that comprise the move-in fee and shall not charge the tenant moving into
the premises for costs associated with routine maintenance and the upkeep of
the premises.
   C.   Tenant Right to Dwelling that Materially Complies with Habitability:
      1.   A tenant shall have the right to a dwelling that materially complies
with habitability and shall have the right to a remedy when the property is not
in material compliance with habitability standards.
      2.   The landlord tenant may use the 2009 International Property
Maintenance Code as adopted by the Village pursuant to section
7-13-1 ("Adoption") of this Code and as amended pursuant to section
7-13-2 ("Amendments") of this Code as a reference for determining habitability
standards.
      3.   Habitability standards shall include, but are not limited to, any of
the following circumstances:
         a.   Floors with structural integrity, in sound condition, and
maintained in good repair, with the safe load-bearing requirements;
         b.   Buildings, structure, and parts of buildings with structural
integrity, in sound condition, and maintained in good repair;
         c.   Appropriate number, width, construction, location, and
accessibility of exits, stairway, fire escape or directional signs with
structural integrity, in sound condition, and maintained in good repair;
         d.   Appropriate number, location and accessibility of smoke alarms,
smoke detectors, sprinkler systems, standpipe systems, fire alarm systems,
automatic fire detectors, and fire extinguishers;
         e.   Elevators with structural integrity, in sound condition, and
maintained in good repair;
         f.   Flush toilet, bathroom sink, bathtub or shower, and kitchen sink
with structural integrity, in sound condition, and maintained in good repair;
         g.   Heating facilities and gas-fired appliances with structural
integrity, in sound condition, and maintained in good repair;
         h.   Adequate heat, cold water, and hot water in such amounts and at
such levels and times as required by the local, municipal, County or state
code;
         i.   Adequate hall or stairway lighting with structural integrity, in
sound condition, and maintained in good repair;
         j.   Foundation, exterior walls, and exterior roof with structural
integrity, in sound condition, maintained in good repair, and substantially
watertight and protected against rodents;
         k.   Floors, interior walls and ceilings with structural integrity, in
sound condition, and maintained in good repair;
         l.   Windows, exterior doors, and basement hatchways with structural
integrity, in sound condition, maintained in good repair and substantially
tight with locks or security devices, including dead latch locks, deadbolt
locks, sash and ventilation locks and front door windows or peepholes;
         m.   Screens with structural integrity, in sound condition, and
maintained in good repair;
         n.   Stairways or porches with structural integrity, in sound
condition, and maintained in good repair;
         o.   Basement and cellar with structural integrity, in sound
condition, maintained in good repair, and in a safe and sanitary condition;
         p.   Facilities, equipment and chimneys in safe condition with
structural integrity, maintained in good repair, and in sound working
condition;
         q.   Prevention against the accumulation of stagnant water;
         r.   Extermination of insects, rodents and other pests;
         s.   Adequate facilities for refuse disposal;
         t.   Prevention against the accumulation of garbage, trash, refuse, or
debris;
         u.   Adequate light and ventilation with structural integrity, in
sound condition, and maintained in good repair;
         v.   Plumbing facilities, piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and
appliances with structural integrity, in good operating condition and
maintained in sound repair;
         w.   Electrical systems, circuits, receptacles, and devices with
structural integrity, in sound condition, and maintained in good repair;
         x.   Any other equipment that the landlord agrees to or is required to
supply, by any applicable law, with structural integrity, in sound operating
condition, and maintained in good repair; and
         y.   A dwelling unit and common areas in a fit and habitable condition
and in compliance with all applicable local, municipal, state, and federal
regulations and guidance.
   D.   Tenant right to adequate heat. A tenant's right to adequate heat shall
be governed by section 602.3 ("Heat Supply") of the 2009 International Property
Maintenance Code, as adopted by the Village pursuant to section
7-13-2 ("Amendments") of this Code, as amended.
   E.   Tenant Right to Exclusive Possession and to be Free from Unlawful
Entry.
      1.   If the landlord fails to deliver possession of the dwelling unit to
the tenant in compliance with the rental agreement, rent abates until the
landlord delivers possession and the tenant may:
         a.   Upon written notice to the landlord, terminate the rental
agreement and, upon termination, the landlord shall return within forty-eight
(48) hours all security deposits; or
         b.   Demand performance of the rental agreement and, if the tenant
elects, the tenant may maintain an action for possession of the dwelling unit
against the landlord or any person wrongfully in possession and recover the
damages sustained by the tenant.
         2.   An aggrieved person may recover from the person withholding
possession an amount not more than two (2) months' rent or twice the actual
damages sustained by them, whichever is greater, and reasonable attorney's
fees.
         3.   If the landlord makes an unlawful entry or a lawful entry in an
unreasonable manner or makes repeated demands for entry otherwise lawful, but
which have the effect of harassing the tenant, the tenant may obtain injunctive
relief to prevent the recurrence of the conduct, or terminate the rental
agreement. In each case, the tenant may recover an amount equal to not more
than two (2) months' rent or twice the damages sustained by them, whichever is
greater, and reasonable attorney's fees.
   F.   One-time Tenant Right to Pay and Stay. At any time prior to the
issuance of any order of possession or eviction order made pursuant to Article
IX ("Eviction") of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, 735 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/9-101 et seq., the tenant has a one-time right to cure the non-
payment of rent by paying the landlord unpaid rent, duly owed from the date of
non-payment to the date of payment, together with all filing fees and costs
paid by the landlord and all fees and costs expended by the landlord for
service of process, but not including attorney fees. If the tenant so pays,
then the Court shall vacate any order of possession or eviction order and
dismiss the case. If the landlord refuses to provide a total amount due, the
tenant may cure by making a good faith payment of the amount that the tenant
believes to be due. (Ord. 21-60, 7-19-2021)
12-6-6: TENANT REMEDIES:
   A.   Tenant Remedy of Withholding Rent: If the landlord is not in material
compliance with the rental agreement or with section
12-6-5, the tenant may deliver a written notice to the landlord specifying the
items of material noncompliance. The tenant may deliver this written notice at
any time of month. The written notice shall indicate that the tenant will
withhold rent on the next rent payment date if the landlord has not remedied
the material noncompliance within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice. The tenant may withhold an amount of rent that reasonably reflects the
reduced value of the premises. The tenant may not withhold for a condition
caused by the deliberate or negligent act or omission of the tenant, a member
of the tenant's family, or other person on the premises with the tenant's
consent.
   B.   Tenant remedy of terminating lease: If the landlord is not in material
compliance with the rental agreement or with section
12-6-5, the tenant may deliver a written notice to the landlord specifying the
items of material noncompliance. The tenant may deliver this written notice at
any time of month. The written notice shall indicate that the tenant will
terminate the rental agreement and vacate the property if the landlord has not
remedied the material noncompliance within fourteen (14) days after receipt of
written notice. The tenant may not terminate for a condition caused by the
deliberate or negligent act or omission of the tenant, a member of the tenant's
family, or other person on the premises with the tenant's consent. If the
tenant does not vacate the property within one (1) month after the expiration
of the fourteen (14)-day period or the end of the next rental period, whichever
is longer, then the tenant's written notice shall be deemed withdrawn and the
rental agreement shall remain in full force and effect. If the rental agreement
is terminated, the landlord shall return the security deposit immediately upon
the tenant tendering possession.
   C.   Tenant remedy of right to file affirmative action: If the landlord is
not in material compliance with the rental agreement or with section
12-6-5 the tenant may recover damages and obtain injunctive relief for any
material noncompliance by the landlord with the rental agreement or with
section
12-6-5. The landlord shall have an affirmative defense to this action that the
condition was caused by a deliberate or negligent act or omission of the
tenant, a member of the tenant's family, or other person on the premises with
the tenant's consent.
   D.   Tenant Remedy for Denial of Essential Services:
      1.   If the landlord fails to supply heat, running water, hot water,
electricity, gas, or plumbing that the rental agreement requires the landlord
to provide, or internet access if the rental agreement requires the landlord to
provide, the tenant shall deliver a written notice to the landlord specifying
the service to be restored. If the landlord fails to correct the condition
within twenty-four (24) hours after being notified by the tenant, the tenant
may:
         a.   Withhold from the monthly rent an amount that reasonably reflects
the reduced value of the premises due to the material noncompliance or failure;
or
         b.   Procure reasonable amounts of heat, running water, hot water,
electricity, gas or plumbing service and, upon presentation to the landlord of
paid receipts, deduct the cost from their rent; or
         c.   Recover damages based upon the diminution in the fair rental
value of the dwelling unit and reasonable attorney fees; or
         d.   Procure substitute housing, in which case the tenant is excused
from paying rent for the period of noncompliance. The tenant may recover the
cost of reasonable value of the substitute housing up to an amount equal to the
monthly rent and reasonable fees.
      2.   In addition, the tenant may terminate the rental agreement by
written notice to the landlord if the landlord fails to supply heat, running
water, hot water, electricity, gas, or plumbing that the rental agreement
requires the landlord to provide, or internet access if the rental agreement
requires the landlord to provide, for more than seventy-two (72) hours after
the tenant has notified the landlord. If the rental agreement is terminated,
the landlord shall return all security deposits thereon and the tenant shall
deliver possession of the dwelling unit to the landlord within thirty (30) days
after the expiration of the seventy-two (72) hour time period specified in the
written notice or the end of the next rental period, whichever is longer. The
landlord shall return the security deposit immediately upon the tenant
delivering possession. If the tenant does not vacate the property within thirty
(30) days after the notification of termination or the end of the next rental
period, whichever is longer, then the tenant's written notice shall be deemed
withdrawn and the rental agreement shall remain in full force and effect.
      3.   The tenant may not exercise their rights under section
12-6-6(D) if the condition was caused by the inability of a utility supplier,
or internet provider to provide service, unless the landlord caused the
inability of the utility supplier, or by the deliberate or negligent act or
omission of the tenant, a member of the tenant's family, or other person on the
premises with the tenant's consent.
   E.   Tenant Remedies in the Event of Fire or Casualty:
      1.   If the dwelling unit or premises are damaged or destroyed by fire or
casualty to an extent that the dwelling unit is in material noncompliance with
the rental agreement or with section
12-6-5(C), the tenant may immediately vacate the premises and notify the
landlord in writing within fourteen (14) days thereafter of the tenant's
intention to terminate the rental agreement, in which case the rental agreement
terminates as of the date of fire or casualty.
      2.   If continued occupancy is lawful, the tenant may vacate any part of
the dwelling unit rendered unusable by the fire or casualty, in which case the
tenant's liability for rent is reduced in proportion to the diminution in the
fair rental value of the dwelling unit.
      3.   If the tenant desires to continue the tenancy and if the landlord
has promised or begun work to repair the damage or destruction but fails to
carry out the work to restore the dwelling unit or common area diligently and
within a reasonable time, the tenant may notify the landlord in writing within
fourteen (14) days after the tenant becomes aware that work is not being
carried out diligently, or within a reasonable time of the tenant's intention
to terminate the rental agreement, in which case the rental agreement
terminates as of the date of the fire or casualty.
      4.   If the rental agreement is terminated, the landlord shall return all
security deposit within forty-eight (48) hours. When the landlord accounts for
rent after the tenant has terminated the rental agreement, the landlord shall
not charge rent to the tenant for any date after the date of the fire or
casualty.
      5.   A tenant may not exercise remedies in this section if the fire or
casualty damage was caused by the deliberate or negligent act or omission of
the tenant, a member of the tenant's family or a person on the premises with
the tenant's consent.
   F.   Tenant Remedy of Withholding Rent to Undertake Minor Repairs:
      1.   If the landlord is not in material compliance with the rental
agreement or with section
12-6-5 and the reasonable cost of compliance does not exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or one-half month's rent, whichever amount is greater, the
tenant may notify the landlord in writing that, if the landlord does not remedy
the condition within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written notice or as
promptly as conditions require in case of emergency, the tenant will correct
the condition and withhold the cost of the repair from the tenant's next rent
payment. The tenant shall have work done in a worker-like manner. The tenant
shall submit to the landlord a paid bill from an appropriate tradesperson or
supplier at the same time as deducting the amount from their rent. The tenant
may not expend or deduct more than the amount specified in this section.
      2.   A tenant shall not repair at the landlord's expense or deduct rent
if the condition was caused by the deliberate or negligent act or omission of
the tenant, a member of the tenant's family, or other person on the premises
with the tenant's permission.
      3.   Before correcting a condition affecting facilities shared by more
than one dwelling unit, the tenant shall notify all other affected tenants of
their plans and so arrange the work as to create the least practicable
inconvenience to the other tenants. (Ord. 21-60, 7-19-2021)
12-6-7: TENANT OBLIGATIONS:
The Tenant Shall:
   A.   Comply with all obligations imposed upon tenants by provisions of the
codes applicable to the dwelling unit;
   B.   Keep the part of the premises that they occupy and use as safe as the
condition of the premises permits;
   C.   Dispose from their dwelling unit all ashes, rubbish, garbage and other
waste in a clean and safe manner;
   D.   Keep all plumbing fixtures in the dwelling unit or used by the tenant
as clean as their condition permits;
   E.   Use, in a reasonable manner, all electrical, plumbing, sanitary,
heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and other facilities and appliances,
including elevators, in the premises;
   F.   Not deliberately destroy, deface, damage, impair, or remove any part of
the premises or knowingly permit any person to do so;
   G.   Conduct themselves in a manner that will not disturb their neighbors'
peaceful enjoyment of premises; and
   H.   Unless otherwise agreed, only occupy their dwelling unit as a dwelling
unit. (Ord. 21-60, 7-19-2021)
12-6-8: LANDLORD RIGHTS:
   A.   In addition to any rights provided under federal and state law, a
landlord shall have the rights specified in this section under the
circumstances herein set forth.
   B.   Landlord Rights of Entry and Restrictions Thereto:
      1.   A tenant shall not unreasonably withhold consent to allow the
landlord to enter the dwelling unit to:
         a.   Inspect the premises or conduct inspections authorized or
required by any government agency;
         b.   Make necessary or agreed repairs, decorations, alterations or
improvements, including where such work elsewhere in the building requires such
access;
         c.   Supply necessary or agreed upon services;
         d.   Exhibit the dwelling unit to prospective or actual purchasers,
mortgagees, workmen or contractors;
         e.   Exhibit the dwelling unit to prospective tenants 60 days or less
prior to the expiration of the existing rental agreement; or
         f.   Determine a tenant's compliance with provisions in the rental
agreement.
      2.   The landlord may only enter at reasonable times, except in case of
an emergency. An entry between eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. and eight o’clock (8:
00) p.m. or at any other time expressly requested by the tenant shall be
presumed reasonable.
         a.   A landlord may enter the dwelling unit without consent of the
tenant in case of an emergency.
         b.   The landlord shall not abuse the right of access or use it to
harass the tenant.
         c.   Except in cases of an emergency, the landlord shall give the
tenant at least two (2) days' written notice of their intent to enter. The
landlord shall provide this written notice directly to each dwelling unit by
mail, telephone, or written notice or by other reasonable means designed in
good faith to provide written notice to the tenant. If access is required
because of repair work for common facilities or multiple apartments, a general
written notice may be given by the landlord to all potentially affected tenants
that entry may be required. In cases where access is authorized due to an
emergency the landlord shall give the tenant written notice of entry within two
(2) days after such entry.
         d.   If the tenant refuses to allow lawful access, the landlord may
obtain injunctive relief to compel access or terminate the rental agreement. In
either case, the landlord may recover damages and reasonable attorney's fees.
         e.   If the landlord makes an unlawful entry, or entry in an
unreasonable manner, or repeated unreasonable demands for entry, which have the
effect of harassing the tenant, the tenant may obtain injunctive relief to
prevent the recurrence of the conduct or terminate the rental agreement. In
each case, the tenant may recover an amount equal to one (1) month's rent or
twice the damages sustained, whichever is greater, and reasonable attorney
fees.
   C.   Landlord Right to Adopt Rules and Regulations:
      1.   The landlord may adopt general rules or regulations concerning the
tenant's use and occupancy of the premises. Rules and regulations are
enforceable only if in writing and if they are:
         a.   Made to promote the convenience, safety, and welfare of the
tenants in the premises, preserve the landlord's property from abusive use, or
make a fair distribution of services and facilities among tenants;
         b.   Reasonably related to the purpose for which they are adopted;
         c.   Applied to all tenants in the premises in a fair manner;
         d.   Sufficiently clear to inform the tenant of what they must or must
not do to comply;
         e.   Not for the purpose of evading the obligations of the landlord;
and
         f.   Not for the purpose of preventing tenants to assemble or
otherwise communicate amongst each other about the premises.
      2.   A rule or regulation adopted after the tenant enters into the rental
agreement that substantially modifies the rental agreement is not enforceable
unless the tenant consents in writing. (Ord. 21-60, 7-19-2021)
12-6-9: LANDLORD REMEDIES:
   A.   The landlord shall have the following remedies when the tenant fails to
pay rent:
      1.   If the tenant is not in material compliance with the obligation to
pay rent, the landlord may deliver to the tenant a written notice of the
landlord's intention to terminate the rental agreement. The landlord shall
serve the written notice in compliance with state law. If the tenant does not
materially comply with the written notice within five (5) days of receipt, the
landlord may file an eviction action to terminate the rental agreement.
      2.   Nothing in this subsection shall affect a landlord's obligation to
provide notice of termination of tenancy in subsidized housing as required
under federal law or regulations.
      3.   A landlord may also maintain an action for rent and/or damages
without terminating the rental agreement.
   B.   The landlord shall have the following remedies when the tenant is not
in material compliance with the rental agreement or the obligations in section
12-6-7.
      1.   If the landlord alleges that the tenant is not in material
compliance with a rental agreement or the obligations in section
12-6-10, the landlord may deliver written notice to the tenant specifying the
acts and omissions constituting the alleged breach. The landlord shall serve
the written notice in compliance with state law. The written notice may provide
that the rental agreement will terminate upon a date no less than 10 days after
the date of the written notice. The tenant shall have the amount of time
specified in the written notice to remedy any alleged breach by the tenant
prior to the date of termination. If the breach is not remedied, the landlord
may file an eviction to terminate the rental agreement, as provided in the
written notice. The landlord may recover damages and obtain injunctive relief
for any material noncompliance by the tenant with the rental agreement or the
obligations in section
12-6-10. If the landlord does not file an eviction action within thirty (30)
days after the notification of termination or the end of the next rental
period, whichever is longer, then the landlord's written notice shall be deemed
withdrawn and the rental agreement shall remain in full force and effect.
      2.   The landlord has the right to determine abandonment of the dwelling
unit and dispose of property. The landlord may determine that the tenant has
abandoned the property in the following circumstances:
         a.   The tenant has provided actual written notice to the landlord
indicating the tenant's intention not to return to the dwelling unit.
         b.   All persons entitled under a rental agreement have been absent
from the dwelling unit for a period of thirty-two (32) days, or for one rental
period when the rental agreement is for less than a month, and such persons
have removed their personal property from the premises and rent for that period
is unpaid. However, if any person entitled to occupancy provides the landlord
with written notice indicating that a tenant intends to occupy the dwelling
unit and make full payments of all amounts due to the landlord, then the
landlord may not determine that the tenant has abandoned the property.
         c.   If the tenant abandons the dwelling unit, the landlord shall make
a good faith effort to rent it at a fair rental value. This shall include the
acceptance of reasonable subleases. If the landlord succeeds in renting the
dwelling unit at a fair rental value, the tenant shall only be liable for the
amount by which the rent due from the date of abandonment to the termination of
the initial rental agreement exceeds the fair rental value subsequently
received by the landlord from the date of abandonment to the termination of the
initial rental agreement. If the landlord makes a good faith effort to rent the
dwelling unit at a fair rental and is unsuccessful, the tenant shall be liable
for the rent due for the period of the rental agreement. The tenant shall also
be liable for reasonable advertising and redecoration costs incurred by the
landlord in re-renting the dwelling unit.
         d.   Unless otherwise agreed, if, upon termination of a tenancy
including, but not limited to, a termination after expiration of a lease or by
surrender or abandonment of the premises, a tenant has left personal property
on the premises, and the landlord reasonably believes that the tenant has
abandoned such personal property, the landlord may dispose of the property
according to the following procedures.
            (1)   If the landlord in good faith reasonably determines that the
tenant has left personal property that is valueless or of such little value
that the cost of storing and conducting a sale would probably exceed the amount
that would be realized from such a sale, the landlord shall retain the property
either in the dwelling unit or remove and store the abandoned property from the
dwelling unit and may dispose of the property after seven (7) days. The
landlord shall not be required to provide written notice to the tenant of its
intent to dispose of property pursuant to this subsection.
            (2)   If the landlord in good faith reasonably determines that the
tenant has left personal property that has value, the landlord shall notify the
tenant in writing of their demand that the tenant remove the property within
dates set forth in the written notice, but no less than seven (7) days after
delivery of the written notice. The landlord may deliver this written notice by
posting it in a prominent location inside the dwelling unit or on the front
door of the dwelling unit or by electronic means if the parties had previously
communicated electronically.
            (3)   If the tenant does not remove the property within the time
specified, the landlord may sell the property at a public sale or at a
commercially reasonable private sale. The landlord may retain the proceeds of
the sale to recover any rent owed by the tenant to the landlord. If the
proceeds, less reasonable costs incurred by such sale or storage, exceed any
rent owed to the landlord, the landlord shall retain the proceeds for one (1)
year. If the tenant does not claim the proceeds within one (1) year, the
proceeds shall be the property of the landlord.
         e.   At any time that the landlord is storing property pursuant to
Sec. 12-6-9, the landlord shall exercise reasonable care of the property, but
shall not be responsible to the tenant for any loss except for damage caused by
the landlord's deliberate or negligent act or omission. The landlord may elect
to store the property in or about the previously vacated premises. The landlord
shall be entitled to the cost of storage for the period of time that the
property has remained in their safekeeping. In such case the storage shall not
exceed commercially reasonable storage rates. If the tenant's property is
removed to a commercial storage company, the storage cost shall include the
actual charge for such storage and removal from the premises to the place of
storage.
         f.   If the tenant timely responds in writing of their intention to
remove the personal property from the premises and does not do so within the
time period in the landlord's written notice or a mutually agreeable date
(whichever is later), it shall be conclusively presumed that they have
abandoned such property.
   C.   The Landlord Right to Rent and Process Renewals of the Tenancy:
      1.   Termination of Tenancy:
         a.   If the landlord accepts rent, including holding payment, knowing
that it alleges a lease violation, including a default in the payment of rent
by the tenant, the landlord waives the right to terminate the rental agreement
for that breach.
         b.   If the rental agreement is terminated, the landlord may make a
claim for possession or for rent and a separate claim for damages for breach of
the rental agreement.
      2.   Nonrenewal of Tenancy:
         a.   No tenant shall be required to renew a rental agreement more than
sixty (60) days prior to the termination date of the rental agreement. If the
landlord violates this subsection, the tenant shall recover one (1) month's
rent or actual damages, whichever is greater.
         b.   The landlord shall notify the tenant in writing at least sixty
(60) days prior to the stated termination date of the rental agreement of the
landlord's intent to terminate a month-to-month tenancy or not renew an
existing rental agreement. If the landlord fails to give required written
notice, the tenant may remain in the dwelling unit for up to one hundred and
twenty (120) days after the date on which such required written notice is given
to the tenant, regardless of the date specified in the existing rental
agreement. During such occupancy, the terms and conditions of the tenancy shall
be the same as the terms and conditions during the last month of tenancy. (Ord.
21-60, 7-19-2021)
12-6-10: LANDLORD OBLIGATIONS:
   A.   The landlord shall maintain the premises in compliance with all
applicable provisions of any this Code, including any and all applicable
building codes, and section
12-6-5(C) and shall promptly make any and all repairs to fulfill this
obligation.
   B.   The landlord and tenant of any dwelling unit may agree that the tenant
is to perform specified repairs, maintenance tasks, alterations, or remodeling
only if:
      1.   The agreement of the parties is entered into in good faith and not
for the purpose of evading obligations of the landlord and is set forth in a
separate writing signed by the parties and supported by adequate consideration;
and
      2.   The agreement does not diminish or affect the obligation of the
landlord to other tenants on the premises.
   C.   The Landlord Obligation to Provide a Written Notice Concerning
Habitability:
      1.   Before a tenant initially enters into or renews a rental agreement
for a dwelling unit, the landlord, or any person authorized to enter into a
rental agreement on their behalf, shall disclose to the tenant in writing:
         a.   Any code violations which have been cited by the municipality or
other oversight body during the previous twelve (12) months for the dwelling
unit and common areas and provide written notice of the pendency of any code
enforcement litigation or administrative hearing. The written notice shall
provide the case number of the litigation and/or the identification number of
the administrative hearing proceeding and a listing of any code violations
cited;
         b.   Any notice of intent by the municipality or any utility provider
to terminate water, gas, electrical, or other utility service to the dwelling
unit or common areas. The disclosure shall state the type of service being
terminated, the intended date of termination, and whether the termination will
affect the dwelling unit, common areas or both.
      2.   If the landlord fails to comply with section
12-6-10(C), the tenant may terminate the rental agreement by written notice.
The written notice shall specify the date of termination no later than thirty
(30) days from the date of written notice. In addition, if a tenant, in a civil
legal proceeding against an owner or landlord, establishes that the landlord
has violated this section, the tenant shall be entitled to recover one (1)
month's rent or actual damages, whichever is greater, and reasonable attorney's
fees.
   D.   The landlord has an obligation to maintain the premises free from bed
bugs.
      1.   Landlords subject to this section must provide to all prospective
and current lessees with a copy of the current, approved U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency federal pamphlet on bed bug prevention, detection and
control.
      2.   In any rental dwelling unit in which an infestation of bed bugs is
found or reasonably suspected, it is the responsibility of the landlord to:
         a.   Provide pest control services by a pest management professional
until such time that no evidence of bed bugs can be found and verified;
         b.   Maintain a written record of the pest control measures performed
by the pest management professional on the rental dwelling unit. The record
shall include reports and receipts prepared by the pest management
professional. The record shall be maintained for three (3) years and shall be
open to inspection by authorized city personnel, including but not limited to
employees of the departments of health and buildings.
      3.   In any multiple rental dwelling unit building in which an
infestation of bed bugs is found or reasonably suspected, it is the
responsibility of the landlord to:
         a.   Provide pest control services by a pest management professional
until such time that no evidence of bed bugs can be found and verified within
the building or portion thereof, including the individual rental dwelling
units;
         b.   Maintain a written record of the pest control measures performed
by pest management professional on the building. The record shall include
reports and receipts prepared by the pest management professional. The record
shall be maintained for three (3) years and shall be open to inspection by
authorized city personnel, including, but not limited to, employees of the
departments of health and buildings.
      4.   A landlord shall provide the pest control services within ten (10)
days after:
         a.   A bed bug is found or reasonably suspected anywhere on the
premises;
         b.   Being notified in writing by a tenant of a known or reasonably
suspected bed bug infestation on the premises or in the tenant's rental
dwelling unit.
      5.   The extermination of bed bugs shall be by inspection, and if
necessary, the treatment of the dwelling unit on either side of the affected
dwelling unit and the dwelling unit directly above and below the affected
dwelling unit. This pattern of inspection and treatment shall be continued
until no further infestation is detected.
      6.   The tenant shall notify the landlord in writing of any bed bug
detection within forty-eight (48) hours of noticing the presence of any bed
bugs.
      7.   If the landlord fails to notify the tenant of the intention to
comply with section
12-6-10(D) after receipt of written notice, the tenant may terminate the rental
agreement by written notice. However, the tenant may exercise the right to
terminate the rental agreement only if the tenant first gives the landlord
written notice of the landlord's breach of this section and the landlord does
not remedy the breach within two (2) business days after the tenant delivered
the written notice of breach. The written notice that the tenant intends to
terminate the rental agreement shall specify the date of termination no later
than thirty (30) days from the date of written notice. The written notices
required by this section may be delivered electronically if the parties have
previously communicated electronically. In addition, if a tenant in a civil
legal proceeding against an owner or landlord establishes that a violation of
this section has occurred, they shall be entitled to recover one (1) month's
rent or actual damages, whichever is greater, and reasonable attorney's fees.
The tenant shall not have this remedy if the tenant unreasonably refused to
cooperate with or unreasonably delayed the extermination process.
   E.   The landlord has an obligation to disclose lead hazards.
      1.   The landlord must follow all applicable municipal, state and federal
regulations regarding lead poisoning and must specifically:
         a.   Provide all prospective and current lessees with a copy of the
current, approved U.S. Environmental Protection Agency federal pamphlet on
lead-based paint disclosure; and
         b.   Disclose any known lead hazards.
      2.   If the landlord fails to comply with section
12-6-10(E) after receipt of written notice, the tenant shall recover one (1)
month's rent or actual damages, whichever is greater, and reasonable attorney
fees.
   F.   The landlord has an obligation to disclose information about ownership,
management and agents.
      1.   The landlord or any person authorized to enter into a rental
agreement on their behalf shall disclose to the tenant in writing, on or before
the commencement of tenancy, the name, address, and telephone number of:
         a.   The owner or person authorized to manage the premises;
         b.   A person authorized to act for or on the behalf of the owner for
the purpose of service of process and for the purpose of receiving of notices
and demands.
      2.   A person who fails to comply with section
12-6-10(F) becomes an agent of each person who is a landlord for the purpose
of:
         a.   Service of process and receiving of notices and demands;
         b.   Performing the obligations of the landlord under this Article and
under the rental agreement and expending or making available for that purpose
all rent collected from the premises.
      3.   The information required to be furnished by this section shall be
kept current.
      4.   This section extends to any successor landlord, owner or manager.
      5.   If the landlord fails to comply with section
12-6-10(F) after receipt of written notice, the tenant may terminate the rental
agreement by written notice. However, the tenant may exercise the right to
terminate the rental agreement only if the tenant first gives the landlord
written notice of the landlord's breach of this section and the landlord does
not remedy the breach within two (2) business days after the tenant delivered
the written notice of breach. The written notice that the tenant intends to
terminate the rental agreement shall specify the date of termination no later
than thirty (30) days from the date of written notice. The written notices
required by this section may be delivered electronically if the parties have
previously communicated electronically. In addition, if a tenant in a civil
legal proceeding against an owner or landlord establishes that a violation of
this section has occurred, they shall be entitled to recover two hundred
dollars ($200.00) in damages in addition to any other damages, attorney's fees,
or remedies that the tenant may also be entitled.
   G.   The landlord has an obligation to disclose foreclosure.
      1.   Within seven (7) days of being served a foreclosure complaint, an
owner or landlord of a premises that is subject to the foreclosure complaint,
shall disclose, in writing, to all tenants of the premises that a foreclosure
action has been filed against the owner or landlord. An owner or landlord shall
also disclose, in writing, the notice of a foreclosure to any other third party
who has a consistent pattern and practice of paying rent to the owner or
landlord on behalf of a tenant.
      2.   Before a tenant initially enters into a rental agreement for a
dwelling unit, the owner or landlord shall also disclose, in writing, that they
are named in a foreclosure complaint.
      3.   The written disclosure shall include the court in which the
foreclosure action is pending, the case name, case number and shall include the
following language:
“This is not a notice to vacate the premises. This notice does not mean
ownership of the building has changed. All tenants are still responsible for
payment of rent and other obligations under the rental agreement. The owner or
landlord is still responsible for their obligations under the rental agreement.
You shall receive additional notice if there is change in owner.”
      4.   If the owner or landlord fails to comply with section
12-6-10(G), the tenant may terminate the rental agreement by written notice.
The written notice shall specify the date of termination no later than thirty
(30) days from the date of written notice. In addition, if a tenant in a civil
legal proceeding against an owner or landlord establishes that a violation of
this section has occurred, they shall be entitled to recover two hundred
dollars ($200) in damages in addition to any other damages, attorney's fees or
remedies to which the tenant may also be entitled.
   H.   Limitation of Liability:
      1.   Unless otherwise agreed upon, a landlord who sells the premises is
relieved of liability under the agreement and this Article for events occurring
after the conveyance and occurring subsequent to written notice to the tenant
of the sale.
      2.   Unless otherwise agreed, the manager of the premises is relieved of
liability under the rental agreement and this Article for events occurring
after written notice to the tenant of the termination of their management.
   I.   The landlord shall provide a summary attachment of the Oak Park
Residential Tenant Landlord Ordinance as set forth in section
12-6-14. If the landlord fails to comply with section
12-6-10(I), the tenant may terminate the rental agreement by written notice.
However, the tenant may exercise the right to terminate the rental agreement
only if the tenant first gives the landlord a written notice of the landlord's
breach of this section and that also provides notice that the landlord must
remedy the breach within two (2) business days after the tenant delivered the
written notice of breach. The written notice that the tenant intends to
terminate the rental agreement shall specify the date of termination no later
than thirty (30) days from the date of written notice. The written notices
required by this section may be delivered electronically if the parties have
previously communicated electronically. In addition, if a tenant in a civil
legal proceeding against an owner or landlord establishes that the landlord has
violated this section and failed to remedy the breach within two (2) business
days from the date the tenant delivered written notice of the breach, the
tenant shall be entitled to recover two hundred dollars ($200.00) in damages in
addition to any other damages, attorney's fees, or remedies that the tenant may
also be entitled. (Ord. 21-60, 7-19-2021)
12-6-11: SECURITY DEPOSIT:
   A.   A landlord may not demand or receive a security deposit in an amount in
excess of one and one-half months' rent. A landlord may not avoid the coverage
of this subsection by labeling the fee or charge as anything other than a
security deposit.
   B.   A tenant shall pay the landlord, at the time the tenant moves into the
premises or at any other time mutually agreed upon by the parties, the amount
of the security required by the landlord. Any portion in excess of one (1)
month's rent, at the election of the tenant, shall be paid either at the time
the tenant pays the initial security deposit, or shall be paid in no more than
six (6) equal installments no later than six (6) months after the effective
date of the lease.
   C.   Upon termination of the tenancy, property or money held by the landlord
as a security deposit shall be returned to the tenant within 30 days after the
tenant has vacated their dwelling, provided that the landlord or successor
landlord may deduct from the security deposit for the following:
      1.   Any unpaid rent that has not been validly withheld or deducted
pursuant to state or federal law or this Code and any courts costs (but not
attorney's fees) awarded by a court in a case that has not been subsequently
settled;
      2.   Any reasonable amount necessary to repair any damage caused to the
premises by the tenant, or any person under the tenant's control or on the
premises with the tenant's consent, reasonable wear and tear excluded. In the
case of such damage, the landlord shall deliver or mail to the last known
address of the tenant, within thirty (30) days, an itemized statement of the
damages allegedly caused to the premises and the estimated or actual cost for
repairing or replacing each item on that statement, attaching copies of the
paid receipts for the repair or replacement. If estimated cost is given, the
landlord shall furnish the tenant with copies of paid receipts, or a
certification of actual costs of repairs of damage if the work was performed by
the landlord's employees, within thirty (30) days from the date the statement
showing estimated costs was furnished to the tenant.
   D.   A landlord shall hold all security deposits in a federally insured
account in a bank, savings and loan association, or other financial institution
located in the state of Illinois. A security deposit shall continue to be the
property of the tenant making such deposit, shall not be commingled with the
assets of the landlord, and shall not be subject to the claims of a creditor of
the landlord or of the landlord's successors in interest, including a
foreclosing mortgagee or trustee in bankruptcy.
   E.   Notwithstanding this section, a landlord may accept the payment of the
first month's rent and security deposit in one check or one electronic funds
transfer and deposit the check or electronic funds transfer into one account
if, within seven (7) business days of acceptance of the check or electronic
funds transfer, the landlord transfers the amount of the security deposit into
a separate account that complies with this section.
   F.   The landlord shall clearly and conspicuously disclose the name of the
financial institution where the landlord has deposited the security deposit in
the written rental agreement signed by the tenant.
   G.   If, during the pendency of the rental agreement, the landlord transfers
the security deposit from one financial institution to another, the landlord
shall notify the tenant in writing of the name of the new financial institution
within fourteen (14) days of the transfer or within a reasonable time, given
all circumstances.
   H.   Any landlord who receives a security deposit from a tenant shall give a
receipt indicating the amount of such security deposit, the name of the person
receiving it, and, in the case of the agent, the name of the landlord for whom
such a security deposit is received, the date on which it is received, and a
description of the dwelling unit. The receipt shall be signed by the person
receiving the security deposit. Failure to comply with this subsection shall
entitle the tenant to immediate return of the security deposit.
   I.   Upon payment of the security deposit by means of an electronic funds
transfer, the landlord shall give the tenant a receipt that complies with this
section, or an electronic receipt that complies with this section, or an
electronic receipt that acknowledges the receipt of the security deposit, a
description of the dwelling unit, and an electronic or digital signature of the
person receiving the deposit.
   J.   If a landlord, who has received a security deposit, sells, leases or
transfers ownership or otherwise transfers control or other direct or indirect
disposition of residential real property, the successor landlord of this
property shall be liable to that tenant for any security deposit which has been
paid to the transferor.
   K.   The transferor shall remain jointly and severally liable with the
successor landlord to the tenant for such security deposit unless and until
this transferor transfers the security deposit to the successor landlord and
provides written notice to the tenant of the transfer, specifying the name,
business address and business telephone number of the successor landlord or
their agent within ten (10) days of the transfer.
   L.   Within fourteen (14) days from the date of the transfer, the successor
landlord shall notify the tenant, in writing, that the security deposit was
transferred to the successor landlord and that the successor landlord is
holding the security deposit. This written notice shall also contain the name,
business address and business telephone number of the successor landlord or
their agent.
   M.   If the landlord fails to comply, the tenant shall have a right to seek
damages.
      1.   If the landlord fails to comply with section
12-6-11(A).
12-6-11(B),
12-6-11(C), the tenant shall be awarded damages in an amount equal to two times
the security deposit and reasonable attorney's fees. This section does not
preclude the landlord or tenant from recovering other damages to which they may
be entitled under this Article.
      2.   If the landlord fails to comply with one or more of the disclosure
requirements as set forth in sections
12-6-11(D) through
12-6-11(L), the tenant may notify the landlord of the landlord's failure to
comply with this section by written notice. Within two (2) business days after
the receipt of the tenant's written notice, the landlord shall remedy and
provide the disclosures as described in those sections. The written notices
required by this section may be delivered electronically if the parties have
previously communicated electronically. The written notice from the tenant to
the landlord must include that there has been a breach of the rental agreement
and that the landlord must remedy the breach within two (2) business days after
the tenant delivered the written notice or face damages. If the landlord fails
to remedy within two (2) business days, the tenant shall be awarded damages in
an amount equal to two times the security deposit and reasonable attorney fees.
This section does not preclude the landlord or tenant from recovering other
damages to which they may be entitled under this Article. (Ord. 21-60, 7-19-
2021)
12-6-12: RETALIATORY CONDUCT:
   A.   Except as provided for in this section, a landlord may not retaliate by
increasing rent or decreasing services, or by bringing or threatening to bring
action for possession, or by refusing to renew a rental agreement because the
tenant has in good faith:
      1.   Complained of code violations to a governmental agency, including
the Village, elected representative, or public official charged with
responsibility for enforcement of a building, housing, health, or similar code;
      2.   Complained of a building, housing, health, or similar code violation
or an illegal landlord practice to a community organization or the news media;
      3.   Sought the assistance of a community organization, including a legal
aid organization, or the news media to remedy a code violation or illegal
landlord practice;
      4.   Requested the landlord make repairs to the premises as required by a
building code, health ordinance, other regulation, or the residential rental
agreement;
      5.   Organized or becomes a member of a tenant union or similar
organization;
      6.   Testified in any court or administrative proceeding concerning the
condition of the premises; or
      7.   Exercised any right or remedy provided by law.
   B.   If the landlord violates section
12-6-12, the tenant has a cause of action against the landlord or a defense in
any retaliatory action against them and is entitled to the following remedies:
      1.   If the landlord attempts to terminate the rental agreement, the
tenant may retain possession by raising this section as a defense. If the
tenant prevails on this defense, the tenant shall recover an amount equal to
not more than two (2) months' rent or twice the damages sustained by the
tenant, whichever shall be greater, and reasonable attorney's fees.
      2.   The tenant may terminate the rental agreement and vacate the
property by giving the landlord written notice of the tenant's intent to
terminate the rental agreement. If the tenant does not vacate the property
within one (1) month after giving written notice, or the end of the next rental
period, whichever is longer, then the tenant's written notice shall be deemed
withdrawn and the rental agreement shall remain in full force and effect. If
the rental agreement is terminated, the landlord shall return the security
deposit within three (3) days after the tenant tenders possession.
      3.   If the tenant files a cause of action against the landlord, the
tenant shall recover an amount equal to not more than two (2) months' rent or
twice the damages sustained by the tenant, whichever is greater, and reasonable
attorney's fees.
   C.   In an action by or against the tenant, if the tenant presents evidence
of a complaint within one (1) year prior to the alleged act of retaliation, the
court shall presume that the landlord's conduct is retaliatory. The landlord
may rebut the presumption of retaliation by proving a legitimate, non-
retaliatory basis for the conduct.
   D.   The presumption shall not arise if the tenant made the complaint after
written notice of a proposed rent increase.
   E.   A landlord's behavior shall not be considered retaliatory if any code
violation was caused primarily by the lack of care of the tenant, a member of
the tenant's family or other person on the premises with the tenant's consent.
(Ord. 21-60, 7-19-2021)
12-6-13: PROHIBITION AGAINST LOCKOUTS:
   A.   The landlord, or any person acting at the direction of the landlord,
shall not oust or dispossess, or threaten or attempt to oust or dispossess, any
tenant from a dwelling unit without authority of law, by plugging, changing,
adding or removing any lock or latching device; or by blocking any entrance
into said dwelling unit; or by removing any door or window from said dwelling
unit; or by interfering with the services to the dwelling unit, including but
not limited to electricity, gas, hot or cold water, plumbing, heat, telephone
service, or internet; or by removing a tenant's personal property from said
dwelling unit; or by the removal or incapacitating of appliances or fixtures,
except for the purpose of making necessary repairs; or by the use or threat of
force, violence or injury to a tenant's person or property; or by any act
rendering a dwelling unit or any part thereof, or any personal property located
therein, inaccessible or uninhabitable. The foregoing shall not apply where:
      1.   A landlord acts in compliance with the eviction laws of Illinois
pertaining to forcible entry and detainer and engages the Sheriff of Cook
County to forcibly evict a tenant or their personal property; or
      2.   A landlord interferes temporarily with possession only as necessary
to make needed repairs or inspection and only as provided by law; or
      3.   The landlord acts in compliance with the laws of Illinois pertaining
to distress for rent, including, but not limited to section 9-301 et seq.
("Distress for Rent") of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, 735 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/9-301 et. seq., for the removal of personal property; or
      4.   The tenant has abandoned the dwelling unit, as prescribed in section
12-6-9(B)(2).
   B.   If a tenant, in a civil legal proceeding against the landlord,
establishes that the landlord has violated section
12-6-13, the tenant shall be entitled to recover possession of the dwelling
unit and personal property. In addition, the tenant shall recover an amount
equal to not more than two (2) months' rent or twice the actual damages
sustained by the tenant, whichever is greater, and reasonable attorney's fees.
(Ord. 21-60, 7-19-2021)
12-6-14: SUMMARY ATTACHMENT TO RENTAL AGREEMENT:
   A.   The Village shall provide a summary of this article, describing the
respective rights, obligations, and remedies of landlords and tenants hereunder
and shall make such summary available for public inspection and copying. A copy
of such summary will be made available in multiple languages on the Village's
website. A copy of such summary shall be attached to each written rental
agreement when such agreement is initially offered to any tenant or prospective
tenant by or on behalf of a landlord and whether such agreement is for rental
or renewal thereof.
   B.   If the landlord acts in violation of this section, the tenant may
terminate the rental agreement by written notice as set forth in the section
12-6-10(I). (Ord. 21-60, 7-19-2021)
12-6-15: RIGHTS AND REMEDIES UNDER OTHER LAWS:
To the extent that this article provides no rights or remedies in a
circumstance, the rights and remedies available to landlords and tenants under
the laws of the State of Illinois or other applicable law, including a
provision of this Code, shall remain applicable. (Ord. 21-60, 7-19-2021)
12-6-16: ENFORCEMENT:
In addition to any other remedy or penalty set forth in this article, any
person found to be in violation of a provision of this article shall be subject
to a fine in accordance with section
1-1-5 of this Code. Each day that a violation continues to occur shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 21-60, 7-19-2021)
ARTICLE 7
HOUSING TRUST FUND
SECTION:
12-7-1: Purpose and Intent
12-7-2: Definitions
12-7-3: Housing Trust Fund Established
12-7-4: Housing Programs Advisory Committee Responsibilities
12-7-5: Eligibility Requirements
12-7-6: Review and Approval of Applications and Programs
12-7-7: Conditions
12-7-8: Sources of Funds
12-7-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this article is to provide sustainable financial resources to
address the affordable housing needs of eligible households in Oak Park by
preserving and producing affordable housing, providing housing-related
financial support and services to eligible households and providing financial
support for not-for-profit organizations that actively address the affordable
housing needs of eligible households. (Ord. 22-23, 5-2-2022)
12-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the following meanings:
 
                                     Housing that has a sales price or rental
                                     amount that is within the means of an
                                     "Eligible Household" as defined herein. In
                                     the case of dwelling units for sale,
                                     housing that is affordable means housing
                                     in which mortgage, amortization, taxes,
                                     insurance, and condominium or association
                                     fees, if any, constitute no more than
AFFORDABLE HOUSING:                  thirty percent (30%) of the gross annual
                                     household income for a household of the
                                     size that may occupy the unit. In the case
                                     of dwelling units for rent, housing that
                                     is affordable means housing for which the
                                     rent and utilities constitute no more than
                                     thirty percent (30%) of the gross annual
                                     household income for a household of the
                                     size that may occupy the unit.
                                     An applicant is any individual or entity,
                                     including but not limited to developers,
APPLICANT:                           not-for-profit organizations, housing
                                     owner/operators, and units of government
                                     that applies for a grant, loan, or other
                                     resources from the Housing Trust Fund.
                                     Eligible Activities shall include those
                                     activities that are eligible to receive
ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES:                 funding or other resources from the
                                     Housing Trust Fund, as set forth in
                                     section
                                     12-7-5 of this Chapter.
                                     A household with in income at or below
                                     eighty percent (80%) of the Area Median
ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLD:                  Income (AMI) for for-sale units and at or
                                     below sixty percent (60%) of the AMI for
                                     rental units.
                                     The Village's Housing Programs Advisory
                                     Committee as established by chapter 2
HOUSING PROGRAMS ADVISORY COMMITTEE: ("Administration"), article 31 ("Housing
                                     Programs Advisory Committee") of this
                                     Code, as amended.
 
   B.   To the extent that words or phrases not defined herein are defined in
the Village's Zoning Ordinance, such words or phrases shall be deemed to have
the meanings set forth therein. (Ord. 22-23, 5-2-2022)
12-7-3: HOUSING TRUST FUND ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Creation; Management and Administration: There is established a Housing
Trust Fund to be held as a separate fund within the Village for the sole
purpose of providing and preserving affordable housing opportunities within the
Village. The Village's Chief Financial Officer shall be responsible for the
day-to-day investment and fiscal maintenance and management of the Housing
Trust Fund. The day-to-day fiscal maintenance and management shall be
undertaken pursuant to the approved investment policies and practices of the
Village for other similarly held funds. Except for disbursements and other
actions taken as part of the day-to-day fiscal maintenance and management of
the Housing Trust Fund, the Chief Financial Officer shall not disburse funds
held by the Housing Trust Fund except upon the written direction of the Village
Board or otherwise pursuant to the provisions of an approved program. The
Village's Housing Programs Advisory Committee shall assist the Village Board
with the organization, operation, and implementation of the Housing Trust Fund
as set forth in this article.
   B.   Distribution and Use of Housing Trust Fund: Distribution of Housing
Trust Fund funds shall be in the form of grants or loans or such other funding
mechanisms that support the purposes of the Housing Trust Fund. Any unused
Housing Trust Fund funds at the end of a fiscal year shall remain in the
Housing Trust Fund for future eligible activities pursuant to the requirements
of this article. (Ord. 22-23, 5-2-2022)
12-7-4: HOUSING PROGRAMS ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
The Housing Programs Advisory Committee shall make recommendations to the
Village Board regarding the following:
   A.   The goals for the use of Housing Trust Fund resources;
   B.   The Housing Trust Fund's annual budget, including projected
expenditures and revenues;
   C.   The procedures for reviewing applications and awarding Housing Trust
Fund resources to applicants;
   D.   The criteria to be used by the Housing Programs Advisory Committee, the
Village Board, and Village staff in reviewing applications and programs that
utilize Housing Trust Fund resources;
   E.   The procedures to be used for disbursing Housing Trust Fund resources;
   F.   The review of applications and programs for Housing Trust Fund awards;
   G.   The procedures to be used to monitor eligible activities funded by the
Housing Trust Fund to ensure that Housing Trust Fund resources are used in
conformance with all applicable requirements; and
   H.   The evaluation of Housing Trust Fund activities. (Ord. 22-23, 5-2-2022)
12-7-5: ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Purpose of Eligible Activity. An applicant shall be required to
demonstrate that the requested eligible activity will advance and support the
purpose of the Housing Trust Fund as set forth in this article.
   B.   Eligible Activities. The use of Housing Trust Fund resources shall be
limited to the following which shall be considered eligible activities:
      1.   Production of affordable housing including, without limitation, new
construction, rehabilitation, and adaptive re-use;
      2.   Acquisition and disposition, including, without limitation, vacant
land, single- family homes, multi-unit buildings, and other existing structures
that may be used in whole or part to provide affordable housing;
      3.   Grants or loans to not-for-profit organizations that are actively
engaged in addressing the housing needs of eligible households;
      4.   Financial assistance to eligible households to rent dwelling units;
      5.   Financial assistance to eligible households to purchase dwelling
units;
      6.   Financial or in-kind assistance to preserve and/or maintain existing
affordable housing;
      7.   Weatherization of dwelling units occupied by eligible households; or
      8.   Emergency repairs to dwelling units occupied by eligible households.
   C.   Criteria for Award of Housing Trust Fund Resources. Among applications
for funding for eligible activities that otherwise meet established program
requirements and eligibility criteria, priority shall be given to:
      1.   Applications that provide for leveraging of funds for projects,
i.e., that yield a larger amount of housing provided or a larger dollar value
for the level of funding being sought;
      2.   Applications that provide the longest term of permanent
affordability; and
      3.   Applications that provide housing to serve the needs of households
with the lowest incomes.
   D.   The Village may approve additional criteria and priorities in
connection with a specific program as adopted by the Village Board. (Ord. 22-
23, 5-2-2022)
12-7-6: REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS AND PROGRAMS:
   A.   The Village Board shall be solely responsible for the approval of all
programs and applications that utilize the expenditure of Housing Trust Fund
monies. Applications for Housing Trust Fund awards shall be submitted to the
Director of Development Customer Services or the Director's designee.
Applications or programs that comply with the applicable requirements shall be
forwarded to the Housing Programs Advisory Committee, and any applications or
programs that do not comply shall be returned to the applicant with a written
explanation of why the application will not be considered. The Housing Programs
Advisory Committee shall review and make recommendations to the Village Board
as to which applications or programs should be awarded funding.
   B.   The Village Board may in its discretion approve a program that
delegates the approval of applications and the dispersal of Housing Trust Fund
monies to the Housing Programs Advisory Committee or Development Customer
Services Director or he Director's designee, provided that provisions for the
disbursement of Housing Trust Fund monies are specifically set forth within the
scope of that program, and the program complies with the provisions of this
article. (Ord. 22- 23, 5-2-2022)
12-7-7: CONDITIONS:
As a condition of any Housing Trust Fund award for an eligible activity, an
applicant shall execute and record such agreements, conditions, restrictive
covenants, and other similar instruments as may be required by the Village to
ensure that Housing Trust Fund resources will be used efficiently and for the
intended purposes. Among other requirements, such conditions may bind an
applicant and an applicable property to the requirements of this article and
provide that an award shall be used in strict compliance with the requirements
of the this Code and such conditions. The Village may also include a
requirement that if a property or development is no longer being used for
affordable housing pursuant to the requirements of the specific award, the
applicant or successor owner of the property or development shall be required
to reimburse the Housing Trust Fund for up to one hundred percent (100%) of the
award, plus applicable interest. (Ord. 22-23, 5-2-2022)
12-7-8: SOURCES OF FUNDS:
The Village Manager or the Village Manager's designee is authorized to accept
funds, property, and other resources from all proper and lawful public and
private sources including, without limitation, cash payments in lieu of
constructing some or all of the on-site affordable units as required by chapter
12 ("Housing"), article 5 ("Inclusionary Housing") of this Code, as amended,
for the benefit of the Housing Trust Fund. The Village’s Chief Financial
Officer shall deposit all funds collected pursuant to the transient occupancy
rental unit surcharge tax set forth in section
23A-4-2(B) of this Code into the Housing Trust Fund. The Village Board in its
sole discretion may make additional funds available to the Housing Trust Fund
from the Village's general fund as it may deem necessary and appropriate. (Ord.
22-23, 5-2-2022; amd. Ord. 24-108, 2-20-2024)
CHAPTER 13
HUMAN RIGHTS
Public Policy; Definitions   1
Unlawful Real Estate Practices   2
Fair Employment Practices   3
Public Accommodations   4
Unlawful Management Practices   5
Counseling   6
Welcoming Village   7
Productive Health Rights   8
ARTICLE 1
PUBLIC POLICY; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
13-1-1: Policy
13-1-2: Definitions
13-1-1: POLICY:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village and the purpose of this
chapter, in the exercise by the Village of its police and regulatory powers for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare and for the maintenance
and promotion of commerce, industry and good government in the Village, to
secure to all persons living or desiring to live in the Village, a fair
opportunity to purchase, lease, rent or occupy housing or other real estate, to
provide all persons desiring employment in the Village fair and equal
employment opportunities, and to provide all persons full and equal access to
all public places of accommodation, regardless of race, sex, gender identity,
gender expression, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, veteran status,
sexual orientation, age, marital status, familial status, source of income,
disability, housing status, military discharge status, or order of protection
status. (Ord. 16-033, 3-21-2016)
13-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
ADMINISTRATOR: The employee of the Village designated by the Village Manager to
administer the provisions of this chapter.
COMMISSION: The Commission on Community Relations of the Village of Oak Park.
DISABILITY: With respect to a person: a) a physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; or b)
a record of having such an impairment; or c) being regarded as having such an
impairment.
DISCRIMINATE: To extend differential treatment on the basis of the actual or
perceived status, practice, or expression of race, sex, gender, gender
identity, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, veteran status, sexual
orientation, age, marital status, familial status, source of income,
disability, housing status, military discharge status, order of protection
status, or the actual or perceived association with such a person.
FAMILIAL STATUS: One or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18
years) being domiciled with: a) a parent or another person having legal custody
of such individual or individuals; or b) the designee of such parent or other
person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other
person.
GENDER EXPRESSION: A gender based appearance, expression or behavior of an
individual, regardless of the individual's assigned sex at birth.
GENDER IDENTITY: An individual's internal sense of their own sex and a defining
component of sex.
HOUSING STATUS: The type of housing in which an individual resides, whether
publicly or privately owned, an individual's ownership status with respect to
the individual's residence, or the status of having or not having a fixed
residence.
LEASE: Includes sublease, assignment and rental and includes any contract to do
any of the foregoing.
LENDING INSTITUTION: Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association,
other persons in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans, any
person in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans as agent or
broker, and any person in the business of buying or selling loans or
instruments for the payment of money which are secured by title to or a
security interest in real property.
MATRICULATION: The condition of being enrolled in a college or university, or
in a business, nursing, professional, secretarial, technical or vocational
school, or in an adult education program.
MILITARY DISCHARGE STATUS: The fact of having been discharged from the armed
forces of the United States, their reserve components or any national guard or
naval militia other than by a "dishonorable discharge".
ORDER OF PROTECTION: A person's status as being a person protected under an
order of protection issued pursuant to the Illinois domestic violence act of
1986 or an order of protection issued by a court of another state.
OWNER: Any person holding any interest in property which may be used for
dwelling purposes, employment purposes, or purposes which involve the
accommodation of the public at large.
PUBLIC PLACE OF ACCOMMODATION: Includes restaurants, hotels, stores, soft drink
or ice cream parlors, barbershops, beauty shops, theaters, places of amusement,
taxicabs, funeral homes, public swimming pools and other places of public
accommodation.
An operator of a public place of accommodation is any owner, lessee,
proprietor, manager or an employee of any such person or persons.
PURCHASE: Includes any contract to purchase.
REAL ESTATE BROKER: Any person who for a consideration acts as an employee or
agent to manage, or to negotiate the sale, purchase or rental of any real
property or any interest therein. Real estate broker includes, but is not
limited to, all persons required to be licensed pursuant to the provisions of
an act in relation to the definition, registration and regulation of real
estate brokers and real estate salespersons as heretofore and hereafter
amended.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION: The purchase, sale, exchange or lease of any real
property or interest therein or any negotiations, listings or contracts in
connection therewith.
SEX: Includes, but is not limited to, an individual's sex (male or female)
assigned at birth, gender identity, gender expression, pregnancy, childbirth,
and medical conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION: Actual or perceived heterosexuality, homosexuality,
bisexuality, or gender related identity, whether or not traditionally
associated with the person's designated sex at birth. "Sexual orientation" does
not include a physical or sexual attraction to a minor by an adult.
SOURCE OF INCOME: The amount of money or its equivalent received as
compensation by a person during a period of time from a lawful source. Source
of income shall include wages, alimony, child support, income derived from
social security, federal or state public assistance, federal or state housing
and rental subsidies, such as the federal housing choice voucher program and
the state of Illinois rental housing support program (collectively referred to
as "housing choice vouchers"), and other lawful compensation. (Ord. 16-033, 3-
21-2016)
ARTICLE 2
UNLAWFUL REAL ESTATE PRACTICES
SECTION:
13-2-1: Unlawful Real Estate Practices; Regulations
13-2-2: Limitations And Exclusions
13-2-3: Real Estate For Rent And For Sale Signs Prohibited
13-2-3.1: Open House Signs Permitted On Sundays
13-2-4: Duties Of Village Manager And Administrator; Complaints, Penalty
13-2-1: UNLAWFUL REAL ESTATE PRACTICES; REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person with respect to real estate located in Oak
Park to:
   A.   Persuade To Sell: Persuade or induce any owner to discriminate in the
sale of real estate.
   B.   Discriminate In Services: Discriminate against any person in furnishing
services in connection with the sale of real estate.
   C.   Discriminate In Terms: Discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection with the sale of real estate.
   D.   Change Of Status: For profit, seek to induce owners to sell real estate
or attempt to obtain listings of real estate for sale or lease by representing
or suggesting that any prospective or present change in any of the
classifications set forth in section
13-1-2 of this chapter, as amended, will cause a decline in the value of the
real estate in the applicable neighborhood.
   E.   Refuse To Disclose Information: Refuse to disclose to any bona fide
prospective buyer or lessee because of any of the classifications set forth in
section
13-1-2 of this chapter, as amended, the address and description of any property
listed for sale or lease or the terms upon which it is offered, or refuse to
show for that reason to any bona fide prospective buyer or lessee any listing
sheet or rental list in the person's possession relating to such property.
   F.   Indication Of Preference: Make, print or publish, or cause to be made,
printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to
the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on any of the classifications set forth in section
13-1-2 of this chapter, as amended, or an intention to make any such
preference, limitation or discrimination.
   G.   Pay Commission: Pay a commission or any consideration to any person for
acts or services performed in violation of this article.
   H.   Misrepresent Property: Represent to any person because of any of the
classifications set forth in section
13-1-2 of this chapter, as amended, that any dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
   I.   Discriminate In Lending: Discriminate in lending or furnishing
financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of
purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to
discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration
or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance. For
the purpose of this subsection, discrimination shall include refusal to make
loans, differentiating in the type of terms of loans, including interest rates,
charges to buyer or seller, duration and amount of loan, influencing appraisals
in connection with loans or delaying of loan applications.
   J.   Unauthorized Advertisement: Advertise that any property is for sale or
for rent in a newspaper or other publication without the written consent of the
owner or the owner's authorized agent.
   K.   Unwanted Solicitation: For any person to solicit any property for sale
or rental or the listing of any property for sale or rental at any time notice
has been given that any owner or tenant of such real estate does not desire to
sell or lease such real estate or does not desire to be solicited. For the
purpose of this subsection
13-1-2K, notice shall be given by the Development Customer Services Department
by preparing a list of the names and addresses of persons who have advised the
Development Customer Services Department they do not desire to be solicited,
said list to be prepared both alphabetically and by street address, and said
list shall be published by the Development Customer Services Department as
follows:
      1.   By maintaining a copy of said list in the office of the Development
Customer Services Department available for inspection, and
      2.   By furnishing a copy of said list annually, plus a monthly list of
additions and deletions to every real estate broker in the Village, and
      3.   By filing annually a copy of said list with the Commission of Human
Relations of the state of Illinois plus a monthly list of additions and
deletions thereto, and
      4.   By furnishing a copy of said list on request, without charge, to any
person having an interest in the sale or rental of real estate in Oak Park.
In addition, any owner or renter may notify in writing any real estate agent or
broker or any other person that such owners or renters do not wish to list for
sale such residential property.
   L.   Insurance: For any person to discriminate in the sale of insurance in
connection with real estate.
   M.   Differentiate In Lending: Differentiate in lending in connection with
loans to be secured by property in Oak Park because of any of the
classifications set forth in section
13-1-2 of this chapter, as amended, living in Oak Park or of the persons living
in the neighborhood of the property to be used as security for the loan or
because of prospective or present changes in any of the classifications set
forth in section
13-1-2 of this chapter, as amended, living in Oak Park or in the neighborhood
of the property to be used as security for the said loan. For the purpose of
this subsection
13-1-2M, differentiate in lending shall include:
      1.   To refuse to make loans; or
      2.   To differentiate in the type of loans, including interest rates,
charges to buyer or seller, duration and amount of loan; or
      3.   To influence appraisals in connection with loans; or
      4.   To delay processing loan applications.
   N.   Reports Of Rentals: It is the policy of the President and Board of
Trustees to prevent the segregation by race of any part of the Village. In
order to prevent persons selling or renting real estate, whether as owner or
otherwise, from selling or renting on the basis of the race of the buyer or
lessee, the Village Manager is directed to review and investigate sales and
rentals of residential property to determine if said sales and rentals are in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   O.   Attempt To Influence: Influence or attempt to influence or steer by any
words, acts or failure to act, any person who is a prospective seller,
purchaser or tenant of real property in connection with the sale or rental of
said property so as to cause or contribute to racially segregated housing or so
as to retard, obstruct or discourage racially integrated housing in any
building, street, block or neighborhood. Steering shall also consist of the
practice of displaying listings or showing prospective nonminority purchasers
or renters units for sale or rent only in areas that are predominantly occupied
by nonminority residents or by displaying listings or showing prospects of a
minority race units for sale or rent in areas containing predominantly minority
residents or areas that adjoin areas containing predominantly minority
residents. Selling a prospect a home as a result of an open house shall not
constitute steering by the broker. (Ord. 16-095, 9-6-2016)
13-2-2: LIMITATIONS AND EXCLUSIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall not apply to the rental of any room or units in
dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no
more than four (4) families living independently of each other if the owner
actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his or her
residence.
   B.   This chapter shall not apply to the payment of rent through housing
choice vouchers for any owner occupied two (2) to four (4) residential unit
buildings.
   C.   This chapter shall not apply to the payment of rent through housing
choice vouchers for a single-family attached or detached residence.
   D.   Nothing in this chapter shall require an owner to offer for sale or
lease real property to the public at large, nor shall this chapter be deemed to
prohibit discrimination for any reason other than those set forth in section
13-1-2 of this chapter, as amended.
   E.   Nothing in this chapter shall require a person to offer real property
for sale or lease or to show real property to any person if such person is not
negotiating for the purchase or lease of such real property in good faith.
Provided, however, a "tester" authorized by the Village Manager shall be deemed
to be negotiating in good faith and shall be deemed to be bona fide as required
by subsection
13-1-2E of this article.
   F.   A building owner may assert as an affirmative defense to the
prohibition set forth in subsection
13-1-2C of this article to not accept housing choice vouchers as payment from
persons who seek to rent a dwelling unit from the owner when twenty five
percent (25%) or more of the dwelling units in the building are already
occupied by persons who pay rent in whole or in part with housing choice
vouchers.
   G.   The provisions of this chapter are limited to real estate transactions
solely in connection with property located in the Village. (Ord. 16-033, 3-21-
2016)
13-2-3: REAL ESTATE FOR RENT AND FOR SALE SIGNS PROHIBITED:
The President and Board of Trustees find as follows:
   A.   That a prohibition of "For Sale" and "Sold" signs has been recommended
by the Commission on Community Relations on the basis that said signs tend to
encourage unfair housing practices and tend to defeat the purposes of the
Village's human rights program.
   B.   That a prohibition of "For Rent" signs has been recommended by the
Commission on Community Relations for the following reasons:
      1.   "For Rent" signs presently are used more frequently in areas that
have a greater percentage of occupancy of minority residents. "For Rent" signs
are seldom used in connection with buildings that have no minority occupants.
The use of these signs therefore tends to "signal" that minorities may be more
welcome in some areas of the Village than others and this tends to segregate
areas contrary to the policy of the Village to maintain an integrated
community.
      2.   A proliferation of "For Rent" signs encourages panic peddling and
block busting.
      3.   "For Rent" signs may give an appearance of community instability
when concentrated in a limited geographic area.
      4.   A proliferation of "For Rent" signs may infer that an area is less
desirable than other areas.
      5.   A system of apartment management that refers tenants to the source
of rentals will encourage greater professionalism in apartment management.
It shall, therefore, be unlawful for any person to construct, place, maintain
or install a "For Sale", "Sold" or "For Rent" sign on any property developed
for residential use in the Village. The term "For Sale" sign shall include
signs carrying the following or similar words: "Open House" or "Open For
Inspection" and shall include any other devices placed on the property to
indicate that the property is for sale.
In the case of new construction of residential property or conversion of an
existing structure to condominium use where a condominium declaration is
recorded, a "For Sale" sign shall be permitted on the property until the
property or condominium units are sold, but not to exceed one and one-half (11/
2) years after issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a new building or
from the date the "For Sale" sign is posted in the case of a conversion. (Ord.
16-033, 3-21-2016)
13-2-3.1: OPEN HOUSE SIGNS PERMITTED ON SUNDAYS:
Notwithstanding section
13-1-2 of this article, "Open House" signs will be permitted on Sunday, subject
to the following conditions:
   A.   The wording on the sign is limited to "Open For Inspection" or "Open
House".
   B.   The display of signs is limited to the hours of the "Open House" and in
no event shall be displayed in excess of four (4) hours.
   C.   The size of the sign is limited to twenty four inches by thirty six
inches (24" x 36").
   D.   The signs are not to be posted on public land.
   E.   The Director of the Community Relations Department will report to the
Board of Trustees on or about February 1 of each year as to the effect "Open
House" signs have on the general purposes of this section. (Ord. 16-033, 3-21-
2016)
13-2-4: DUTIES OF VILLAGE MANAGER AND ADMINISTRATOR; COMPLAINTS, PENALTY:
It shall be the duty of the Administrator to initiate, receive and investigate
written complaints charging discrimination; and seek conciliation of such
complaints and compliance by violators.
   A.   Complaints And Enforcement: Any person aggrieved in any manner by a
violation of any provision of this chapter may file a written complaint with
the Administrator on a form to be provided by the Administrator. The complaint
shall be under oath, and shall state:
      1.   The name and address of the complainant,
      2.   The name and address of the person or persons against whom the
complaint is brought, if known to the complainant, and
      3.   The facts surrounding the alleged violation of this chapter.
      4.   The name and address of all persons believed to have knowledge
concerning the alleged violation.
   B.   Fee: No fee shall be charged for the filing of the complaint.
   C.   Service Of Copy: After the filing of the complaint, the Administrator
shall, within three (3) days, serve a copy of the complaint personally or by
certified mail on the person or persons charged and shall furnish a copy to the
Village Manager.
   D.   Investigation: The Administrator shall investigate the complaint and if
he or she determines that probable cause exists in support of the allegations
of the complaint, he or she shall set a date for a conference and notify the
parties of the time and place thereof. At such conference, the Administrator
shall interview the complainant and the person or persons against whom the
complaint has been directed, and shall attempt to resolve the complaint by
conciliation.
   E.   Conciliation: If the Administrator is unable to conciliate the
complaint, the Administrator shall so notify the Village Manager within thirty
(30) days of the filing of the complaint. The Village Manager or a hearing
officer appointed by the Village Manager shall thereupon hold a hearing on the
complaint.
   F.   Hearing: Such hearing shall be conducted upon notice by certified mail
to all parties, at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the hearing. The
Village shall provide a court reporter to take a transcript of the hearing. All
evidence shall be under oath, administered by an officer authorized to
administer oaths. All parties may be represented by counsel at their election
and shall have the right to call witnesses and to cross examine witnesses. If
the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the Village Manager,
the hearing officer shall furnish the Village Manager with:
      1.   Findings of fact;
      2.   A recommendation(s);
      3.   A summary of the evidence taken; and
      4.   A transcript of the hearing if requested by the Village Manager.
   G.   Hearing Officer: A hearing officer appointed by the Village Manager to
conduct a hearing pursuant to this section shall be an attorney licensed in the
state of Illinois for at least five (5) years.
   H.   Remedies: The Village Manager may impose one or all of the following
remedies upon the conclusion of a hearing:
      1.   An order that the respondent cease the complained of conduct and
take steps to alleviate the effect of the conduct;
      2.   Payment by the respondent of actual damages, as reasonably
determined by the Village Manager, for injury or loss suffered;
      3.   Order the respondent to sell or lease the housing in question to the
complainant;
      4.   Payment by the respondent to the complainant of all or a portion of
the complainant's costs, including reasonable attorney fees, expert witness
fees, witness fees, and duplicating costs, incurred in pursuing the complaint;
      5.   The respondent take such action as may be necessary to make the
complainant whole, including, but not limited to, an award of interest on the
actual damages from the date of the violation;
      6.   Posting by the respondent in a conspicuous place a notice(s) setting
forth the requirements for compliance with this chapter or other relevant
information in the discretion of the Village Manager;
      7.   Payment by the respondent a fine of not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Every day that a violation shall
continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense;
      8.   Revocation of any applicable Village license or permit held by the
respondent;
      9.   Notice to the Department of Professional Regulation of the state of
Illinois or other applicable agency that any licensed real estate broker or
salesperson violated this chapter;
      10.   Instruct the Village Attorney to file a complaint in the circuit
court to enjoin the violation or the filing of a complaint for any other
appropriate relief upon the conclusion of a hearing or at any time prior to the
conclusion of a hearing if the Village Manager determines that immediate court
action is necessary;
      11.   Dismissal of the complaint;
      12.   Remanding of the complaint to the Administrator for conciliation;
      13.   In the case of any violation of this chapter by any person in the
course of performing under a contract or subcontract with the state or any
political subdivision or agency thereof, or with the government of the United
States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, to notify by certified mail
such contracting agency for the purpose of causing it to terminate such
contract or any portion thereof, either absolutely or on condition of
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
      14.   Any other appropriate relief as determined by the Village Manager
consistent with the provisions set forth in this section; and
      15.   All remedies set forth above shall be cumulative.
   I.   Additional Powers And Duties: In addition to the duties specified
herein, the Village Manager shall have the following powers and duties:
      1.   To make recommendations regarding amendments to this chapter and
related ordinances or parts of this code.
      2.   To investigate all matters coming to the Village Manager's attention
in connection with administering the fair housing program of the Village.
      3.   To investigate fair housing grievances and attempt conciliation
thereof, when either an oral or written complaint has been filed.
   J.   Action By Complainant: At any time after final action by the Village
Manager, or after dismissal of a complaint by the Administrator, or in the
event of the refusal of the Administrator or Village Manager to act on a
complaint within the time limits herein set forth, the complainant may file a
complaint in the circuit court for appropriate relief for the alleged
violation.
   K.   Limitation Of Time To File Complaints: Any complaint shall be barred
from consideration unless it is filed with the Administrator within one year
after the alleged discriminatory practice occurred. The Administrator may
extend the time for filing the complaint for an additional sixty (60) days when
conciliation efforts are pending.
   L.   Closed Meeting For Conciliation: The Village Manager and the
Administrator are authorized to hold closed meetings for conciliation of
complaints of discrimination brought pursuant to this chapter. The Village
Manager and/or Administrator, the complainant and an advisor, and the
respondent and an advisor, shall have the right to attend the hearing.
   M.   Issue Of Subpoenas: The complainant or the person or entity charged,
the Village Manager or a hearing officer designated by the Village Manager, may
have subpoenas issued for persons to appear at hearings and for the examination
of documents. Subpoenas shall only be issued to persons or for documents which
have a substantial evidentiary connection with a complaint. Service of such
subpoenas shall be made in the same manner as in civil actions and shall be
enforceable through the circuit court of Cook County. (Ord. 16-033, 3-21-2016)
ARTICLE 3
FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES
SECTION:
13-3-1: Discrimination In Employment
13-3-2: Discrimination By Contractors With The Village
13-3-3: Bidding On Village Contracts
13-3-4: Contracts With Village Of Oak Park
13-3-1: DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any department of the Village, or any Village
official, his or her agent or employee, for or on behalf of the Village to
refuse to employ, or to discharge any person, otherwise qualified, on account
of any of the classifications set forth in section
13-1-2 of this chapter, as amended, or to discriminate for any of said reasons
in regard to tenure, terms or conditions of employment; to deny promotion or
increase in compensation solely for any of said reasons; to publish offers of
employment based on any such discrimination; to adopt or enforce any rule or
employment policy which discriminates between employees on account of any of
the classifications set forth in section
13-1-2 of this chapter, as amended, except where such rule or policy is
consistent with the pension, retirement, and related laws of the state of
Illinois. Further, that all persons with a physical or mental disability shall
be free from discrimination unrelated to ability in hiring and promotion
practices of the Village.
   B.   Discrimination in employment on the basis of age shall generally be
unlawful for prospective employees between the ages of eighteen (18) and
seventy (70). (Ord. 16-033, 3-21-2016)
13-3-2: DISCRIMINATION BY CONTRACTORS WITH THE VILLAGE:
Every supplier of materials and services and all contractors doing business
with the Village in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year shall
be an "equal opportunity employer" as defined in section 2000(e) of chapter 21,
title 42, of the United States Code Annotated, and federal executive orders
#11245 and #11375 which are incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 16-033, 3-
21-2016)
13-3-3: BIDDING ON VILLAGE CONTRACTS:
The Village shall have the right, as a condition to bidding, to require
prospective contractors, bidders or suppliers to show that they are "equal
opportunity employers" as provided for by federal law and federal executive
order, and to ensure their compliance with the requirements and obligations of
the human rights act, contained in 775 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-105(A)
pertaining to public contracts, which act is incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 16-033, 3-21-2016)
13-3-4: CONTRACTS WITH VILLAGE OF OAK PARK:
The provisions of section
13-3-1 of this article shall be incorporated as material parts of all contracts
to which the Village is a party. (Ord. 16-033, 3-21-2016)
ARTICLE 4
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS
SECTION:
13-4-1: Discriminatory Acts Prohibited
13-4-1: DISCRIMINATORY ACTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to deny, directly or indirectly, any person the full and
equal access to the goods, services, facilities, privileges and accommodations
of any place of public accommodation by reason of any of the classifications
set forth in section
13-1-2 of this chapter, as amended. (Ord. 16-033, 3-21-2016)
ARTICLE 5
UNLAWFUL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
SECTION:
13-5-1: Unlawful Management Practices; Regulations
13-5-1: UNLAWFUL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES; REGULATIONS:
   A.   Applicability: Unless otherwise provided, this article shall apply only
to multiple-family residences containing four (4) or more rental dwelling
units. For the purpose of this article, a "dwelling unit" is defined as a
portion of a building containing culinary facilities and arranged, designed and
exclusively used or maintained for use by one family as a separate housekeeping
unit.
This article shall not apply to hotels. A "hotel" is defined as "a building in
which living or sleeping facilities are provided for compensation and offered
to transient guests and in which one or more customary services such as maid
and linen service or telephone service are provided". For the purposes of this
article, the term "hotel" shall also mean motel.
   B.   Lease Required: No dwelling unit shall be rented without a written
lease having been executed on behalf of the owner and the tenant, regardless of
the number of units in a building. This requirement shall not apply to the
renewal of tenancies existing as of April 1, 2016.
   C.   Application And Fees: No dwelling unit shall be rented without the
owner or agent first having obtained a written application, along with a
security deposit or onetime, nonrefundable move in fee not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00). An owner or agent shall not require both a security
deposit and a move in fee as a condition of any lease pursuant to this section.
If an owner or agent chooses to collect a security deposit, the value of the
security deposit must be no less than one month's rent. However, this provision
shall not apply to renewals of existing leases.
   D.   Showing Of Dwelling Units: Any person showing a dwelling unit for the
purpose of renting said dwelling unit must have knowledge of this chapter.
   E.   Processing Of Application For Rental Of A Dwelling Unit: Any person
accepting and/or processing an application for a dwelling unit must:
      1.   Have knowledge of this chapter;
      2.   Have knowledge of the laws and practices in connection with rental
and management of multiple-family dwellings; and
      3.   Attend a seminar on housing practices to be conducted by the
Village. Such seminar must be attended at least once each calendar year.
   F.   Copies Of Applications: Copies of applications for apartments shall be
furnished by the owner or manager to all agents having authority to accept such
applications. No agent shall represent that an application has been made for a
dwelling unit unless he or she has, in fact, knowledge that such application
has been made. (Ord. 16-095, 9-6-2016)
ARTICLE 6
COUNSELING
SECTION:
13-6-1: Counseling; Regulations
13-6-1: COUNSELING; REGULATIONS:
In order to encourage the development of a racially integrated and stable
community, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any person
from referring a prospective tenant or purchaser to the Community Relations
Division of the Village for counseling. Counseling, which may be conducted by
the Community Relations Division in connection with applicants so referred,
shall consist of:
   A.   Furnishing statistical data regarding the racial composition of blocks,
neighborhoods and school districts;
   B.   Furnishing data regarding the policy of the Village to maintain racial
diversity; and
   C.   Furnishing data regarding state guidelines in connection with minority
enrollment in schools. (Ord. 16-033, 3-21-2016)
ARTICLE 7
WELCOMING VILLAGE
SECTION:
13-7-1: Definitions
13-7-2: Requesting Information Prohibited
13-7-3: Threats Based On Citizenship Or Immigration Status Prohibited
13-7-4: Conditioning Benefits, Services, Or Opportunities On Immigration Status
Prohibited
13-7-5: Civil Immigration Enforcement Actions; Federal Responsibility
13-7-6: Federal Registry Programs
13-7-7: Information Regarding Citizenship Or Immigration Status
13-7-8: No Private Cause Of Action
13-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms wherever used in this article shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning appears from the context:
ADMINISTRATIVE WARRANT: An immigration warrant of arrest, order to detain or
release aliens, notice of custody determination, notice to appear, removal
order, warrant of removal, or any other documents, issued by ICE that can form
the basis for an individual's arrest or detention for a civil immigration
enforcement purpose. This definition does not include any criminal warrants
issued upon a judicial determination of probable cause and in compliance with
the requirements of the fourth amendment to the United States constitution and
article 1, section 6 of the Illinois constitution.
AGENCY: Every Village department, division, commission, committee, board, or
other body established by authority of an ordinance or Village Board
resolution.
AGENT: Any person employed by or acting on behalf of an agency.
CITIZENSHIP OR IMMIGRATION STATUS: All matters regarding questions of
citizenship of the United States or any other country, the authority to reside
in or otherwise be present in the United States, the time and manner of a
person's entry into the United States, or any other immigration matter enforced
by the department of homeland security or successor or other federal agency
charged with the enforcement of civil immigration laws.
COERCE: To use express or implied threats toward a person or any family member
of a person that attempts to put the person in immediate fear of the
consequences in order to compel that person to act against his or her will.
CONTACT INFORMATION: Home address, work address, telephone number, electronic
mail address, social media contact information, or any other means of
contacting an individual.
ELIGIBLE FOR RELEASE FROM CUSTODY: A person that may be released from custody
because one of the following conditions has occurred:
   A.   All criminal charges against the person have been dropped or dismissed;
   B.   The person has been acquitted of all criminal charges filed against him
or her;
   C.   The person has served all the time required for his or her sentence;
   D.   The person has posted a bond; or
   E.   The person is otherwise eligible for release under state or local law,
or local policy.
ICE: The United States immigration and customs enforcement agency and shall
include any successor agency charged with enforcement of civil immigration
laws.
IMMIGRATION DETAINER: A request by ICE to a federal, state or local law
enforcement agency to provide notice of release or maintain custody of an
individual based on an alleged violation of a civil immigration law, including
detainers issued pursuant to sections 1226 or 1357 of title 8 of the United
States Code or 287.7 or 236.1 of title 8 of the code of federal regulations.
These detainers include, but are not limited to, DHS form I-247D "immigration
detainer - request for voluntary action"; DHS form I-247X "request for
voluntary transfer"; or DHS form I-247N "request for voluntary notification of
release".
IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT OPERATION: Any operation that has as one of its
objectives the identification or apprehension of a person or persons: a) in
order to subject them to civil immigration detention, removal proceedings and/
or removal from the United States; or b) to criminally prosecute a person or
persons for offenses related to immigration status, including, but not limited
to, violations of sections 1253, 1304, 1306(a) and (b), 1325, or 1326 of title
8 of the United States Code.
VERBAL ABUSE: The use of oral or written remarks that are overly insulting,
mocking, or belittling, directed at a person based upon the actual or perceived
race, color, sex, religion, national origin, English proficiency, sexual
orientation, or gender identity of that person. (Ord. 17-180, 2-6-2017)
13-7-2: REQUESTING INFORMATION PROHIBITED:
No agent or agency shall request information about or otherwise investigate or
assist in the investigation of the citizenship or immigration status of any
person unless such inquiry or investigation is required by an order of a court
of competent jurisdiction. Notwithstanding this provision, the Village Attorney
or the Village Attorney's designee may investigate and inquire about
immigration status when relevant to potential or actual litigation or an
administrative proceeding in which the Village is or may be a party. (Ord. 17-
180, 2-6-2017)
13-7-3: THREATS BASED ON CITIZENSHIP OR IMMIGRATION STATUS PROHIBITED:
No agent or agency will coerce, including using threats of deportation, or
engage in verbal abuse of any person based upon the person's or the person's
family members' actual or perceived citizenship or immigration status.
For purposes of this section, "family member" means a person's:
   A.   Mother, father, spouse, brother or sister (including blood, step or
half), son or daughter (including blood, step or half), father-in-law, mother-
in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, grandparent
or grandchild;
   B.   Court appointed legal guardian or a person for whom the person is a
court appointed legal guardian; or
   C.   Domestic partner or the domestic partner's mother, father, brother,
sister (including blood, step, or half), son or daughter (including blood, step
or half). (Ord. 17-180, 2-6-2017)
13-7-4: CONDITIONING BENEFITS, SERVICES, OR OPPORTUNITIES ON IMMIGRATION STATUS
PROHIBITED:
   A.   No agent or agency shall condition the provision of the Village
benefits, opportunities, or services on matters related to citizenship or
immigration status unless required to do so by statute, federal regulation, or
an order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
   B.   Where presentation of an Illinois driver's license or identification
card is accepted as adequate evidence of identity, presentation of a photo
identity document issued by the person's nation of origin, such as a driver's
license, passport, or consulate issued document, shall be accepted and shall
not subject the person to a higher level of scrutiny or different treatment
than if the person had provided an Illinois driver's license or identification
card except that this subsection
13-7-4B shall not apply to the completion of federally mandated I-9 forms.
   C.   All applications, questionnaires, and interview forms used in relation
to Village benefits, opportunities, or services shall be promptly reviewed by
the Village and any questions regarding citizenship or immigration status,
other than those required by statute, ordinance, federal regulation or court
decision, shall be deleted and of no force and effect. (Ord. 17-180, 2-6-2017)
13-7-5: CIVIL IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS; FEDERAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   No agency or agent shall stop, arrest, detain, or continue to detain a
person after that person becomes eligible for release from custody or is free
to leave an encounter with an agent or agency, based on any of the following:
      1.   An immigration detainer;
      2.   An "administrative warrant" as defined herein (including, but not
limited to, entered into the federal bureau of investigation's national crime
information center database); or
      3.   Any other basis that is based solely on the belief that the person
is not present legally in the United States, or that the person has committed a
civil immigration violation.
   B.   No agency or agent shall be permitted to accept requests by ICE or
other agencies to support or assist in any capacity with immigration
enforcement operations, including, but not limited to, requests to provide
information, other than as provided in section
13-7-7 of this article, on persons who may be the subject of immigration
enforcement operations, to establish traffic perimeters, or to otherwise be
present to assist or support an operation. In the event an agent receives a
request to support or assist in an immigration enforcement operation, he or she
shall report the request to his or her supervisor, who shall decline the
request and document the declination in an interoffice memorandum to the agency
director through the chain of command.
   C.   No agency or agent shall enter into an agreement under section 1357(g)
of title 8 of the United States Code or any other federal law that permits
state or local governmental entities to enforce federal civil immigration laws.
   D.   Unless presented with a valid and properly issued criminal warrant, no
agency or agent shall:
      1.   Permit ICE agents access to a person being detained by, or in the
custody of, the agency or agent;
      2.   Transfer any person into ICE custody;
      3.   Permit ICE agents use of agency facilities, information, other than
as provided in section
13-7-7 of this article, or equipment, including any agency electronic
databases, for investigative interviews or other investigative purpose or for
purposes of executing an immigration enforcement operation; or
      4.   Expend the time of the agency or agent in responding to ICE
inquiries or communicating with ICE regarding a person's custody status,
release date, or contact information. (Ord. 17-180, 2-6-2017)
13-7-6: FEDERAL REGISTRY PROGRAMS:
No agency or agent shall expend any time, facilities, equipment, information,
or other resources of the agency or agent to facilitate the creation,
publication, or maintenance of any federal program to register individuals
present in the United States based on their ancestry, national origin, or
religion, or the participation of any Village residents in such a registry.
(Ord. 17-180, 2-6-2017)
13-7-7: INFORMATION REGARDING CITIZENSHIP OR IMMIGRATION STATUS:
Nothing in this article prohibits any agency or agent from sending to, or
receiving from, any local, state, or federal agency, information regarding an
individual's citizenship or immigration status. All agents shall be instructed
that federal law does not allow such a prohibition. "Information regarding an
individual's citizenship or immigration status", for purposes of this section,
means a statement of the individual's country of citizenship or a statement of
the individual's immigration status. (Ord. 17-180, 2-6-2017)
13-7-8: NO PRIVATE CAUSE OF ACTION:
This article does not create or form a basis for liability on the part of the
Village, its agents, or agencies. The exclusive remedy for violation of this
article shall be the Village's disciplinary procedures for officers and
employees. (Ord. 17-180, 2-6-2017)
ARTICLE 8
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH RIGHTS
SECTION:
13-8-1: Purpose and Intent
13-8-2: Definitions
13-8-3: Limitation on Enforcement Related to Reproductive Health Care
13-8-4: Requesting Information Prohibited
13-8-5: Objection to Subpoena or Requests for Information
13-8-6: Incorporation of the Reproductive Health Act; Conflict
13-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this article is to protect individual decision-making in the
area of reproductive health and to support access to the full scope of quality
reproductive health care for all in the Village. (Ord. 22-50, 7-11-2022)
13-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
following meanings:
 
                          Abortion shall be as defined in the Reproductive
ABORTION:                 Health Act, 775 Illinois Compiled Statutes 55/1-10,
                          as amended.
                          Every Village department, division, commission,
AGENCY:                   committee, board, or other body established by
                          authority of an ordinance, or Village Board
                          resolution.
                          Any person employed by or acting on behalf of an
AGENT:                    agency or other person acting under color of law on
                          behalf of the Village.
                          Reproductive health care shall be as defined in the
                          Reproductive Health Act, 775 Illinois Compiled
                          Statutes 55/1-10, as amended, and includes
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE: contraception, sterilization, preconception care,
                          maternity care, abortion care, counseling regarding
                          reproductive health care and access to health care
                          services and products. (Ord. 22-50, 7-11-2022)
 
13-8-3: LIMITATION ON ENFORCEMENT RELATED TO REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE:
No Village agent or agency or using resources or assets belonging to the
Village shall conduct any investigation, detain any person, make any arrest,
file any criminal charges, cooperate with any other officer, agent, agency,
entity, or department, or participate in any prosecution in which a person or
entity is accused of facilitating, providing, or receiving an abortion with the
consent of the pregnant person pursuant to the laws of the State of Illinois or
a person or entity is accused of facilitating, providing, or receiving
reproductive health care services or products obtained in conformance with the
laws of the State of Illinois. (Ord. 22-50, 7-11-2022)
13-8-4: REQUESTING OR PROVIDING INFORMATION REGARDING REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE
PROHIBITED:
No Village agent or agency shall request or provide information about or
otherwise investigate or assist in the investigation of a person or entity for
facilitating, providing, or receiving an abortion with the consent of the
pregnant person pursuant to the laws of the State of Illinois or a person or
entity for facilitating, providing, or receiving reproductive health care
services or products obtained in conformance with the laws of the State of
Illinois. (Ord. 22-50, 7-11-2022)
13-8-5: OBJECTION TO SUBPOENA OR REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION:
The Village will object to any subpoena or requests for information from any
out-of-state person or entity for the purposes of investigating a law
criminalizing abortion or reproductive health care as set forth in this article
or creates civil liability for abortion or reproductive health care. (Ord. 22-
50, 7-11-2022)
13-8-6: INCORPORATION OF THE ACT; CONFLICT:
The Reproductive Health Act, 775 Illinois Compiled Statutes 55/1-1 et seq. (the
"Act"), is incorporated herein by reference as part of this article. In the
case of a conflict between a provision of the Act and a provision of this
article, the provision of the Act shall control. The remedy for a violation of
this article shall be as set forth in the Act. (Ord. 22-50, 7-11-2022)
CHAPTER 14
LIBRARY
Generally   1
ARTICLE 1
GENERALLY
SECTION:
14-1-1: Public Library Established
14-1-2: Board of Library Directors
14-1-3: Injuring Library Materials
14-1-1: PUBLIC LIBRARY ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a public library for the use of the Village, which
shall be known as the Oak Park Public Library.
14-1-2: BOARD OF LIBRARY DIRECTORS:
The Oak Park Public Library shall be under the supervision and management of a
board of seven (7) library directors to be elected in accordance with the
Illinois Local Library Act. The Board of Library Directors shall have the
powers and authority conferred by the Illinois Local Library Act.
14-1-3: INJURING LIBRARY MATERIALS:
Any person who shall remove from the library without checking out any library
materials or equipment belonging to or in the possession or under the control
of the Oak Park Public Library shall be punished as provided in Section
1-1-5 of this Code.
Any person who shall damage or fail to return any library materials belonging
to or in the possession or under the control of the Oak Park Public Library
shall be punished as provided in Section
1-1-5 of this Code.
CHAPTER 15
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
In General   1
Bicycles   2
Parking Meters, Parking Permits And Municipal Attendant Parking Lots   3
Vehicle Licenses   4
Schedule Of Fines And Penalties For Certain Minor Traffic Violations,
Parking And Vehicle License Violations   5
Parking Patrol   6
Wrecked Or Abandoned Vehicles   7
Oak Park Mall Traffic Regulations (Rep. by Ord. 2013-0-16, 2-19-2013)   8
Parking Areas And Garages For Four Or Fewer Vehicles   9
Towing, Immobilization And Impoundment Of Motor Vehicles Or Motor Vehicles
Containing Unlawful Firearms   10
Clear Sight Areas At Street Intersections   11
ARTICLE 1
IN GENERAL
SECTION:
15-1-1: Adoption Of State Law; Penalty
15-1-2: Regulation And Control Of Vehicular Traffic
15-1-3: Negligent Driving
15-1-4: Trucks And Buses Prohibited, Locations
15-1-5: U-Turns Prohibited
15-1-6: Evading Traffic Control Signals
15-1-7: Through Traffic In Alley
15-1-8: Driving Over Curb Prohibited
15-1-9: Driver's License
15-1-10: Speed Limits
15-1-11: Stop Signs
15-1-12: Yield Right-Of-Way Signs
15-1-13: One-Way Streets And Alleys
15-1-14: Prohibited Turn Locations
15-1-15: Right Turns On Red Light Prohibited
15-1-16: Limited And Prohibited Parking; Parking On Private Property
15-1-17: Night Parking; Restricted Hours
15-1-18: Parking In Alley
15-1-19: Miscellaneous Parking Offenses
15-1-20: Commercial Activities From Parked Vehicle Prohibited
15-1-21: Cab Outside Of Stand
15-1-22: Emergency Snow Parking
15-1-23: Snow Route Map
15-1-24: Reserved Parking And Drop Off Zones For Persons With Disabilities
15-1-25: Authorized Traffic Control Signals And Parking Regulations
15-1-26: Parking Offenses Related To Time Restrictions, Time Limits And
Prohibited Parking For Designated Areas
15-1-27: Parking In A Tow
15-1-1: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW; PENALTY:
There is hereby adopted by the Village for the purpose of regulating and
controlling traffic on the streets of the Village 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-100 to 5/11-1425 inclusive, and individually sections 5/12-101,
5/12-201(a), 5/12-202, 5/12-205, 5/12-401, 5/12-502, 5/12-503, 5/12-601, 5/12-
602, 5/12-603, 5/12-702 and 5/12-710 as amended, excepting any penalties
therein. Not less than three (3) copies of such law are on file in the Office
of the Village Clerk and are available for public use, inspection and
examination.
Any person violating the provisions of the above mentioned State law shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). (Ord. 1984-0-3, 2-6-1984)
15-1-2: REGULATION AND CONTROL OF VEHICULAR TRAFFIC:
Except as otherwise provided in this section the Board of Trustees shall
regulate control and approve all matters pertaining to vehicular traffic within
the Village.
The Village Manager is authorized to establish and designate crosswalks,
traffic lanes, permanent and temporary taxicab stands, passenger zones and
loading zones.
The Chief of Police is empowered to make and enforce temporary regulations to
cover emergencies or special conditions in connection with vehicular traffic.
(Ord. 1988-0-91, 11-21-1988)
15-1-3: NEGLIGENT DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle negligently or without
due caution in a manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, any person
or property. (Ord. 1988-0-91, 11-21-1988)
15-1-4: TRUCKS AND BUSES PROHIBITED, LOCATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a "truck" as defined in
section
15-4-6 of this chapter on any of the following streets in the Village of Oak
Park:
Austin Boulevard.
Chicago Avenue.
Division Street.
Forest Avenue from Lake Street to Ontario Street.
Highland Avenue from Fillmore Street to the east-west alley north of Roosevelt
Road.
Humphrey Avenue from Lake Street to Chicago Avenue.
Jackson Boulevard.
Ontario Street from Marion Street to Forest Avenue.
South Boulevard from Harlem Avenue to Marion Street for eastbound traffic only.
Washington Boulevard.
Provided, however, that trucks may use said streets within a distance of three
(3) blocks of a location situated on said streets when a delivery or pick up is
being made to said location. (Ord. 2014-0-69, 10-6-2014)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a "bus" as defined in
subsection
15-1-4B1 of this section on any of the following streets in the Village of Oak
Park:
Elizabeth Court.
Erie Street from Forest Avenue on the west to Marion Street on the east.
Forest Avenue from Chicago Avenue on the north to the point where Ontario
Street east of Forest Avenue intersects with Forest Avenue on the south.
Grove Avenue from Chicago Avenue on the north to Ontario Street on the south.
Kenilworth Avenue from Chicago Avenue on the north to Ontario Street on the
south.
Superior Street from Forest Avenue on the west to Marion Street on the east.
      1.   "Bus" for purposes of subsection
15-1-4B of this section shall mean every motor vehicle designed for carrying
more than ten (10) persons, except for:
         a.   Passenger carriers operating under the authority of the
metropolitan transit authority act;
         b.   Commuter vans as defined in section 5/1-114.1 of the Illinois
vehicle code (1997);
         c.   School buses as defined in subsection
15-1-4B2 of this section;
         d.   Buses providing transportation services to senior citizens and/or
persons with disabilities who reside on a street where bus traffic is
prohibited under subsection
15-1-4B of this section; and
         e.   Buses providing shuttle service on behalf of the Frank Lloyd
Wright Home And Studio Foundation during the annual "Wright Plus" architectural
tour.
      2.   "School bus", for purposes of subsection
15-1-4B of this section, shall mean every motor vehicle owned or operated by or
for any public, private or religious school for the transportation of persons
regularly enrolled therein in nursery, primary or secondary school through the
twelfth grade only when such buses are transporting such students to and from
school on a specific and regular school bus route. (Ord. 1997-0-25, 5-19-1997)
15-1-5: U-TURNS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn so as to
proceed in the opposite direction on the same street. This section shall not
apply to any public or private emergency equipment actually on an emergency
call. (1981 Code)
15-1-6: EVADING TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle upon or across any
private drive or through any alley for the purpose of evading traffic control
signals or devices. (1981 Code)
15-1-7: THROUGH TRAFFIC IN ALLEY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use an alley for the sole purpose of
driving from one street to another. Alleys shall be used for delivery purposes
or for the convenience of those residing adjacent to said alleys. (1981 Code)
15-1-8: DRIVING OVER CURB PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to drive or park a motor vehicle over a curb or on an
unpaved parkway. (1981 Code)
15-1-9: DRIVER'S LICENSE:
   A.   No person shall operate or drive any motor vehicle on any street,
highway or other public way within the Village, unless such person has a valid
driver's license or permit.
   B.   For the purposes of this section, "motor vehicle" shall mean every
vehicle which is propelled otherwise than by muscular power, including, but not
limited to, motorcycles, motor driven cycles, pole trailers, reconstructed
vehicles, road tractors, school buses, semitrailers, special mobile equipment,
specially constructed vehicles, trackless trailer coaches, trailers, trucks,
truck tractors, as well as bicycles with motor attached, or power scooters with
a motor. (1981 Code)
15-1-10: SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   The maximum speed limit for a motor vehicle in the Village shall be
twenty (20) miles per hour on Elizabeth Court and Lake Street from Harlem
Avenue to Forest Avenue and shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour on all
other streets except the following:
      Austin Boulevard
      Harlem Avenue
      North Avenue
      Ridgeland Avenue
      Roosevelt Road
      Washington Boulevard
   On these specifically named streets the maximum speed limit shall be as
specified in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-601 et seq., adopted in
section 15-1-1 of this article.
   B.   The maximum speed limit for a motor vehicle shall be twenty (20) miles
per hour in a park speed zone. The following locations shall be designated as
park speed zones:
      1.   Ridgeland Avenue from a point approximately fifty feet (50') south
of Lenox Street to Division Street.
      2.   Division Street from a point approximately two hundred twenty feet
(220') west of Elmwood Avenue to Ridgeland Avenue.
      3.   Elmwood Avenue from Division Street to Berkshire Street.
      4.   Berkshire Street from a point approximately two hundred twenty feet
(220') west of Elmwood Avenue to Ridgeland Avenue.
      5.   LeMoyne Parkway from Marion Street to Woodbine Avenue.
      6.   Marion Street from LeMoyne Parkway to Greenfield Street.
      7.   Greenfield Street from Marion Street to Woodbine Avenue.
      8.   Garfield Street from a point approximately ninety feet (90') east of
Highland Avenue to a point approximately ninety feet (90') west of Lyman
Avenue.
      9.   Lombard Avenue from Garfield Street to Harvard Street.
      10.   Taylor Avenue from Garfield Street to Harvard Street.
      11.   Harvard Street from Lombard Avenue to Taylor Avenue.
      12.   Lexington Street from Harlem Avenue to Wisconsin Avenue.
      13.   Maple Avenue from Lexington Street to Roosevelt Road.
      14.   Lake Street from East Avenue to Ridgeland Avenue.
      15.   East Avenue from Lake Street to South Boulevard.
      16.   Scoville Avenue from Lake Street to South Boulevard.
      17.   Ridgeland Avenue from Lake Street to South Boulevard.
      18.   Garfield Street from East Avenue to Elmwood Avenue.
      19.   East Avenue from Garfield Street to Harvard Street.
      20.   Scoville Avenue from Harvard Street to a point approximately four
hundred ninety feet (490') north of Harvard Street.
      21.   Gunderson Avenue from Garfield Street to Harvard Street.
      22.   Fillmore Street from Euclid Avenue to Wesley Avenue.
      23.   Euclid Avenue from Fillmore Street to a point approximately one
hundred and forty feet (140') north of Roosevelt Road.
      24.   Wesley Avenue from Fillmore Street to a point approximately one
hundred and forty feet (140') north of Roosevelt Road.
   C.   The maximum speed limit for a motor vehicle shall be (20) miles per
hour in a Neighborhood Greenway Speed Zone. Neighborhood Greenways are streets
designed to prioritize bicycle travel with features to calm and reduce
vehicular traffic and improve safety for bicycles and pedestrians. The
following locations shall be designated as neighborhood Greenway Speed Zones:
      1.   Erie Street from Kenilworth Avenue to Scoville Avenue.
      2.   Scoville Avenue from South Boulevard to Lake Street. (Ord. 2011-0-
68, 11-7-2011; amd. Ord. 19-77, 9-16-2019; Ord. 23-27, 4-24-2023; Ord. 23-108,
11-20-2023)
15-1-11: STOP SIGNS:
Wherever authorized stop signs have been erected, it shall be unlawful for the
driver of any vehicle to proceed into the intersection without first bringing
such vehicle to a full stop.
Traffic control signals and signs have been established by separate ordinance
entitled "An Ordinance Establishing Traffic Control Signals". (1981 Code)
15-1-12: YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS:
   A.   Where authorized "Yield Right-Of-Way" signs are installed, vehicles
facing these signs shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles in the intersection
and to vehicles approaching from the right or left at such a distance as to
constitute a hazard. "Yield Right-Of-Way" signs shall be posted at the
following locations:
      1.   The "Y" in Garfield Street approximately one hundred twenty feet
(120') east of its intersection with Ridgeland Avenue.
      2.   On Taylor Avenue at its intersection with Ontario Street.
      3.   On Clinton Avenue at its intersection with Fillmore Street.
      4.   On Grove Avenue at its intersection with Pleasant Street.
      5.   On Taylor Avenue at its intersection with Fillmore Street.
      6.   On Scoville Avenue at its intersection with Van Buren Street.
      7.   On Wenonah Avenue at its intersection with Fillmore Street.
      8.   On Mapleton Avenue at its intersection with Greenfield Street.
      9.   On Belleforte Avenue at its intersection with Berkshire Street.
      10.   On Woodbine Avenue at its intersection with Berkshire Street.
      11.   On Pleasant Street at its intersection with Home Avenue.
      12.   On Randolph Street at its intersection with Scoville Avenue.
      13.   On Taylor Avenue at its intersection with Randolph Street.
      14.   On Randolph Street at its intersection with Humphrey Avenue.
      15.   On Kenilworth Avenue at its intersection with Monroe Street.
      16.   On Clinton Street at its intersection with Adams Street.
      17.   On Humphrey Avenue at its intersection with Adams Street.
      18.   On Lombard Avenue at its intersection with Greenfield Street.
      19.   On Schneider Street at its intersection with Marion Street.
      20.   On Paulina Street at its intersection with Marion Street.
      21.   On Ontario Court at its intersection with Harlem Court.
      22.   On Erie Street at its intersection with Kenilworth Avenue.
      23.   On Ontario Street at its intersection with Linden Avenue.
      24.   On Humphrey Avenue at its intersection with Pleasant Street.
      25.   On Erie Street at its intersection with Taylor Avenue. (Ord. 18-
377, 6-18-2018)
15-1-13: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
Wherever authorized "one-way" street or alley signs have been erected on any
street or alley, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to proceed
along such street or alley in a direction otherwise than indicated by such
signs.
   A.   The following are hereby determined to be and are established as one-
way streets:
      1.   North Boulevard from Cuyler Avenue to Ridgeland Avenue, one- way
westbound.
      2.   Superior Street from Maple Avenue to Harlem Avenue, one-way
westbound.
      3.   Maple Avenue from a point one hundred twenty feet (120') south of
Chicago Avenue to Superior Street, one-way northbound.
      4.   North Boulevard from a point sixty feet (60') east of Humphrey
Avenue to Austin Boulevard, one-way eastbound.
      5.   Forest Avenue from LeMoyne Parkway to North Avenue, one-way
northbound.
      6.   Elmwood Avenue between Lake Street and Ontario Street is hereby
determined to be and is a one-way southbound street on Saturdays from seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to two o'clock (2:00) P.M. from the first Saturday in June
to the last Saturday in October.
      7.   Clarence Avenue between Harrison Street and Van Buren Street, one-
way eastbound.
      8.   North Boulevard between Oak Park Avenue and Euclid Avenue, one-way
eastbound.
      9.   Ontario Street between Oak Park Avenue and Kenilworth Avenue, one-
way westbound.
      10.   Grove Avenue between Harvard Street and Fillmore Street, one- way
southbound.
      11.   Scoville Avenue between Erie Street and a point two hundred twenty
five feet (225') north of Lake Street, one-way southbound.
      12.   Flournoy Street between Taylor and Humphrey Avenues, one-way
westbound.
      13.   Cuyler Avenue between Harvard and Fillmore Streets, one-way
southbound.
      14.   Highland Avenue from Jackson Boulevard to Van Buren Street, one-way
southbound.
      15.   Harvey Avenue from Thomas Street to Augusta Street, one-way
southbound.
      16.   North Boulevard from Forest Avenue to Oak Park Avenue, one-way
eastbound.
      17.   South Boulevard from Oak Park Avenue to Home Avenue, one-way
westbound.
      18.   North Boulevard from Marion Street to Forest Avenue, one-way
eastbound.
      19.   Euclid Avenue between North Avenue and a point one hundred twenty
five feet (125') south of North Avenue, one-way northbound.
   B.   The following are hereby determined to be and are established as one-
way alleys:
      1.   North-south alley east of Forest Avenue between Division Street and
Berkshire Street, one-way southbound.
      2.   The two (2) east-west alleys intersecting with Austin Boulevard
between South Boulevard and Washington Boulevard, one- way eastbound.
      3.   East-west alley east of Oak Park Avenue located midblock between
Lake Street and North Boulevard, one-way westbound.
      4.   The east-west alley located south of North Avenue between Marion
Street and Belleforte Avenue, one-way westbound.
      5.   The north-south alley located north of Berkshire Street and south of
Lenox Street between Elmwood Avenue and Ridgeland Avenue, one-way southbound.
      6.   The north-south alley located between Cuyler Avenue and Harvey
Avenue from the east-west alley immediately north of and parallel to Madison
Street to the east-west alley immediately south of and parallel to Washington
Boulevard, one-way southbound.
      7.   The east-west alley located immediately north of and parallel to
Washington Boulevard between Scoville Avenue and the north- south alley
immediately west of and parallel to Scoville Avenue, one-way eastbound.
      8.   The east-west alley located immediately north of and parallel to
Madison Street between Cuyler Avenue and Ridgeland Avenue, one-way westbound.
      9.   The east-west alley located immediately south of and parallel to
Madison Street between Wisconsin Avenue and Wenonah Avenue, one-way eastbound.
      10.   The north-south alley located immediately west of Forest Avenue
between Erie Street and Ontario Street, one-way northbound.
      11.   The east-west alley located immediately south of Garfield Street
between Austin Boulevard and the north-south alley immediately west of Austin
Boulevard, one-way eastbound. (Ord. 2014-0-06, 2-3-2014)
15-1-14: PROHIBITED TURN LOCATIONS:
   A.   Left turns are prohibited at the following locations:
      1.   Westbound traffic exiting onto Oak Park Avenue from east-west alley
lying midblock between and parallel to North Boulevard and Lake Street.
      2.   Northbound or southbound traffic on Austin Boulevard at the
intersection of South Boulevard from four o'clock (4:00) P.M. to six o'clock
(6:00) P.M. only, except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
      3.   Westbound traffic on North Boulevard at Ridgeland Avenue.
      4.   Westbound traffic exiting onto Humphrey Avenue from the east- west
alley lying south of and parallel to South Boulevard.
      5.   Southbound traffic on Harlem Avenue at South Boulevard.
      6.   Westbound traffic on Westgate at Harlem Avenue.
      7.   Northbound and southbound traffic on Grove Avenue at Jackson
Boulevard.
      8.   Northbound traffic on Harlem Avenue at Jackson Boulevard from seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and from four o'clock (4:00)
P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. only.
      9.   Northbound Austin Boulevard onto westbound Greenfield Street.
      10.   From northbound Oak Park Avenue onto westbound LeMoyne Street
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and
four o'clock (4:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Monday through Friday.
      11.   From southbound Oak Park Avenue onto eastbound Superior Street
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and
four o'clock (4:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Monday through Friday.
      12.   Southbound traffic on Oak Park Avenue at Randolph Street.
      13.   Westbound traffic on Randolph Street at Oak Park Avenue.
      14.   Southbound traffic on Harlem Avenue at Westgate Street.
      15.   Northbound traffic on Maple Avenue at Lake Street.
   B.   Right turns only are permitted at the following locations:
      1.   For eastbound traffic on Superior Street at Austin Boulevard.
      2.   For westbound traffic on LeMoyne Street onto Oak Park Avenue.
      3.   For northbound traffic on Humphrey Avenue at Division Street.
      4.   For northbound traffic on Taylor Avenue at Division Street.
      5.   For eastbound traffic on Harvard Street at Austin Boulevard.
      6.   For southbound traffic on Forest Avenue at Ontario Street.
      7.   For eastbound traffic on Greenfield Street at Ridgeland Avenue.
      8.   For eastbound traffic exiting onto Ridgeland Avenue from the
Northridge Shopping Center driveway located on the west side of Ridgeland
Avenue approximately twenty feet (20') south of North Avenue.
      9.   For westbound traffic on North Boulevard at Harlem Avenue.
      10.   For westbound traffic exiting onto Rossell Avenue from the parking
lot located on the southeast corner of Rossell Avenue and North Avenue.
      11.   For southbound traffic on Euclid Avenue at Washington Boulevard.
      12.   For northbound and southbound traffic on Kenilworth Avenue at
Washington Boulevard.
      13.   For eastbound traffic on Randolph Street at Oak Park Avenue.
      14.   For northbound traffic on Scoville Avenue at Washington Boulevard
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and
two o'clock (2:00) P.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M. Monday through Friday.
      15.   For westbound traffic exiting onto Ridgeland Avenue from the east-
west alley lying immediately north of and parallel to Madison Street.
      16.   For eastbound traffic exiting onto Euclid Avenue from the CVS
Pharmacy driveway located on the west side of Euclid Avenue approximately
eighty five feet (85') north of Roosevelt Road.
      17.   For westbound traffic exiting onto Oak Park Avenue from the CVS
Pharmacy driveway located on the east side of Oak Park Avenue approximately one
hundred feet (100') north of Roosevelt Road.
   C.   No turns are permitted at the following locations:
      1.   For northbound and southbound traffic on Austin Boulevard into
Superior Street in Oak Park.
      2.   For northbound and southbound traffic on Austin Boulevard into
Harvard Street in Oak Park.
      3.   For northbound and southbound traffic on Ridgeland Avenue into North
Boulevard.
   D.   Right turns are prohibited at the following locations:
      1.   For traffic exiting from the parking lot located at the northwest
corner of Austin Boulevard and Jackson Boulevard into the north-south alley
adjacent to said lot.
      2.   For traffic exiting from the parking lot adjacent to Fair Oaks
Pharmacy, 400 Chicago Avenue, into the north-south alley adjacent to the
parking lot.
      3.   For southbound traffic on Humphrey Avenue at Ontario Street.
      4.   For eastbound traffic on Division Street at Elmwood Avenue between
the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and four
o'clock (4:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Monday through Friday.
      5.   For eastbound traffic on North Avenue at Grove Avenue between the
hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and four o'clock
(4:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Monday through Friday.
   E.   All traffic is prohibited:
      1.   From proceeding on Maple Avenue in a southbound direction past the
barrier peninsula traffic diverter located approximately two hundred fifty feet
(250') south of Monroe Street. (Ord. 17-305, 11-20-2017)
15-1-15: RIGHT TURNS ON RED LIGHT PROHIBITED:
   A.   Right turns are prohibited at all times on a red light at the following
intersections:
      1.   Ridgeland Avenue and Division Street.
      2.   Forest Avenue and Lake Street.
      3.   South Boulevard and Austin Boulevard.
      4.   South Boulevard and Oak Park Avenue.
      5.   Oak Park Avenue and Harrison Street.
      6.   Oak Park Avenue and Garfield Street.
      7.   Washington Boulevard and Ridgeland Avenue.
      8.   Marion Street and Lake Street.
   B.   Right turns are prohibited on a red light at the following
intersections from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
except as noted:
      1.   Ridgeland Avenue and Lake Street.
      2.   Oak Park Avenue and Lake Street.
      3.   Madison Street and Ridgeland Avenue.
      4.   Madison Street and Oak Park Avenue.
      5.   Washington Boulevard and Oak Park Avenue.
      6.   Jackson Boulevard and Ridgeland Avenue.
      7.   Harvard Street and Ridgeland Avenue.
      8.   For northbound traffic on Ridgeland Avenue at Augusta Street when
children are present.
      9.   Jackson Boulevard and Highland Avenue when children are present.
      10.   South Boulevard and Ridgeland Avenue. (Ord. 2009-0-035, 6-1-2009;
amd. Ord. 21-62, 10-4-2021)
15-1-16: LIMITED AND PROHIBITED PARKING; PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park in a
prohibited parking zone.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to park in a limited parking zone longer than the
time designated by authorized signs.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to park on private property without the consent of
the owner of the private property or to park in any parking lot which is not
licensed, as provided in chapter 8 of this code. (Ord. 1997-0-13, 3-17-1997)
15-1-17: NIGHT PARKING; RESTRICTED HOURS:
In order to facilitate police protection, street cleaning, leaf and snow
removal, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park said
vehicle, or for the owner of said vehicle to permit said vehicle to be parked,
on any street in the Village between the hours of two thirty o'clock (2:30)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day, except for emergency vehicles, and
except where vehicles having permits are parked in authorized parking enclaves
established pursuant to this chapter and identified below.
Any lease and application for lease of residential property in the Village
shall contain a clause advising the tenant of the Village overnight parking
restriction, and that the lessee is responsible for providing off street
parking for the lessee's vehicle during those hours specified above to the
extent such parking is not provided by the lessor. Any lease not containing the
foregoing language shall be voidable by the lessee.
Authorized Parking Bays:
   A.   Twenty one (21) metered parking spaces located in the bay on the north
side of South Boulevard and lying between Ridgeland Avenue and Cuyler Avenue.
   B.   All spaces in the bay located on the north side of South Boulevard
immediately to the west of Austin Boulevard.
   C.   All spaces in the bay located on the north side of South Boulevard
between Ridgeland Avenue and Elmwood Avenue.
   D.   All spaces in the several bays located on the following named east-west
streets immediately to the west of and separated by parkway from Austin
Boulevard:
      1.   Fillmore Street.
      2.   Van Buren Street.
      3.   Adams Street.
      4.   Randolph Street.
      5.   Pleasant Street. (Ord. 1983-0-22, 4-4-1983)
   E.   Fifteen (15) parking spaces located on the south side of North
Boulevard west of East Avenue adjacent to the Chicago Northwestern Railroad
embankment. (Ord. 1983-0-70, 10-3-1983)
15-1-18: PARKING IN ALLEY:
It shall be unlawful for any driver to park a vehicle within an alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than eight feet (8')
of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic; and
there shall be no parking in any alley for a time longer than is necessary to
load or unload passengers or materials. (1981 Code)
15-1-19: MISCELLANEOUS PARKING OFFENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or for the owner of a motor vehicle
to permit it to be parked as follows:
   A.   Blocking a driveway.
   B.   On or across a sidewalk.
   C.   In an intersection or crosswalk.
   D.   In a viaduct.
   E.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
   F.   In a bus stop, loading zone or cabstand.
   G.   Under a fire escape.
   H.   The wrong way on a one-way street.
   I.   On any two-way street so that the driver's side of the car is nearest
to the curb.
   J.   Backed into a stall in a Municipal parking lot.
   K.   More than twelve inches (12") from the curb.
   L.   In any private parking lot not licensed as provided in Chapter 8 of
this Code. Signs shall be posted by the Village on the parkway at the entrance
of any such lot reading as follows:
   No Parking In This Lot
   Police Order
   M.   No truck or commercial vehicle bearing a Class C or heavier State of
Illinois "license plate" as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-815,
or having a gross weight capacity (including vehicle and maximum load) in
excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds, shall be parked on a public street or
a public or private driveway in any residence district as defined by the Zoning
Ordinance, except when making deliveries or to perform requested service at a
particular residence.
   N.   Tourist buses for the Frank Lloyd Wright Home and Studio or other
historic buildings on Forest Avenue shall be parked only in a designated bus
stand on Chicago Avenue adjacent to Holmes School playground. While so parked
the motor of the bus shall be turned off so as to reduce noise and exhaust
fumes.
   O.   Double parked.
   P.   In an area restricted to the loading and unloading of children.
   Q.   When any bus is parked or standing longer than fifteen (15) minutes,
its engine shall be turned off so as to reduce noise and exhaust fumes. (1981
Code)
15-1-20: COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES FROM PARKED VEHICLE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle:
   A.   On a street, parkway or Village controlled parking lot for the purpose
of repairing said vehicle, provided that emergency repairs on a disabled
vehicle are permitted; or
   B.   On a street, parkway, alley or Village controlled parking lot for the
commercial purpose of selling or displaying a motor vehicle, or the sale of any
item from a motor vehicle, provided that on-street commercial activities
conducted pursuant to any licensed business activity as described in Chapter 8
of this Code is permitted. (Ord. 1982-0-67, 12-6-82)
15-1-21: CAB OUTSIDE OF STAND:
It shall be unlawful to park any cab outside a designated cabstand for the
purpose of waiting for the potential pick up of unsummoned-for fares. (1981
Code)
15-1-22: EMERGENCY SNOW PARKING:
The following restrictions are adopted in order to facilitate snow removal and
the movement of traffic under winter conditions:
   A.   At such times as there is an accumulation of two inches (2") of snow on
the streets in the Village, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle
to park said vehicle, or for the owner of any vehicle to permit said vehicle to
be parked, on the even side (as indicated by address) on odd days (as indicated
by date) or on the odd side (as indicated by address) on even days (as
indicated by date) of any such street in the Village between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. except for emergency vehicles,
vehicles making deliveries which do not exceed ten (10) minutes, and except for
the streets as identified in subsections B and D of this Section.
   B.   At such times as there is an accumulation of two inches (2") of snow on
the streets in the Village, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle
to park said vehicle, or for the owner of any vehicle to permit said vehicle to
be parked, on any emergency snow routes designated on the map contained in
section
15-1-23 of this article, except for emergency vehicles and vehicles making
deliveries which do not exceed ten (10) minutes.
   C.   The amount of accumulation of snow shall be determined by the enforcing
officer in a manner that reflects the depth of snow at locations near the
parked vehicle.
   D.   At such times as there is an accumulation of two inches (2") of snow on
the streets in the Village, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle,
or for the owner of any vehicle to be parked, on the even side (as indicated by
address) on odd days (as indicated by date) or on the odd side (as indicated by
address) on even days (as indicated by date) of the following streets in the
Village between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:
00) A.M. except for emergency vehicles and vehicles making deliveries which do
not exceed ten (10) minutes:
      1.   The west side of Marion Street, from Superior Street to Chicago
Avenue.
      2.   The north side of Westgate Street, Harlem Avenue to 1126 Westgate
Street.
      3.   Marion Street, from Lake Street to Ontario Street.
      4.   North Boulevard, from Euclid Avenue to Kenilworth Avenue.
      5.   South Boulevard, from Euclid Avenue to Kenilworth Avenue.
      6.   Marion Street, from South Boulevard to Pleasant Street.
      7.   South Boulevard, from Forest Avenue to Maple Avenue.
      8.   Pleasant Street, from Marion Street to Maple Avenue.
      9.   The west side of Maple Avenue, from Garfield Street to Lexington
Avenue.
      10.   The north side of Harrison Street, from Oak Park Avenue to Grove
Avenue.
   E.   The provisions of this section shall override all other Village parking
regulations, including all permit parking regulations of the Village.
   F.   Vehicles violating any of the provisions of this section may be towed
without prior notice. (Ord. 1999-0-41, 9-7-99)
15-1-23: SNOW ROUTE MAP:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3318.gif]
(Ord. 1999-0-41, 9-7-99)
15-1-24: RESERVED PARKING AND DROP OFF ZONES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
   A.   Reserved Parking For Persons With Disabilities:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person, except a person with a
disability or a person transporting a person with a disability, to park a motor
vehicle in any public parking area posted Reserved Parking and bearing the
international symbol indicating parking reserved for persons with disabilities.
For the purposes of this section, "a person with a disability" shall mean a
person with registration plates or a decal or device designated for a person
with a disability pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-616, 5/11-
1301.1, 5/11-1301.2, or to veterans with disabilities as provided in 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-609. The decal or device must be displayed on
the vehicle parked in the designated area.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any individual who is not the authorized
holder of the disability license plate or parking decal or device and who is
not transporting the authorized holder of the disability license plate or
parking decal or device to and from the parking location to use the disability
license plate or parking decal or device to exercise any privileges granted by
or through the disability license plate or parking decal or device.
      3.   Upon request of a person with a disability who has been issued
registration plates pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-616 or a
decal issued pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.2, a parking
space shall be reserved in the street adjacent to the residence of the person
with a disability and so designated by an official sign of the Department of
Public Works. No person shall park a motor vehicle in the space so designated
unless it bears special registration plates issued pursuant to 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3-616 or a decal issued pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1301.2.
   B.   Drop Off Zones For Persons With Disabilities: It shall be unlawful for
any person to park a motor vehicle or stop a motor vehicle for the purpose of
loading or unloading persons or things, other than persons with disabilities,
in any public parking area posted as a drop off zone for persons with
disabilities.
Drop off zones for persons with disabilities shall meet the following criteria:
      1.   The person or entity seeking the drop off zone for persons with
disabilities must demonstrate the need for such a zone. Factors to be
considered in determining the need for such a drop off zone shall include the
following: the number of persons with disabilities traveling to and from the
proposed drop off zone location, the frequency of this activity, the
difficulties encountered without the proposed drop off zone and the alternate
solutions available.
      2.   The proposed drop off zone for persons with disabilities shall not
have a substantial negative impact on existing parking and traffic conditions
in the area.
      3.   The need which must be demonstrated under this subsection
15-1-24B must not be the need for parking for persons with disabilities, but
rather the need for a location to stop a vehicle which carries a person or
persons with disabilities only long enough to drop off or pick up such person
or persons from a designated place. The regular use of special motor vehicles
or buses for the transport of persons with disabilities to and from a
designated place shall be considered as evidence indicating the need for a drop
off zone for persons with disabilities, rather than the need for parking for
persons with disabilities. (Ord. 2006-0-20, 4-3-06)
   C.   Disabled Permit Parking Established: There is hereby created permit
parking for the disabled on public streets within the Village, subject to the
following restriction, requirements and minimal fees.
      1.   Application For Permit Parking: A disabled person shall be issued a
disabled parking permit for parking on the public way within the Village if
such person satisfies the following requirements:
         a.   The applicant for disabled permit parking is a resident of the
Village of Oak Park.
         b.   The applicant or member of the applicant's household who
transports the applicant in the applicant's vehicle possesses a valid, current
driver's license within the state.
         c.   The vehicle to be parked in the disabled permit parking space is
owned by such applicant and possesses current, valid state registration and
Village vehicle license.
         d.   The applicant has no current outstanding parking citations with
the Village of Oak Park.
         e.   The applicant either possesses disabled State registration plates
or a current State disabled certificate issued to the applicant.
         f.   The applicant is able to establish that the issuance of a
disabled parking permit to the applicant will alleviate some demonstrable
hardship presently borne by the applicant.
      2.   Proof Of Hardship: The applicant for the disabled parking permit
must establish to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works or the
Director's designee that the issuance of the disabled parking permit will
alleviate some demonstrable hardship presently borne by the applicant.
Applicants who possess off street parking which is easily accessible from the
applicant's dwelling will be presumed not to have a hardship which will be
relieved by the issuance of a disabled parking permit. There shall also be a
presumption that applicants who reside in single- family dwellings with side
drives which are accessible from the street are not subject to a hardship which
will be relieved by the issuance of a disabled parking permit.
      3.   Permits Approved By The Director Of Public Works And Issued By The
Parking Permit Office: The Director of Public Works or the Director's designee
shall be responsible for approving all applications for disabled parking
permits applied for hereunder. The Parking Director shall be responsible for
accepting, processing and issuing disabled parking permits and verifying the
applicant's compliance with licensing, certification and registration
requirements and the fact that the applicant has no outstanding Village parking
citations attributable to the applicant or applicant's vehicle prior to
issuance.
      4.   Disabled Parking Permits; Parking Regulations; Overnight Parking
Ban: The disabled parking permit shall be affixed to the lower right hand
corner of the rear windshield of the applicant's vehicle. The appropriately
affixed disabled parking permit will entitle the applicant, when driving such
vehicle, to the exclusive use of the permit parking space to which that permit
is allocated. Such vehicle, while parked in the designated permit parking
space, will not be subject to parking regulations related to time, such as No
Parking 8–10 A.M. or 2 Hour Parking.
The disabled parking permit shall not, however, override the overnight parking
ban in effect throughout the Village. (Ord. 1995-0-37, 6-5-1995)
      5.   Permit Fees:
         a.   There shall be a onetime charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) for
the installation of disabled permit parking signage and an annual disabled
parking permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00).
         b.   The renewal of the disabled parking permit shall be due on July 1
of each year.
         c.   The disabled parking permit fee for the first year will be
reduced to five dollars ($5.00) if the time period between the issuance of the
initial permit and the following July 1 is less than six (6) months. (Ord.
1996-0-12, 2-20-1996)
15-1-25: AUTHORIZED TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS AND PARKING REGULATIONS:
Each traffic control signal, stop sign, parking regulation sign, parking meter
or other traffic control device erected by the Village or the State and
existing on the effective date of this Code is designated, authorized, approved
and adopted for the purpose of regulating parking and traffic, pursuant to the
provisions of this Code. (1981 Code)
15-1-26: PARKING OFFENSES RELATED TO TIME RESTRICTIONS, TIME LIMITS AND
PROHIBITED PARKING FOR DESIGNATED AREAS:
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in violation of the time restrictions
(e.g., no parking 8:00 to 10:00 A.M.), time limits (e.g., 2 hours maximum
parking) and prohibited parking areas designated on the map attached as exhibit
A to the ordinance codified herein provided such areas are properly posted with
signage that clearly sets forth such parking time restrictions, time
limitations or prohibitions.
The map attached as exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein shall be updated
by ordinance amendment on a semiannual basis. (Ord. 2011-0-22, 5-16-2011)
15-1-27: PARKING IN A TOW:
   A.   At the times herein specified and as designated by authorized signage,
no person shall directly or indirectly park or permit a vehicle owned or
controlled by said person to be parked at the locations on the streets set
forth below which are designated as tow zones Monday through Sunday from ten
o’clock (10:00) P.M. to two-thirty o’clock (2:30) A.M.:
      1.   The 1150 to 1200 block of South Cuyler Avenue;
      2.   The 1150 to 1200 block of South Harvey Avenue;
      3.   The 1150 to 1200 block of South Highland Avenue; and
      4.   The 1150 to 1200 block of South Ridgeland Avenue.
   B.   The specifically prohibited tow zone areas from which vehicles may be
towed shall be posted by the Village with a notice at or near the sign
identifying the prohibited parking which provides "TOW ZONE" or with a
reasonable notice which conveys substantially similar information. No person
shall directly or indirectly or permit a vehicle owned or controlled by that
person to be parked in the Village in violation of any such prohibited parking.
All Village police officers shall have the authority to authorize the towing,
removal and storage of such a vehicle.
   C.   Residents of the blocks set forth in subsection A above who have
current Village vehicle licenses may park their vehicles during the designated
tow zone dates and times and shall not be considered unlawfully parked when a
resident parks their vehicle on a block on which they reside. Guests of such
residents shall be eligible to obtain Village guest passes to park within a tow
zone and shall not be considered unlawfully parked during the applicable period
of time for which a guest pass has been issued by the Village. Passes shall be
obtained in a form designated by the Village. (Ord. 23-38, 5-15-2023)
ARTICLE 2
BICYCLES
SECTION:
15-2-1: Definitions
15-2-2: Effect Of Bicycle Regulations
15-2-3: Traffic Laws To Apply To Persons Riding Bicycles
15-2-4: Speed Of Bicycles
15-2-5: Emerging From Alley, Driveway Or Building
15-2-6: Riding Bicycles On Sidewalks
15-2-7: Riding Bicycles On Street And Bicycle Paths
15-2-8: Clinging To Moving Vehicle
15-2-9: Carrying Articles On Bicycles
15-2-10: Parking
15-2-11: Lighted Lamps And Audible Signaling Devices On Bicycles
15-2-12: Riding On Bicycles
15-2-13: Obedience To Traffic Control Devices
15-2-14: License Required
15-2-15: License Application; Fee
15-2-16: License Issuance
15-2-17: Attachment Of License Decal
15-2-18: Inspection
15-2-19: Transfer Of Ownership
15-2-20: Serial Number
15-2-21: Buying Or Selling Bicycles
15-2-22: Rental Agencies
15-2-23: Bicycle Helmets Required
15-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section as follows:
BICYCLE: Any device propelled by human power upon which any person or persons
may ride, having two (2) or more wheels, any of which is more than sixteen
inches (16") in diameter.
MINOR: Any person who has not attained the age of seventeen (17) years.
PARENT OR GUARDIAN: Any person having legal custody of a minor who is: a) a
natural or adoptive parent; b) a legal guardian; c) a person who stands in loco
parentis; or d) a person to whom legal custody has been given by court order.
(Ord. 2013-0-68, 12-2-2013)
15-2-2: EFFECT OF BICYCLE REGULATIONS:
   A.   The regulations in this chapter applicable to bicycles shall apply
whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or public sidewalk or upon any
public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those
exceptions stated herein.
   B.   The parent or guardian of any minor shall not authorize or knowingly
permit any such minor to violate any of the provisions of this chapter
applicable to bicycles. (Ord. 2013-0-68, 12-2-2013)
15-2-3: TRAFFIC LAWS TO APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES:
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state
declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles, or by the traffic
ordinances of this Village applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to
those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no
application. (1981 Code)
15-2-4: SPEED OF BICYCLES:
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing and, in any case, not beyond the
posted speed limit. (1981 Code)
15-2-5: EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING:
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall,
upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway,
yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or
sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to
vehicles approaching on said roadway. (1981 Code)
15-2-6: RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS:
   A.   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
   B.   No person fifteen (15) or more years of age shall ride a bicycle upon
any sidewalk in any zoning district.
   C.   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk such person
shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal
before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (1981 Code)
15-2-7: RIDING BICYCLES ON STREET AND BICYCLE PATHS:
   A.   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right hand side of the roadway as practicable exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   B.   Bicycles shall not be operated upon any street where the operation of
bicycles has been prohibited, and signs have been erected indicating such
prohibition.
   C.   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride other than single
file except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
   D.   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and not use the roadway. (Ord.
2013-0-16, 2-19-2013)
15-2-8: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLE:
Any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy
vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any
roadway. (1981 Code)
15-2-9: CARRYING ARTICLES ON BICYCLES:
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which
prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. (1981
Code)
15-2-10: PARKING:
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street. Bicycles may be parked upon the
sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or at the curb in such a manner as to
afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic or against a building. (1981
Code)
15-2-11: LIGHTED LAMPS AND AUDIBLE SIGNALING DEVICES ON BICYCLES:
   A.   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a
headlamp which shall emit a white light visible from a minimum distance of five
hundred feet (500') from the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a
type approved by the Secretary of State or with a rear lamp emitting a red
light visible from a minimum distance of at least five hundred feet (500') from
the rear.
   B.   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for at least one hundred feet
(100'), except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person
use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle. (1981 Code)
   C.   Every bicycle shall be equipped with side reflectors attached to the
wheels which are visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500'). The
required colors shall be red in the rear half of the bike and amber in the
front.
   D.   Every bicycle shall be equipped with an effective brake. (Ord. 1983-0-
12, 3-21-1983)
15-2-12: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
   A.   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   B.   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped. (1981 Code)
15-2-13: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
   A.   Any person operating a bicycle shall comply with official traffic
control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.
   B.   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
turn or a turn in the opposite direction is permitted, no person operating a
bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person
dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person
shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. (1981 Code)
15-2-14: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person who resides in the Village shall ride or propel a bicycle on any
street or upon any public way within the Village unless such bicycle has been
licensed and the license decal is attached thereto as prescribed herein. (1981
Code; amd. Ord. 1983-0-12, 3-21-1983)
15-2-15: LICENSE APPLICATION; FEE:
Application for a bicycle license shall be made upon a form provided by the
Village and shall be made to the Village Clerk. A license fee of one dollar
($1.00) shall be paid to the Village before a license is granted. This license
shall be valid until such time as the ownership of the bicycle is transferred.
(1981 Code)
15-2-16: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
The Village Clerk, upon receiving the proper application and fee, upon approval
by the Chief of Police as authorized in section
15-2-18 of this article, is authorized to issue a license decal, which shall be
attached to the bicycle and an identification card as prescribed by the Police
Department, containing the name and address of the owner along with a complete
description of the bicycle which may be carried by the owner and displayed when
requested by a police officer to verify ownership of the bicycle. (1981 Code;
amd. Ord. 1983-0-12, 3-21-1983)
The Chief of Police may not approve the issuance of a license for any bicycle
when he knows or has reasonable grounds to believe the applicant is not the
owner of, or entitled to the possession of, such bicycle.
The Village Clerk shall keep a record of the number of each bicycle registered,
the name and address of the person to whom the license was issued, and the
color and serial number of the bicycle for which the license was issued. (1981
Code)
15-2-17: ATTACHMENT OF LICENSE DECAL:
Upon issuance of a bicycle license decal, which shall contain the name OAK
PARK, ILLINOIS, and a number, the licensee shall cause the same to be affixed
firmly on the front of the vertical frame between the seat and the pedal
mechanism of the bicycle for which the license is issued. (Ord. 1983-0-12, 3-
21-1983)
This license shall be permanently assigned to this bicycle and no person shall
remove this license from the bicycle, except upon transfer of ownership or in
the event the bicycle is wrecked, junked or dismantled and is no longer used
upon the streets of the Village. (1981 Code)
15-2-18: INSPECTION:
The Chief of Police may cause the inspection of any bicycle and shall refuse to
approve a license for any bicycle in an unsafe mechanical condition. (1981
Code)
15-2-19: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP:
Upon the sale of the bicycle, the license shall be removed and the Village
Clerk notified that the bicycle is no longer in the possession of the former
owner. If the new owner resides in the Village, the bicycle shall be registered
by him and a new license obtained. (1981 Code)
15-2-20: SERIAL NUMBER:
It shall be unlawful to destroy, remove, alter, cover or deface the
manufacturer's serial number on any bicycle. It shall be unlawful for any
person to own or have custody of a bicycle on which the original serial number
has been destroyed, altered, removed, covered or defaced. In the event a
bicycle has been purchased, which does not contain a manufacturer's serial
number, the Police Department shall stamp an original serial number on the
frame of the bicycle and this number shall be considered the original number.
(1981 Code)
15-2-21: BUYING OR SELLING BICYCLES:
Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling or exchanging bicycles
in the Village shall maintain for five (5) years a record containing the name,
color, type and serial number of each bicycle bought, sold or exchanged. Said
record shall further contain the name and address of each person buying,
selling or exchanging a bicycle, which record shall be open to inspection by a
representative of the Police Department during reasonable business hours. (1981
Code)
15-2-22: RENTAL AGENCIES:
A rental agency shall not rent or offer to rent any bicycle unless the bicycle
is licensed and the license decal is firmly attached as provided herein and
such bicycle is equipped with lamps and other equipment as required in this
article. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 1983-0-12, 3-21-1983)
15-2-23: BICYCLE HELMETS REQUIRED:
   A.   Helmet Required: Every person under the age of seventeen (17) years
shall wear a protective helmet meeting nationally recognized safety
requirements whenever that person is upon a public highway, sidewalk, bicycle
path or other public right of way within the corporate limits of the Village
and is riding or being carried on any bicycle or any carrier attached to or
pulled by a bicycle.
   B.   Compliance: Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary,
compliance with this section may be demonstrated by proof of possession of a
helmet that meets nationally recognized safety requirements, and solely with
respect to the first such violation, there shall be no penalty if such
compliance is so demonstrated.
   C.   Admissibility In A Civil Action: A violation of this section shall not
constitute negligence, contributory negligence, assumption of risk, be
considered in mitigation of damages of whatever nature, be admissible in
evidence, or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the
recovery of damages arising out of the operation of any bicycle, nor shall
anything in this section change any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining
to any civil action.
   D.   Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian
to knowingly or negligently permit or cause a minor under the age of seventeen
(17) years to be upon a public highway, sidewalk, bicycle path or other public
right of way within the corporate limits of the Village while riding or being
carried on any bicycle or any carrier attached to or pulled by a bicycle
without wearing a protective helmet meeting nationally recognized safety
requirements pursuant to this section.
   E.   Penalty: A violation of this section shall be punishable by a maximum
term of four (4) hours of community service or a fine not to exceed twenty five
dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 2013-0-68, 12-2-2013)
ARTICLE 3
PARKING METERS, PARKING PERMITS AND MUNICIPAL ATTENDANT PARKING LOTS
SECTION:
15-3-1: Definitions
15-3-2: Construction Of Article
15-3-3: Duty Of Director Of Public Works To Install Parking Meters And Mark Off
Parking Meter Spaces
15-3-4: Board Of Trustees To Fix Time Limitations On Parking; How Time
Limitations Indicated
15-3-5: Payment For Parking Meters And Installment Thereof
15-3-6: Where Parking Meters To Be Placed; Signal; Legend
15-3-7: Designation And Use Of Parking Meter Spaces
15-3-8: Duty Of Operator When Parking Vehicle
15-3-9: Occupation Of Parking On Or Off Street Meter Spaces Upon Deposit Of
Coins; Pay By Space; Overtime Parking
15-3-10: Defacing, Injuring, Etc., Parking Meters
15-3-11: Defrauding Parking Meters Or Coin Operated Gates
15-3-12: Duty Of Police Officers With Reference To Violations; Payment Of Fines
15-3-13: Collection And Disposition Of Parking Meter Money And Fines
15-3-14: Municipal Parking Lots And Parking Enclaves; Overtime Parking
15-3-15: Parking Enclaves
15-3-16: Overnight Parking Permits
15-3-17: Enclave Parking Reports
15-3-18: Parking Rates; Parking Meters, Pay By Space Machines, Village Operated
Parking Structures, Permit, Extended Pass, Valet And Daytime On Street Permit
Parking
15-3-19: On Street Overnight Parking Passes
15-3-20: Valet Public Parking Fees
15-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
ATTENDANT PARKING: The parking of a vehicle in a Village attendant parking lot
during those times when a Village parking lot attendant is present.
METERED PARKING: The parking of a vehicle in a parking meter zone during the
time designated on the parking meter regulating said zone.
PARKING METER: A mechanical device located in any public parking lot or upon a
public street or sidewalk in a place regularly designated as a "parking meter
zone" as defined in this section, which device shall record a certain number of
minutes by the use of a clock mechanism determining the period of time for
which parking privileges may be extended to the person so depositing a coin.
PARKING METER ZONE: A certain designated and marked off section of the public
street within the marked boundaries of which a vehicle may be temporarily
parked and allowed to remain for such period of time as the parking meter
attached thereto may indicate.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street between the regularly established curb lines.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent
property lines.
STREET: Every way set apart for public travel, except alleys.
VEHICLE: Any device by which any person or property may be transported upon a
public highway.
VEHICLE ATTENDANT PARKING LOTS: A parking lot operated by the Village for the
parking of vehicles by the general public, the use of which shall require
payment of a fee in accordance with an approved and posted fee schedule to a
Village parking lot attendant upon exiting the parking lot in a vehicle at all
times when a Village parking lot attendant is present. (Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-
2010)
15-3-2: CONSTRUCTION OF ARTICLE:
This article shall be deemed to be in addition and supplementary to and not in
conflict with nor a repeal of prior or existing ordinances of the Village, but
shall be an additional provision for the regulation of traffic and parking in
the parking meter zones created and provided for by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-2010)
15-3-3: DUTY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS TO INSTALL PARKING METERS AND MARK OFF
PARKING METER SPACES:
In parking meter zones the Director of Public Works shall cause parking meters
to be installed in such numbers and at such places as in his judgment may be
necessary for the regulation, control and inspection of the parking vehicles
therein, including the reservation of loading zones for commercial vehicles,
and shall cause parking meter spaces to be designated as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-2010)
15-3-4: BOARD OF TRUSTEES TO FIX TIME LIMITATIONS ON PARKING; HOW TIME
LIMITATIONS INDICATED:
The Board of Trustees shall fix the time limitations for legal parking in
parking meter zones and the hours during the day when the parking meters must
be used and when the time limitations shall be effective, in compliance with
the provisions of this article, and shall indicate the time limitations by
designating the same on the parking meters or by appropriate signs posted in
proximity to the meters in parking meter zones. (Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-2010)
15-3-5: PAYMENT FOR PARKING METERS AND INSTALLMENT THEREOF:
The payment for parking meters and installation thereof shall be provided for
solely from the receipts, funds and revenues obtained from the operation of
such parking meters without in any manner obligating the Village to pay for the
same from any other source. (Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-2010)
15-3-6: WHERE PARKING METERS TO BE PLACED; SIGNAL; LEGEND:
The parking meters installed in the parking meter zones as established by the
Board of Trustees shall be placed upon the curb immediately adjacent to the
individual parking places hereinafter described. Each parking meter shall be
placed or set in such a manner as to show or display by a signal that the
parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking
meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time
established by the Village. (Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-2010)
15-3-7: DESIGNATION AND USE OF PARKING METER SPACES:
The Director of Public Works shall have markings painted or placed upon the
curb and the street, either or both, adjacent to each parking meter for the
purpose of designating the parking space for which such meter is to be used.
Each vehicle parking adjacent or next to any parking meter shall park within
the lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle
across any such line or marking or to park such vehicle in such position that
the same shall not entirely fit within the area so designated by such lines or
markings. (Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-2010)
15-3-8: DUTY OF OPERATOR WHEN PARKING VEHICLE:
When any vehicle shall be parked in any space adjacent to which a parking meter
is located, in accordance with the provisions of this article, the operator of
such vehicle shall, upon entering such parking space, immediately deposit or
cause to be deposited a coin of the United States, in such parking meter, and
put such meter in operation; failure to deposit such coin and put the meter in
operation shall be unlawful. (Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-2010)
15-3-9: OCCUPATION OF PARKING ON OR OFF STREET METER SPACES UPON DEPOSIT OF
COINS; PAY BY SPACE; OVERTIME PARKING:
   A.   Upon placing a meter in operation as provided in this article or paying
by space, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle for a
period indicated thereon for the coin or coins specified.
   B.   If any such vehicle shall remain parked in such parking space beyond
the parking time limit as fixed by the payment for such meter or payment by
space for such parking space, the parking meter or pay by space machine shall,
by its dial and pointer or other applicable time measurement, indicate such
illegal parking; in that event such vehicle shall be considered parked overtime
and beyond the period of legal parking time and shall be unlawful. (Ord. 15-
197, 12-7-2015, eff. 7-1-2016)
15-3-10: DEFACING, INJURING, ETC., PARKING METERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or
wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed
under the provisions of this article. (Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-2010)
15-3-11: DEFRAUDING PARKING METERS OR COIN OPERATED GATES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any
parking meter or coin operated gate, any slug, device or metallic substitute,
or any other substitute for any coin of the United States. (Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-
15-2010)
15-3-12: DUTY OF POLICE OFFICERS WITH REFERENCE TO VIOLATIONS; PAYMENT OF
FINES:
It shall be the duty of the police officers or parking meter patrol persons of
the Village to report:
   A.   The number of each parking meter which indicated that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or has been
parking in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
   B.   The state license number of such vehicle.
   C.   The time such vehicle is parking in violation of any of the provisions
of this article.
   D.   Any other facts or knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
Each such police officer or parking patrol person shall attach to such vehicle
a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in
violation of a provision of this article. (Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-2010)
15-3-13: COLLECTION AND DISPOSITION OF PARKING METER MONEY AND FINES:
All money from parking meters and fines collected shall be deposited with the
Director of Finance; provided, however, that a separate fund to be known as the
parking meter fund shall be maintained at all times for the accurate recording
of such money and fines so deposited. (Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-2010)
15-3-14: MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS AND PARKING ENCLAVES; OVERTIME PARKING:
No person shall park in any parking space in any municipally owned garage,
parking lot or parking enclave beyond parking limits established by the Board
of Trustees, or if equipped with meters, beyond the parking time limits fixed
by the coins deposited in the meter for the parking space. The provisions of
sections
15-3-8 through
15-3-11 of this article relating to parking meters shall apply to this section.
(Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-2010)
15-3-15: PARKING ENCLAVES:
The Board of Trustees may establish all night permit parking enclaves within
the dedicated right of way of public streets, provided said enclaves meet the
following criteria:
   A.   Curb cut and cul-de-sac parking enclaves must be separate from the
physical flow of normal street traffic. Enclaves will also be permitted where
adjacent to the Chicago and Northwestern or Eisenhower Expressway embankments,
as parking in these unique areas does not affect street cleaning or leaf and
snow removal to as great an extent as normally traveled street areas.
   B.   The proposed parking enclave will not have a substantial negative
impact on police protection.
   C.   The area must be in or adjacent to areas having the severest parking
space shortages in the Village.
   D.   Curb cut parking enclaves shall not be permitted if there is a
substantially negative effect on grassed parkways.
All night parking shall be permitted in parking enclaves only on monthly permit
basis. Each vehicle shall be identified with a parking sticker to facilitate
police identification and protection. (Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-2010)
15-3-16: OVERNIGHT PARKING PERMITS:
All night permit parking from six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. shall be permitted in parking enclaves, except that the permit parking
hours at a given enclave location may be varied by resolution of the President
and Board of Trustees, based upon the unique parking needs of the area. Permits
shall be issued only to persons residing within four (4) blocks of the parking
area designated, with a priority to those residing closest to the parking
spaces. A permit sticker shall be issued by the Village to be affixed to the
rear window of the vehicle. (Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-2010)
15-3-17: ENCLAVE PARKING REPORTS:
The Chief of Police and the Director of Public Works shall report annually to
the Board of Trustees on or about July 1 regarding the effect of the
establishment of parking enclaves on police protection, street cleaning, and
leaf and snow removal. The continuation or addition of parking enclaves shall
be reviewed by the Board of Trustees after the receipt of the annual report.
(Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-2010)
15-3-18: PARKING RATES; PARKING METERS, PAY BY SPACE MACHINES, VILLAGE OPERATED
PARKING STRUCTURES, PERMIT, EXTENDED PASS, VALET AND DAYTIME ON STREET PERMIT
PARKING:
Persons parking vehicles in Village owned and/or operated parking spaces
designated by the Village for use by the general public as metered pay by
plate, Village operated parking structures, permit parking, overnight pass
parking shall pay a fee to the Village in accordance with the following rate
schedule:
   A.   High Parking Demand Area: Pay by plate machine and parking meter rates
for all persons in the high parking demand area from and including Harlem on
the west to and including Euclid on the east and from and including Ontario
(from Harlem to Kenilworth) and Lake Street (from Kenilworth to Euclid) on the
north to and including the north side of North Boulevard on the south and
excluding from the high parking demand area all commuter areas set forth in
subsection
15-3-18C of this section and depicted on the map hereinafter set forth as map
exhibit 1 on file with the Village except the following locations:
      Marion Street south of South Boulevard
      Pleasant Street, between south Marion Street and the north-south alley
east of Marion Street
      Pleasant Street, between south Marion Street and the north-south alley
west of Marion Street
   All pay by plate machines: The fee shall be fifty cents ($0.50) for each
fifteen (15) minutes of parking for the first three (3) hours after which the
fee shall be one dollar and fifty cents for each fifteen (15) minutes of
parking.
      2.   All pay by plate and metered parking shall be free of charge for up
to two (2) hours at pay by plate and metered parking spaces from Ontario Street
on the north to Pleasant Street on the south, including south Marion Street, to
Harlem Avenue on the west to Euclid Avenue on the east, on the following dates:
      July 4
      The day after Thanksgiving Day
      Every Saturday that falls after Thanksgiving Day and prior to December 25
   Unless otherwise set forth in this section, the rate for each pay by plate
machine and parking meter shall be the rate set forth on the face of the
machine and/or meter as previously approved by the Village Board.
   B.   Medium Parking Demand Areas: Pay by plate machine and parking meter
rates in the medium parking demand areas as depicted on the map hereinafter set
forth as map exhibit 1, on file with the Village, and described as follows:
   Area 1: Harlem on the west to and including Euclid on the east and from
Paulina (from Harlem to Marion) and Chicago (from Marion to Euclid) on the
north, to the north side of Ontario (from Harlem to Forest) and the north side
of Lake (from Kenilworth to Euclid) on the south.
   Area 2: Harlem on the west to and including East on the east and from South
Boulevard on the north to and including Madison on the south.
   Area 3: Euclid on the west to and including Cuyler on the east to and
including Lake on the north to North Boulevard on the south.
   Area 4: Lombard on the west to and including Austin on the east and from
Washington on the north to Adams on the south.
   Area 5: Grove on the west to and including Wesley on the east, and from Van
Buren on the north to and including Lexington on the south.
   Area 6: Highland on the west to and including Lombard on the east and from
Van Buren on the north to and including Flournoy on the south.
   Area 7:
   Area 8:
      1.   All pay by plate machines: The fee shall be twenty five cents
($0.25) for each fifteen (15) minutes of parking for the first three (3) hours
after which the fee shall be seventy five cents ($0.75) for each fifteen (15)
minutes of parking.
      2.   All parking meters: The fee shall be twenty-five cents ($0.25) for
each fifteen (15) minutes of parking.
      3.   All pay by plate and metered parking shall be free of charge for up
to two (2) hours at pay by plate and metered parking spaces from Van Buren
Street on the north to Lexington Street on the south to Grove Avenue on the
west to Euclid Avenue on the east on the following dates:
      July 4
      The day after Thanksgiving Day
      Every Saturday that falls after Thanksgiving Day and prior to December 25
   Unless otherwise set forth in this section, the rate for each pay by plate
machine and parking meter shall be the rate set forth on the face of the
machine and/or meter as previously approved by the Village Board.
   C.   Pay By Plate Machine And Parking Meter Rates In Commuter Areas From
Euclid On The West To Austin On The East And Including North Boulevard On The
North To And Including South Boulevard On The South, As Depicted On The Map
Hereinafter Set Forth As Map Exhibit 1 On File With The Village:
      1.   The fee shall be twenty five cents ($0.25) for each fifteen (15)
minutes of parking.
   D.   Pay By Plate Machine And Parking Meter Rates In All Areas Of The
Village Not Within The High Or Medium Parking Demand Or Commuter Areas
Designated In Subsections 15-3-18A, B And C Of This Section:
      1.   All pay by plate machines: The fee shall be twenty-five cents
($0.25) for each fifteen (15) minutes of parking.
      2.   All parking meters: The fee shall be twenty-five cents ($0.25) for
each fifteen (15) minutes of parking.
   Unless otherwise set forth in this section, the rate for each parking meter
shall be the rate set forth on the face of the meter as previously approved by
the Village Board.
   E.   Oak Park Business Employee Discount Parking At Village Designated
Public Parking Locations:
      1.   Employers of full and part time employees who work within Oak Park
may purchase from the Village a discount parking reduced fee card in designated
public parking locations for their employees.
      2.   Employers may purchase a reduced fee card for each of their
employees by providing the full name, work status (full or part time), hourly
rate of pay and vehicle identification, registration, make and model
information to the Village.
      3.   Each quarterly reduced fee card shall cost three dollars ($3.00).
      4.   Reduced fee cards shall be sold to Oak Park employers for the
benefit of their employees who work in Oak Park and earn an hourly wage of
twenty dollars ($20.00) per hour or less on a first come, first served basis.
Reduced fee cards shall be sold on a quarterly basis and may be purchased by
employers between the fifteenth day of the month preceding the start of the
quarter and the fifth day of the first month of said quarter and the fifth of
the following month on a first come, first serve basis. Once purchased reduced
fee cards are nonrefundable.
      5.   If it is determined that either an employer or their employee has
used a reduced fee card in a manner inconsistent with this section, the
employer shall be prohibited from purchasing employee discount parking.
      6.   Employee parking shall be available in the following lots:
         a.   Two hundred (200) spaces at the Holley Court Garage at 1125
Ontario, roof level only.
         b.   One hundred and fifty (150) spaces at the Avenue Garage at 720
North Boulevard, roof level only.
      7.   The Development Customer Services Director shall establish the
actual number of reduced fee cards that may be sold per quarter based upon
utilization.
      8.   The fee schedule for the Oak Park Business Employee Discount Parking
at the Holley Court and The Avenue garages is as follows:
 
Holley Court & The Avenue Garages
Hours    Price
0 to 1.5 FREE
1.5 to 6 $2
6 to 12  $3
12+      Daily Rates
 
   F.   Village Operated Multilevel Parking Structures Parking Rates (Except
For The Oak Park River Forest High School Parking Structure and The Avenue
Garage): The fee for parking in Village operated multilevel parking structures
other than by meter or permit (except for the Oak Park River Forest High School
parking structure and The Avenue Garage) on Monday through Saturday shall be as
follows:
Duration Parking Fee
Duration         Parking Fee
0 to 1 hour      Free
1 to 2.5 hours   $ 2.00
2.5 to 3.5 hours 3.00
3.5 to 4.5 hours 4.00
4.5 to 5.5 hours 5.00
5.5 to 6.5 hours 6.00
6.5 to 10 hours  11.00
10 to 24 hours   16.00
 
   The fee for parking in the Avenue Garage on Monday through Saturday
beginning March 1, 2026 through November 30, 2026 shall be as follows:
Duration Parking Fee
Duration         Parking Fee
0 to 1.5 hours   Free
1.5 to 2.5 hours $ 2.00
2.5 to 3.5 hours 3.00
3.5 to 4.5 hours 4.00
4.5 to 5.5 hours 5.00
5.5 to 6.5 hours 6.00
6.5 to 10 hours  11.00
10 to 24 hours   16.00
 
   Garage fees shall be inclusive of any applicable tax that the Village is
required to collect and remit. Parking in all Village operated multilevel
parking structures (except for the Oak Park River Forest High School parking
structure) shall be free of charge on the following dates:
      July 4
      The day after Thanksgiving Day
      Every Saturday that falls after Thanksgiving Day and prior to December 25
   G.   Oak Park River Forest High School Parking Structure: The fee for
parking in Village operated multilevel parking structures known as the Oak Park
River Forest High School shall be fifty cents ($0.50) per hour during times
designated as public parking. The hourly parking fee shall be eliminated during
times that the parking structure is reserved for Friday evening football
parking established by special use permit. Public parking in the Oak Park River
Forest High School shall be free during farmers' market Saturdays.
   H.   High Volume Business Parking Validation Program:
      1.   High Volume Business Parking Validation Program; Authorized For
Holley Court Multilevel Parking Structure:
         a.   Businesses patronized by customers on a high volume, short
duration daily basis, shall be eligible for participation in the Village
Parking Validation Program.
         b.   Businesses which are patronized by more than four thousand
(4,000) customers per week for an average of at least one and one-half (11/2)
hours per visit shall be eligible for participation in the Village's High
Volume Business Parking Validation Program ("program").
         c.   Participation in the program shall provide the participating
business with the ability to offer its customers up to one hour of free parking
in the Holley Court multilevel parking structure in addition to the one free
hour of parking already provided by the Village to all members of the public
who park in the structure.
         d.   The participating business shall acquire at its own cost the
specific ticket validation machine authorized by the Village as compatible with
Village equipment and update and/or replace same as required by Village.
            (1)   The machine shall be encoded by the Village with a code which
will identify the participating business on each parking ticket validated by
the machine; and
            (2)   The machine shall be programmed by the Village to provide
each validated ticket with one hour of free parking in addition to the first
hour of free parking provided by the Village to all members of the public who
park in the structure.
               (A)   The Village shall charge the participating business a fee
of fifty cents ($0.50) per one hour of free parking authorized by each
validated parking ticket.
               (B)   The validation machine shall be maintained on the premises
of the participating business and shall be used by the business to validate the
parking tickets provided by the Holley Court parking structure system to the
business' customers.
               (C)   At the time a business enters the program, the Village
shall estimate the number of customer parking tickets in the Holley Court
multilevel parking structure which shall be validated by that business each
month and shall multiply that number by fifty cents ($0.50) and shall bill that
total amount to the business fifteen (15) days prior to the first of each month
for which ticket validation is provided for the first six (6) months the
business is in the program.
               (D)   The participating business shall provide the Village with
full payment of the monthly bill within fifteen (15) days of receipt of same.
               (E)   At the end of the first six (6) months of each business'
participation in the Validation Program and each six (6) months thereafter, the
Village shall determine the actual average number of business customers
participating in the Validation Program and shall multiply that number by fifty
cents ($0.50) and shall bill the business on a monthly basis at the newly
established rate for the subsequent six (6) month period.
               (F)   The participating business shall provide ticket validation
to its customers only.
               (G)   The participating business shall cooperate fully with the
Village in providing the Village with access to the validation machine and
customer attendance records as the Village deems necessary for the Village to
effectively administer the program.
               (H)   The Village shall provide the participating business upon
request with the calculation upon which the new billing is based and copies of
the record information upon which such calculation is based.
               (I)   In the event that a participating business violates the
terms and conditions of the Validation Program, the Village reserves the right
to suspend or terminate the business' participation in the program upon giving
the business at least ten (10) days' prior written notice of said violation(s)
and an opportunity to respond to or correct same before suspending or
terminating same.
   I.   Village Operated Surface Parking Lot, Parking Garage And Public Way
Parking Enclave Permit Parking Rates:
      1.   Village Operated Surface Parking Lots: Parking in Village operated
surface parking lots shall only be permitted in pay by plate parking spaces,
metered parking spaces, by permit, in designated parking spaces. Such lots may
operate exclusively as pay by plate or metered parking lots or exclusively as
permit parking only lots or may operate with a combination of pay by plate,
metered, and permit parking spaces.
   No overnight parking shall be permitted in Village operated surface parking
lots without a Village issued overnight parking permit.
      2.   Village Operated Parking Garage Monthly Permit Parking Rates:
Parking permits allowing for twenty four (24) hour parking in the Holley Court
and Avenue multilevel parking structures shall be sold for one hundred fifty-
seven dollars ($157.00) per vehicle, per month.
      3.   Village Operated Multilevel Parking Structure, Parking Lot And
Enclave Public Way Parking Quarterly Permit Parking Rates: Parking permits
allowing for twenty four (24) hour, daytime and overnight parking in Village-
operated multilevel parking structures, permit lots, and public way permit
parking enclaves shall be sold at the following rates:
         a.   High Demand Area Permit Parking Lots And Public Way Enclaves: In
Village-operated permit parking lots, and public way permit parking enclaves
located within the high parking demand area as designated in subsection 15-3-
18A of this section, rates shall be as follows:
            (1)   Resident Rates:
               (A)   Twenty four (24) hour a day permit parking: Two hundred
fifty seven dollars ($257.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (B)   Daytime permit parking only: Two hundred twenty seven
dollars ($227.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (C)   Overnight permit parking only: One hundred seventy seven
dollars ($177.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
            (2)   Nonresident Rates:
               (A)   Twenty four (24) hour a day permit parking: Three hundred
thirty two dollars ($332.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (B)   Daytime permit parking only: Two hundred eighty two
dollars ($282.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (C)   Overnight permit parking only: One hundred ninety seven
dollars ($197.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
            (3)   Corporate Rates: Corporate rates shall only apply to a
licensed business located in the Village of Oak Park which has made application
to the Village and been designated as a corporate account for the purposes of
quarterly parking permits and purchases a minimum of five (5) quarterly
permits, per quarter.
               (A)   Twenty four (24) hour a day permit parking: Two hundred
fifty seven dollars ($257.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (B)   Daytime permit parking only: Two hundred twenty seven
dollars ($227.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (C)   Overnight permit parking only: One hundred seventy seven
dollars ($177.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
         b.   High Demand Area Multilevel Parking Structures: In Village-
operated multilevel parking structures located within the high parking demand
area as designated in subsection
15-3-18A of this section, rates shall be as follows:
            (1)   Rates effective April 1, 2023:
               (A)   Twenty four (24) hour a day permit parking: Two hundred
ninety-two dollars ($292.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (B)   Daytime permit parking only: Two hundred sixty-two dollars
($262.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (C)   Overnight permit parking only: Two hundred and twelve
dollars ($212.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
         c.   Permit Parking Lots And Public Way Enclaves Outside High Demand
Areas: In all Village-operated permit lots, and public way permit parking
enclaves located outside the high demand parking area designated in subsection
15-3-18A of this section, the rates shall be as follows:
            (1)   Resident Rates:
               (A)   Twenty four (24) hour a day permit parking: Two hundred
twenty two dollars ($222.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (B)   Daytime permit parking only: One hundred eighty seven
dollars ($187.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (C)   Overnight permit parking only: One hundred fifty two
dollars ($152.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
            (2)   Nonresident Rates:
               (A)   Twenty four (24) hour a day permit parking: Two hundred
eighty two dollars ($282.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (B)   Daytime permit parking only: Two hundred thirty seven
dollars ($237.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (C)   Overnight permit parking only: One hundred ninety two
dollars ($192.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
            (3)   Corporate Rates: Corporate rates shall only apply to a
licensed business located in the Village of Oak Park which has made application
to the Village and been designated as a corporate account for the purposes of
quarterly parking permits and purchases a minimum of five (5) quarterly
permits, per quarter.
               (A)   Twenty four (24) hour a day permit parking: Two hundred
twenty two dollars ($222.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (B)   Daytime permit parking only: One hundred eighty seven
dollars ($187.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (C)   Overnight permit parking only: One hundred fifty two
dollars ($152.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
         d.   Multilevel Parking Structures Outside High Demand Area: In all
Village-operated multilevel parking structures located outside the high demand
parking area set forth in subsection 15-3-18A of this section, the rates shall
be as follows:
            (1)   Resident Rates:
               (A)   Twenty four (24) hour a day permit parking: Two hundred
thirty two dollars ($232.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (B)   Daytime permit parking only: One hundred ninety seven
dollars ($197.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (C)   Overnight permit parking only: One hundred sixty two
dollars ($162.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
            (2)   Nonresident Rates:
               (A)   Twenty four (24) hour a day permit parking: Two hundred
ninety two dollars ($292.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (B)   Daytime permit parking only: Two hundred forty seven
dollars ($247.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (C)   Overnight permit parking only: Two hundred two dollars
($202.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
            (3)   Corporate Rates: Corporate rates shall only apply to a
licensed business located in the Village of Oak Park which has made application
to the Village and been designated as a corporate account for the purposes of
quarterly parking permits and purchases a minimum of five (5) quarterly
permits, per quarter.
               (A)   Twenty four (24) hour a day permit parking: Two hundred
thirty two dollars ($232.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (B)   Daytime permit parking only: One hundred ninety seven
dollars ($197.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (C)   Overnight permit parking only: One hundred sixty two
dollars ($162.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
         e.   Commuter Areas: Commuter lot permit fees for commuter permit
parking in areas defined in subsection
15-3-18C of this section.
            (1)   Resident Rates:
               (A)   Twenty four (24) hour a day permit parking: Two hundred
twenty seven dollars ($227.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (B)   Daytime permit parking only: Two hundred seventeen dollars
($217.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (C)   Overnight permit parking only: One hundred fifty two
dollars ($152.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
            (2)   Nonresident Rates:
               (A)   Twenty four (24) hour a day permit parking: Two hundred
eighty seven dollars ($287.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (B)   Daytime permit parking only: Two hundred seventy two
dollars ($272.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (C)   Overnight permit parking only: One hundred ninety two
dollars ($192.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
            (3)   Corporate Rates: Corporate rates shall only apply to a
licensed business located in the Village of Oak Park which has made application
to the Village and been designated as a corporate account for the purposes of
quarterly parking permits and purchases a minimum of five (5) quarterly
permits, per quarter.
               (A)   Twenty four (24) hour a day permit parking: Two hundred
twenty seven dollars ($227.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (B)   Daytime permit parking only: Two hundred seventeen dollars
($217.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
               (C)   Overnight permit parking only: One hundred fifty two
dollars ($152.00) per vehicle, per quarter.
   J.   Daytime On Street Permit Parking Fee: Permit fees for all daytime on-
street parking permits, other than parking permits for the disabled, issued for
all daytime on-street permit parking areas authorized by ordinance of the
President of the Board of Trustees shall be as follows:
   Handicapped permits: Ten dollars ($10.00) per year.
   Resident permits: Seventy four dollars ($74.00) per year.
   Guest day passes; books of twenty (20): Five dollars ($5.00) per book.
   Business Residential Parking Permit Program: Any business that provides
services to residences in the Village shall be eligible for an annual business
daytime on-street permit at a rate of one hundred twenty four dollars ($124.00)
per year for a business licensed by the Village and at a rate of one hundred
fifty five dollars ($155.00) for a business not licensed by the Village that
may be used for up to five (5) vehicles, which includes business vehicles or
private vehicles used by employees of the business. Said permit shall override
all of the Village’s street time limit restrictions except prohibited parking
hours of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. to nine o’clock (9:00) A.M. or four o’clock
(4:00) P.M. to six o’clock (6:00) P.M., but shall not override any Village
street cleaning restrictions, any Village safety-related restrictions, such as
“no parking anytime” or parking within a prohibited area because of a fire
hydrant, or the Village’s overnight parking prohibition. Said permits shall not
be eligible for use in Village metered spaces, permit parking only spaces, or
in a drop-off zone for persons with disabilities.
   Employee permits where authorized by ordinance: One hundred twenty four
dollars ($124.00) per year.
   Student permits:
      If the Village administers permit sales:
         Residents: Two hundred forty dollars ($240.00) per year.
         Nonresidents: Three hundred twenty dollars ($320.00) per year.
      The daytime permit parking rate for all students shall be two hundred
forty dollars ($240.00) per year if the school attended by the students
purchases all student parking permits for students at that school for the full
year prior to August 31 annually and the school agrees to administer the
distribution of all such permits subject to the review of the Parking Services
Manager.
      Permits may be issued on a monthly or quarterly basis for an equivalent
portion of the annual fee subject to the Village's discretion.
      Fees which are not expended to cover the costs of administering the
daytime, on street, permit parking program shall be deposited in a fund
entitled the "Daytime Off Street Parking Fund", which shall be used exclusively
for the provision of additional daytime, off street parking.
   Any conflict between the provisions of this subsection and any other
ordinance establishing daytime on street permit parking in a specific area
within the Village shall be resolved in favor of the other ordinance.
   K.   On Street Overnight Permit Parking Fee In R-7 Zoned Districts:
      1.   One hundred thirty seven dollars ($137.00) per quarter for "high
demand areas", defined, for purposes of this subsection 15-3-18K, as parking
zones established by the Village Board that are more than eighty percent (80%)
full for four (4) consecutive quarters.
      2.   One hundred twenty seven dollars ($127.00) per quarter for "medium
demand areas", defined for purposes of this subsection 15-3-18K as parking
zones established by the Village Board that are between twenty percent (20%)
and eighty percent (80%) full for four (4) consecutive quarters.
      3.   One hundred seventeen dollars ($117.00) per quarter for "low demand
areas", defined, for purposes of this subsection 15-3-18K, as parking zones
established by the Village Board that are less than twenty percent (20%) full
for four (4) consecutive quarters.
   Any conflict between the provisions of this subsection and any other
ordinance establishing on-street overnight permit parking in R-7 Zoned
Districts within the Village shall be resolved in favor of this subsection.
   L.   Overnight Parking Pass Fees In Off Street Public Parking Lots:
Overnight passes are available to fulfill the short term needs of residents and
their guests in the following off street public parking lots between the hours
designated below seven (7) days per week when a valid one day permit is
purchased in the manner established below and displayed:
 
Overnight parking lots (utilize pay by space technology); $5.00 per night
from 6:00 P.M. to 8:00 A.M.:
  Lot Description
 9   North Boulevard, east of Harlem Avenue at 1118 North Boulevard
 108 South Boulevard, east of Harlem Avenue at 331 N. Harlem Avenue
 118 Holley Court west of Marion Street at 1106 Holley Court
 
Overnight parking lots (require voucher purchased at Village Hall in
advance); $5.00 per night from 8:00 P.M. to 8:00 A.M.:
 Lot Description
Overnight parking lots (require voucher purchased at Village Hall in
advance); $5.00 per night from 8:00 P.M. to 8:00 A.M.:
  Lot  Description
 7    Chicago Avenue, east of Harlem Avenue at 1124 Chicago Avenue
 11   Fifth Third Bank drive-through facility at 726 Wesley Avenue
       OPRF High School garage at 137 N. Scoville Avenue (garage must be
 19   vacated by 6:00 A.M. Monday through Friday during the OPRF High School
       year which is generally from August 15 to June 15)
 47   Village Hall at 123 Madison Street
 53   Rehm Pool at 515 Garfield Street
 93   Harrison Street Bible Church at 901 S. Taylor Avenue
 99   Public Way Enclave off Humphrey Avenue at 1236 N. Humphrey
 116  Madison east of Oak Park Avenue at 710 Madison
 SB2  Public Way Enclave - north side of South Boulevard, Harvey Avenue to
       Cuyler Avenue
 SB6E Public Way Enclave - north side of South Boulevard, Wesley Avenue to
       Euclid Avenue
 SB10 Public Way Enclave - north side of South Boulevard, Home Avenue east
       toward meters
 
 
Parking garages; $15.00 for each 24 hour period:
  Lot Description
 2   Avenue parking garage, 720 North Boulevard
 18  Holley Court garage, 1125 Ontario
 
   M.   Valet Permit Parking: Current valet parking license holders may apply
for valet parking permits in Village operated parking structures or lots
designated by the Village as available for valet parking.
      1.   The Village valet parking permit shall be in the form of a laminated
placard which may be transferred from valet parked vehicle to valet parked
vehicle.
      2.   The valet parking placard shall be displayed on the dashboard of the
valet parked vehicle at the location authorized by the valet permit.
      3.   The valet placard shall be eight and one-half inches by eleven
inches (81/2" x 11") in size and shall contain the name and current valet
license number of the business, the beginning and end dates of the quarter to
which it applies and the number of the lot in which valet permit parking has
been authorized.
      4.   The valet parking placard shall only authorize valet permit parking
on Thursday through Saturday evenings between six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. during the quarter and in the lot designated by the
placard.
      5.   Valet parking permits shall only be issued to current valet license
holders and shall only be issued as the Village determines space is available
for same in a given Village operated parking structure or lot.
      6.   The Village shall charge a fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) per
quarter per valet parking placard.
      7.   Valet parking permit placards shall be sold on a first come, first
served basis although the Village may limit the number of valet permits per
valet parking license holder based upon the number of valet parking license
holders applying for valet parking permit placards in a given parking structure
or lot and the number of spaces available for same in a given structure or lot.
   N.   Reduced Parking Permit Fee Program: For permits to be issued on or
after April 1, 2023, eligible parking permit applicants shall be entitled to
pay a reduced fee as follows:
      1.   The registered owner of a vehicle for which a parking permit is
sought must be a current participant in the Oak Park Housing Authority’s
housing choice voucher program or a current resident or employee at one of the
following affordable housing locations in the Village:
         a.   Heritage House (201 Lake Street);
         b.   The 801 (801 Van Buren Street);
         c.   Grove Apartments (442 S. Grove Avenue);
         d.   The Oaks (114 S. Humphrey Avenue);
         e.   Farrelly-Muriello Apartments (435 S. Humphrey Avenue);
         f.   Mills Park Tower (1025 Pleasant Place);
         g.   The Wright Inn (211 N. Oak Park Avenue); and
         h.    An unhoused person residing at an emergency shelter location in
the Village and employees of an emergency shelter location in the Village. For
purposes of this section, an emergency shelter location is defined as a
building where persons are provided overnight sleeping accommodations for a
period not-to-exceed twelve (12) consecutive hours at a time.
      2.   The applicant must apply by submitting a form approved by the
Village’s Development Customer Services Director or the Director’s designee.
      3.   Reduced fee parking permits are subject to available spaces.
      4.   The reduced fee parking permit fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00)
per quarter for each eligible vehicle.
      5.   No fee shall be charged for those persons who meet the eligibility
requirements set forth in subsections (g) and (h) above.
   O.   Electric Vehicle Charging Station User Fee:
      1.   A fee of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per kilowatt-hour (kWh) of energy
dispensed shall be paid by a user of any of the Village's publicly-accessible
electric vehicle charging stations.
      2.   The user shall be responsible for payment of any applicable
convenience, transaction, processing or taxes that are assessed on the
transaction.
      3.   The Village shall determine the software and hardware by which the
fee is collected.
   P.   All parking charges herein shall be subject to any additional
applicable taxes unless otherwise set forth above. (Ord. 2010-0-74, 11-15-2010;
amd. Ord. 2011-0-67, 11-7-2011, eff. 12-1-2011; Ord. 2014-0-87, 11-17-2014,
eff. 1-1-2015; Ord. 15-195, 11-16-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; Ord. 16-055, 5-2-2016;
Ord. 18-340, 2-5-2018; Ord. 18-402, 9-17-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; Ord. 18-434, 10-
15-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; Ord. 19-121, 11-25-2019; Ord. 20-032, 4-6-2020; Ord.
20-059, 7-6-2020; Ord. 22-54, 8-1-2022; Ord. 22-86, 11-21-2022; Ord. 23-22, 3-
20-2023; Ord. 23-118, 12-4-2023; Ord. 24-124, 6-18-2024; Ord. 24-128, 7-9-2024;
Ord. 24-104, 2-4-2025; Ord. 25-134, 3-18-2025)
15-3-19: ON STREET OVERNIGHT PARKING PASSES:
Overnight parking shall be permitted pursuant to passes issued by the Village
for an individual vehicle under the following conditions:
   A.   The applicable vehicle shall be parked on a residential street not
designated as a snow route pursuant to section
15-1-23 of this chapter or in on street overnight parking permit zone pursuant
to subsection
15-3-18K of this article.
   B.   The first three (3) passes shall be issued by the Village at no charge
on a monthly basis.
   C.   An additional seven (7) passes shall be issued by the Village at the
rate of seven dollars ($7.00) for each pass on a monthly basis from November 1
to March 31. An additional twelve (12) passes shall be issued by the Village at
the rate of seven dollars ($7.00) for each pass on a monthly basis from April 1
to October 31. No additional passes shall be issued for the same vehicle during
an applicable month. (Ord. 2013-0-79, 12-9-2013, eff. 3-1-2014; amd. Ord. 21-
25, 2-22-2021)
15-3-20: VALET PUBLIC PARKING FEES:
When the Village offers a valet public parking service by which the Village or
a contractor of the Village receives, takes temporary custody of, drives,
moves, parks or stores any vehicle that is left at one location to be driven to
another location for parking, the Village shall charge the following fees:
   A.   For zero (0) to three (3) parking hours, the fee shall be five dollars
($5.00), which shall include any applicable taxes; and
   B.   For three (3) to ten (10) parking hours, the fee shall be twelve
dollars ($12.00), which shall include any applicable taxes. (Ord. 2014-0-48, 8-
4-2014)
ARTICLE 4
VEHICLE LICENSES
SECTION:
15-4-1: License; Required
15-4-2: License; Application, Contents, Etc.
15-4-3: Fees Generally
15-4-4: Fees; Exemptions To Members Of Armed Forces
15-4-5: Fees; Exemptions To School, Religious Or Eleemosynary Institution
Vehicles
15-4-6: Truck Classifications
15-4-7: License; Exemptions From Time Limited Parking And Commuter Restriction
Parking Zones
15-4-8: License; Exemption For Unhoused Persons Residing At An Emergency
Shelter Location And Employees Of Emergency Shelter Locations
15-4-1: LICENSE; REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any resident of the Village to own or lease a vehicle,
or for any person to use in the Village a vehicle owned or leased by a resident
of the Village, or for a nonresident to own or lease a vehicle which has the
Village as its situs or base, unless the owner of such vehicle is licensed by
the Village for the current year, by July 15 of that year, as provided herein
to use the same.
For the purpose of this section the term "resident of the Village" shall
include a corporation or any business entity having its principal place of
business in the Village.
For purposes of this section the term "vehicle" shall include every vehicle
which is self-propelled. Dealer vehicle licenses may only be used on vehicles
equipped with dealer license plates issued by the state. A Village vehicle
license shall be valid only for the vehicle for which it was originally issued.
Upon conveyance of title to a vehicle for which a vehicle license was
originally issued and the acquisition of a replacement vehicle, a transfer
vehicle license sticker may be obtained upon payment of the fee set forth in
section
15-4-3 of this article.
All licenses required by this article shall expire on July 14 of the year
following that in which they are issued, and the fee to be paid shall be the
full annual rate for that year; provided, however, that if such vehicle has
been purchased or otherwise acquired by the applicant or the applicant becomes
a resident of the Village after December 31 of the year for which a license is
applied for, the fee to be paid for the remainder of the license year shall be
an amount equal to one-half (1/2) of the annual license fee, but the applicant
shall be entitled to such reduced fee only upon submission to the Director of
the Development Customer Services Department or the Director’s designee of
satisfactory evidence that the vehicle was purchased or otherwise acquired on
or after December 31. (Ord. 2012-0-04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 23-23, 3-20-2023)
15-4-2: LICENSE; APPLICATION, CONTENTS, ETC.:
Any person desiring a license for any automobile or other vehicle shall prepare
an application upon a form provided by the Director of the Development Customer
Services or the Director’s designee,, setting forth the name and address of the
applicant, a description of the vehicle for which the license is desired, its
state license number, if any, and the place where such automobile or vehicle is
to be kept when not in use and such other information as may be prescribed.
Such application shall be transmitted to the Director of the Development
Customer Services Department or the Director’s designee, and upon payment by
the applicant of the license fee set forth below, the Director of the
Development Customer Services Department or the Director’s designee shall issue
a license which shall authorize the use of such vehicle within the Village
until the expiration of such license. It shall be unlawful for any person to
furnish false information on an application for a vehicle license. (Ord. 2010-
0-69, 11-1-2010; amd. Ord. 23-23, 3-20-2023)
15-4-3: FEES GENERALLY:
The license fees to be paid annually to the Village pursuant to this article
shall be as follows:
License Type Rate In Person       Renewal Rate In Person Or By Mail Or Online
             Or By Mail Or Online After July 14
License Type                  Rate In Person       Renewal Rate In Person Or By
                              Or By Mail Or Online Mail Or Online After July 14
Passenger cars:               $ 74.00              $ 94.00
 Same, owned by persons 65   43.00                63.00
  years of age or older
  Same, owned by handicapped
  persons possessing a
 current State of Illinois   43.00                63.00
  handicapped vehicle
  registration or placard
Recreation vehicles           74.00                94.00
Antique vehicles (State of
Illinois vehicle registration 21.00                41.00
showing AV status required)
Motorcycles                   42.00                62.00
Motorized pedal cycles        34.00                54.00
(mopeds)
Buses                         64.00                84.00
Dealer plate vehicles         40.00                60.00
Duplicate licenses (original  5.00                 5.00
receipt required)
License transfer fees (with
original sticker receipt and  5.00                 5.00
bill of sale required)
Truck Class B                 86.00                106.00
Truck Class D                 112.00               132.00
Truck Class F                 134.00               154.00
Truck Class H                 156.00               176.00
Truck Class J                 172.00               192.00
Truck Class K                 183.00               203.00
Truck Class L                 214.00               234.00
Disabled veteran              0.00                 0.00
Charity vehicle               0.00                 0.00
Active duty United States     0.00                 0.00
armed forces - limit 1
 
Current Village licenses must be displayed by July 15. The rates set forth
above shall be effective for the 2019-20 license year and thereafter and the
prior rates shall be in effect through April 1, 2019.
One-half (1/2) year fees are allowed with evidence of vehicle acquisition or
new residency on or after January 1 if paid within thirty (30) days of vehicle
acquisition or establishing new residency. If not paid within said thirty (30)
day period, the vehicle license applicant shall pay the difference in rates set
forth above for purchases after July 14.
The Director of the Development Customer Services Department or the Director’s
designee is authorized to waive the imposition of the difference in rates set
forth above for purchases after July 14 for those vehicle license applicants
who are able to reasonably demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director of
the Development Customer Services Department or the Director’s designee, that
the applicant's late purchase of an annual vehicle license is due to
circumstances beyond the applicant's control. Lack of funds to acquire an
annual license shall not be considered to be a circumstance beyond one's
control. "Circumstances beyond the applicant's control" shall include, but
shall not be limited to: filing of vehicle license application within thirty
(30) days of the acquisition of a new vehicle; filing the vehicle license
application within thirty (30) days of becoming a new resident of the Village;
or the death of an immediate family member of the applicant or serious illness
or injury to the applicant or another immediate family member in close
proximity to the annual vehicle license due date which prevented the applicant
from obtaining the annual vehicle license in a timely manner. (Ord. 18-402, 9-
17-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; amd. Ord. 23-23, 5-20-2023)
15-4-4: FEES; EXEMPTIONS TO MEMBERS OF ARMED FORCES:
Members of the United States Army, Navy, Coast Guard, Air Force, Marine Corps
and National Guard engaged in military service thereof who are detained on
official duty in the State shall not be required by the Director of the
Development Customer Services Department or the Director’s designee to pay the
Vehicle Tax license fee provided for in section 15-4-3 of this article, nor
shall disabled veterans of the United States Army, Navy, Coast Guard, Air
Force, Marine Corps and National Guard.
Any such applicant shall present the necessary credentials certifying to such
military service and official status by the proper officers authorized to issue
such credentials. There shall be a limit of one vehicle per applicant. (Ord.
2012-0-04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 23-23, 5-20-2023)
15-4-5: FEES; EXEMPTIONS TO SCHOOL, RELIGIOUS OR ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTION
VEHICLES:
Vehicles owned and operated as a school bus by any school district or religious
or eleemosynary institution shall not be required to pay the license fees
provided for in section
15-4-3 of this article. It is required that religious or eleemosynary
institutions provide the appropriate State of Illinois vehicle registration
indicating the appropriate designation. (Ord. 2010-0-69, 11-1-2010)
15-4-6: TRUCK CLASSIFICATIONS:
A truck is any motor vehicle designed and used for the carrying of merchandise
or material. Trucks are classified as follows and shall be subject to the
license fees set forth in section
15-4-3 of this article:
   Class B: Having a gross weight, including load capacity, of not more than
eight thousand (8,000) pounds.
   Class D: Having a gross weight, including load capacity, of not more than
twelve thousand (12,000) pounds and not less than eight thousand one (8,001)
pounds.
   Class F: Having a gross weight, including load capacity, of not more than
sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds and not less than twelve thousand one (12,001)
pounds.
   Class H: Having a gross weight, including load capacity, of not more than
twenty four thousand (24,000) pounds and not less than sixteen thousand one
(16,001) pounds.
   Class J: Having a gross weight, including load capacity, of not more than
twenty eight thousand (28,000) pounds and not less than twenty four thousand
one (24,001) pounds.
   Class K: Having a gross weight, including load capacity, of not more than
thirty two thousand (32,000) pounds and not less than twenty eight thousand one
(28,001) pounds.
   Class L: Having a gross weight, including load capacity, of thirty two
thousand one (32,001) pounds or more. (Ord. 15-202, 12-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
15-4-7: LICENSE; EXEMPTIONS FROM TIME LIMITED PARKING AND COMMUTER RESTRICTION
PARKING ZONES:
   A.   For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
 
            That portion of a block or tract of land facing the same side of a single
            street and lying between the closest intersecting streets, or between an
BLOCKFACE:  intersecting street and a public park, cemetery, railroad right-of-way, or
            municipal boundary line as defined in section 2.4A of the Village of Oak Park
            Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
COMMUTER    Area where it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle between the hours of eight
RESTRICTION o’clock (8:00) A.M. to ten o’clock (10:00) A.M., Monday through Friday as
PARKING     designated by authorized signage.
ZONE:
REGISTERED  Any vehicle parked on the blockface of a residence to which the vehicle is
VEHICLE:    registered or parked on the blockface of the same street opposite the
            registered address.
TIME
LIMITED     Area where it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle longer than the time as
PARKING     designated by authorized signage.
ZONE:
 
   B.   Any registered vehicle parked within a time limited parking zone shall
not be considered unlawfully parked pursuant to section
15-1-26 of this chapter if parked longer than the time designated by authorized
signage.
   C.   Guests of blockface residents shall be eligible to obtain guest passes
to park within a time limited parking zone and not be considered unlawfully
parked pursuant to section
15-1-26 of this chapter if parked longer than the time designated by authorized
signs. Passes shall be obtained in a form designated by the Director of the
Development Customer Services Department or the Director’s designee.
   D.   Any registered vehicle parked within a commuter restriction zone shall
not be considered unlawfully parked pursuant to section
15-1-26 of this chapter if parked within time restrictions designated by
authorized signage.
   E.   Guests of blockface residents shall be eligible to obtain guest passes
to park within a commuter restriction zone and not be considered unlawfully
parked pursuant to section
15-1-26 of this chapter if parked within time restrictions designated by
authorized signs. (Ord. 23-23, 3-20-2023)
15-4-8: LICENSE; EXEMPTION FOR UNHOUSED PERSONS RESIDING AT AN EMERGENCY
SHELTER LOCATION AND EMPLOYEES OF EMERGENCY SHELTER LOCATIONS:
Unhoused persons residing at the Wright Inn located at 211 N. Oak Park Avenue
in the Village or an emergency shelter location in the Village as defined in
section
15-3-18(N)(1)(h) of this Code and employees of the Wright Inn or an emergency
shelter location in the Village are exempt from the Village's vehicle license
fee requirements set forth in this article. (Ord. 24-124, 6-18-2024)
ARTICLE 5
SCHEDULE OF FINES AND PENALTIES FOR CERTAIN MINOR TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS, PARKING
AND VEHICLE LICENSE VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
15-5-1: Schedule Of Fines And Penalties For Parking Violations
15-5-2: Fines And Penalties; Miscellaneous
15-5-3: Fines And Penalties; Village Vehicle Sticker
15-5-4: Alternative Penalties; Compliance Warning Citations (Rep. by Ord. 2003-
0-42, 10-7-2003)
15-5-5: Specific Violation Of The Illinois Vehicle Code Adopted By Reference
15-5-1: SCHEDULE OF FINES AND PENALTIES FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS:
   A.   The fine for the following parking violations:
Parking meter violation, on street;
Parking meter violation, off street;
Pay by space, on street;
Pay by space, off street;
Failure to set meter; and
Limited parking time violation
shall be thirty three dollars ($33.00) if paid within fourteen (14) days after
the date of the notice of the violation. If the fine is not paid within
fourteen (14) days of the notice of the violation, an additional penalty of ten
dollars ($10.00) shall be imposed.
   B.   The fine for the following parking violations:
Parking on private property without owner's consent;
Parking within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
Parking under viaduct;
Double parking;
Parking in violation at intersection and/or crosswalk;
Parking in violation of bus/cab/loading zone;
Emergency snow parking requirements;
Parking without a Village permit where a permit is required;
Parking in violation of prohibited and restricted parking; and
Parking in violation of the alternate side on street prohibition from eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. in posted areas within
Multiple-Family Zoned Districts
shall be forty three dollars ($43.00) if paid within fourteen (14) days after
the date of the notice of the violation. If the fine is not paid within
fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice of the violation, an additional
penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be imposed.
   C.   The fine for the violation of the emergency snow route parking
requirements set forth in subsection
15-1-22B and section
15-1-23 of this chapter shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) if paid within
fourteen (14) days after the date of the notice of the violation. If the fine
is not paid within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice of violation,
an additional penalty of seventy dollars ($70.00) shall be imposed.
   D.   Any individual who violates subsection
15-1-24A1 or A3 of this chapter, parking in a space reserved for persons with
disabilities, shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) if paid within
fourteen (14) days of the date the notice of violation was issued, or two
hundred seventy dollars ($270.00) if paid more than fourteen (14) days after
the date the notice of violation was issued and the provisions of section
29-2-10 of this Code shall not be applicable.
Any individual who violates subsection
15-1-24A2 of this chapter (unauthorized use of a disability plate, decal or
device) shall be fined six hundred dollars ($600.00) as required by the
Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3, as amended.
An individual shall be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any
subsequent violation of subsection
15-1-24A2 of this chapter as required by the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3, as amended.
   E.   The fine for all other parking violations not specifically set forth
herein shall be thirty three dollars ($33.00) if paid within fourteen (14) days
after the date of notice of the violation. If the fine is not paid within
fourteen (14) days of the notice of violation, an additional penalty of ten
dollars ($10.00) shall be imposed. (Ord. 18-402, 9-17-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; amd.
Ord. 21-33, 3-15-2021)
15-5-2: FINES AND PENALTIES; MISCELLANEOUS:
The fine for the first offense of riding a bicycle in the Oak Park Village Mall
shall be ten dollars ($10.00) if paid within fourteen (14) days after the
violation. If the fine is not paid within fourteen (14) days of the date of the
notice of violation, a penalty of five dollars ($5.00) shall be imposed. (Ord.
15-197, 12-7-2015, eff. 7-1-2016)
15-5-3: FINES AND PENALTIES; VILLAGE VEHICLE STICKER:
The fine for failure to purchase and display a Village vehicle license, as
required by section
15-4-1 of this chapter shall be seventy eight dollars ($78.00) if paid within
fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice of violation. If the fine is not
paid within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice of violation, an
additional penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be imposed.
In addition, a person charged with failure to purchase a Village vehicle
license shall be required to purchase said vehicle license. (Ord. 18-402, 9-17-
2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
15-5-4: ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES; COMPLIANCE WARNING CITATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-2003)
15-5-5: SPECIFIC VIOLATION OF THE ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The following violations of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, the Illinois
Vehicle Code, are hereby adopted by reference:
5/3-112 Failure to transfer certificate of title
(b)
5/3-401 No valid registration - never applied
(a)
5/3-404 No bill of lading or manifest/dispatch record
5/3-411 Failure to carry registration card or reciprocity permit - second division
        vehicle
5/3-413 Improper display of license plates
(a,b)
5/3-413 Operation of vehicle with expired registration plate or sticker
(f)
5/3-416 Failure to notify the Secretary of State of name/address change
5/3-417 Failure to immediately apply for replacement registration card, plate or
(a)     sticker
5/3-701 No valid registration - no valid plate or sticker obtained
(1)
5/3-701 No valid registration - reciprocity, prorate or apportionment
(2)
5/5-201 No in-transit plates
(h)
5/5-202 Failure to display three (3) tow truck plates
(e)
        Parking of vehicle with expired registration. No person may stop, park or
        leave standing upon a public street, highway, roadway or in a public parking
5/11-   facility or lot, a vehicle upon which is displayed as Illinois registration
1304.5  plate or plates or registration sticker after the termination of the
        registration period for which the registration plate or plates or registration
        sticker was issued or after the expiration date set under section 3-414 or 3-
        414.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
5/11-   Unauthorized use of parking places reserved for electric vehicles
1308
5/11-   Failure to display Illinois Motor Fuel Tax identification card
1419.01
5/11-   Failure to display external Illinois Motor Fuel Tax identification device
1419.02
5/11-   Operation of bicycle without lamp and reflector
1507(a)
5/11-   Operation of motorized pedal cycle without lamp and reflector
1507.1
5/12-   Operation of vehicle with unsafe equipment
101(a)
5/12-   Operation of motorcycle without lighted headlamp
201(a)
5/12-   Driving vehicles other than motorcycles without two (2) lighted headlamps and
201(b)  taillamps when required
5/12-   No white rear registration light
201(c)
5/12-   Insufficient clearance, identification or side marker lamps and reflectors -
202     second division vehicle
(a,b)
5/12-   Failure to use parking lights while vehicle is standing on highway
203(a)
5/12-   Improper lamp or flag on projecting load
204
5/12-   Improper use of lamps on towing and towed vehicles
205
5/12-   Improper use of more than one spot lamp
207(a)
5/12-   Improper use of more than three (3) auxiliary driving lamps
207(b)
5/12-   No stop signal lamp or device
208(a)
5/12-   Defective backup lights
209(c)
5/12-   Failure to dim headlights/auxiliary driving lamps within five hundred feet
210(a)  (500') on approach of vehicle
5/12-   Failure to dim headlights/auxiliary driving lamps within three hundred feet
210(b)  (300') of vehicle in same direction
5/12-   Improper lighting on vehicles other than motorcycles - only one headlamp
211(a)
5/12-   Improper use of more than four (4) lighted headlights/auxiliary driving lamps
211(b)
5/12-   Improper use of red light visible from front of vehicle
212(a)
5/12-   Unlawful use of flashing lights
212(b)
5/12-   Unlawful use of oscillating, rotating or flashing lights
215
5/12-   Use of defective brakes
301
5/12-   Unlawful use of metal studded tire
401
5/12-   Use of unsafe tire
405(d)
5/12-   Operation of vehicle without windshield
501(a)
5/12-   Operation of vehicle without rear reflecting mirror
502
5/12-   Obstructed view of windshield or side windows adjacent to driver
503(a)
5/12-   Unlawful application of tinted film to windshield or window(s) adjacent to
503(b)  driver - all vehicles manufactured after December 31, 1981
5/12-   Obstructed view of any window by stationary or suspended object(s)
503(c)
5/12-   Operation of vehicle without windshield cleaning device; operation of vehicle
503(d)  with view obstructed by snow, ice or moisture
5/12-   Obstructed view due to defective condition or repair of any window
503(e)
5/12-   Operation of vehicle with defective horn
601(a)
5/12-   Unlawful possession or use of siren
601(b)
5/12-   Operation of vehicle with defective or modified exhaust system
602
5/12-   Operation of vehicle without two (2) front seat safety belts - vehicles of
603(b)  1961 or later model years
5/12-   Failure of driver/front seat occupant(s) to use seat safety belt
603.1
5/12-   Operation of vehicle with television receiver visible to driver
604(a)
5/12-   Operation of tow truck without:
606
          a.   Identifying sign attached on each side
          b.   Required equipment - one broom, shovel, trash can and fire
        extinguisher
          c.   Removing roadway debris and spreading dirt or sand on oil/grease
        deposits
          d.   Insurance policy in cab
5/12-   Operation of vehicle with unlawfully altered vehicle suspension system - body
607(a)  lifted in excess of three inches (3") from chassis
5/12-   Operation of first division vehicle with frame in excess of twenty two inches
607.1   (22") above ground
(a)
5/12-   Operation of second division vehicle with frame in excess of specified limits
607.1   above ground - refer to statute
(b)
5/12-   Operation of vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of nine
608(a)  thousand (9,000) pounds or less or a recreational vehicle without two (2)
        bumpers
5/12-   Operation of vehicle with unlawful bumper height
608(a)
5/12-   Operation of vehicle while wearing headset receiver
610(a)
5/12-   Operation of second division vehicle without carrying flares/warning devices
702(a)
5/12-
702     Failure to use flares/warning devices when second division vehicle is disabled
(c,d,
e,f,g)
5/12-   Overloaded school bus, commuter van or motor vehicle used for hire
707
5/12-   Operation of garbage truck, roll-off hoist or roll-on container without
711     audible backing warning system
5/12-   Failure to cover school bus sign
806
5/12-   Operating school bus without fire extinguisher
808
5/12-   Operating school bus without first aid kit
809
5/12-   Transporting handicapped passenger(s) without restraining device
810
5/13-   Operating without certificate of valid safety test attached to windshield -
111     second division vehicle
5/15-   Load projecting in any excess beyond left fenders or six inches (6") beyond
105     right fenders of first division vehicle
5/15-   Failure to fasten loose projecting member
106
5/15-   Failure to plank edge of pavement for any vehicle in excess of eight thousand
108     (8,000) pounds
5/15-   Spilling load on highway
109(a)
5/15-   Operating loaded vehicle without securely fastened covering
109(b)
5/15-   Operating second division vehicle with load falling, blowing or dropping to
109.1   highway
5/15-   Unlawful pushing of disabled vehicle
114
5/18C-  Operation without registration - intrastate or interstate
4104(a)
5/18C-  Operation without current cab card and Illinois identifier stamp
4604(1)
5/18C-  Use of a cab card and Illinois identifier stamp issued to another carrier
4604(3)
5/18C-  Failure to display or present a cab card and Illinois identifier stamp
4604(4)
5/18C-  Operating without trade name, license and registration number of carrier
4701(1) painted or affixed to both doors of power unit
40/3-1  Operation of unnumbered snowmobile
        Operation of snowmobile without required:
           a.   One white headlamp during darkness
40/4-1     b.   One rear taillight during darkness
           c.   Brake system in good mechanical condition
           d.   Reflective material on each side of cowling
           e.   Adequate sound suppression equipment
40/5-1  Operation of snowmobile without lighted headlamp and taillight
 
(Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03; amd. Ord. 2010-0-13, 3-15-10; Ord. 23-89, 9-5-2023)
ARTICLE 6
PARKING PATROL
SECTION:
15-6-1: Parking Patrol Created
15-6-2: Parking Patrol; Duties
15-6-3: Parking Patrol; Limitations
15-6-1: PARKING PATROL CREATED:
There is hereby established and created the Parking Patrol of the Village.
Members of such patrol shall be persons whose qualifications, physical and
educational, shall permit the performance of the duties hereinafter designated
and in accordance with such requirements as may be established from time to
time by the Village Manager.
15-6-2: PARKING PATROL; DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of each member of the Parking Patrol to issue written
parking violation notices whenever any vehicle is found to be unlawfully parked
on any street or in a municipally operated parking lot in the Village and to
perform such functions as may be assigned by the Village Manager.
15-6-3: PARKING PATROL; LIMITATIONS:
This Article shall not be construed as granting or establishing in members of
the Parking Patrol the general powers or authority of a police officer, and
members of said Parking Patrol shall be strictly limited to the exercise and
performance of the duties provided for in Section
15-6-2.
ARTICLE 7
WRECKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES
SECTION:
15-7-1: Definitions
15-7-2: Abandonment of Vehicles
15-7-3: Leaving of Wrecked or Discarded Vehicles
15-7-4: Disposition of Wrecked or Discarded Vehicles
15-7-5: Impounding
15-7-6: Locking of Vehicles
15-7-7: Duty of Police Officer; Unattended Vehicle
15-7-8: Registered Owner Responsible
15-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
   A.   PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
   B.   VEHICLE: A machine propelled by power other than human power designed
to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and
transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without
limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.
   C.   STREET or HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
   D.   PROPERTY: Any real property within the Village which is not a street or
highway.
15-7-2: ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES:
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the Village and no person shall
leave any vehicle at any place within the Village for such time and under such
circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been
abandoned.
15-7-3: LEAVING OF WRECKED OR DISCARDED VEHICLE ON STREET:
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked
vehicle on any street or highway within the Village. (1981 Code)
15-7-4: DISPOSITION OF WRECKED OR DISCARDED VEHICLES:
No person in charge or control of any property within the Village whether as
owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially
dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on
such property longer than twenty four (24) hours. Provided however that this
section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building, a
vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and
manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, or a
vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful
place and manner by the Village. (1981 Code)
15-7-5: IMPOUNDING:
The Chief of Police or any member of his Department designated by him is hereby
authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place within the
Village which reasonably appears to be in violation of this article or lost,
stolen or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or
disposed of in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-201 through
5/4-214. (1981 Code)
15-7-6: LOCKING OF VEHICLES:
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended in any public place, or on any used or new car lot, without first
stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the ignition key from the
vehicle, effectively setting the brake thereon and when standing upon any
grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. (1981 Code)
15-7-7: DUTY OF POLICE OFFICER; UNATTENDED VEHICLE:
Whenever any police officer shall find a motor vehicle standing unattended with
the ignition key in the vehicle, in violation of section
15-7-6 of this article, such police officer is authorized to remove such key
from such vehicle and to deliver such key to the Police Department public
information desk. (1981 Code)
15-7-8: REGISTERED OWNER RESPONSIBLE:
The registered owner of a vehicle found in violation of section
15-7-6 of this article, shall be held prima facia responsible for any such
violation. (1981 Code)
ARTICLE 8
OAK PARK MALL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 2013-0-16, 2-19-2013)
ARTICLE 9
PARKING AREAS AND GARAGES FOR FOUR OR FEWER VEHICLES
SECTION:
15-9-1: Parking Areas Defined
15-9-2: Surface of Parking Areas and Driveways
15-9-3: Dimensions
15-9-4: Maintenance
15-9-5: Required Access to Parking Spaces
15-9-6: Garages For Four or Fewer Vehicles, Doors
15-9-1: PARKING AREAS DEFINED:
For purposes of this Article, a parking area is any parcel of land used for the
parking of motor vehicles and having a capacity of one to four (4) motor
vehicles and excluding places where motor vehicles are parked within a
building.
15-9-2: SURFACE OF PARKING AREAS AND DRIVEWAYS:
The surface of parking areas and driveways serving as access to parking areas
shall consist of standard blacktop or equivalent material, or shall be
constructed by excavating the parking or driveway area to a six inch (6") depth
and placing six inches (6") of compacted gravel or crushed stone therein.
15-9-3: DIMENSIONS:
Each parking space shall consist of a space a minimum of nine feet (9') in
width and a length of twenty feet (20').
15-9-4: MAINTENANCE:
Each parking area shall be maintained so that the surface shall be free from
dirt and ponding water. Loose gravel or stones that may spill onto adjacent
public or private properties shall be removed.
15-9-5: REQUIRED ACCESS TO PARKING SPACES:
If more than two (2) parking spaces are provided on a zoning lot, as defined in
the Zoning Ordinance, in an "R-5" or more restrictive zone district, then
access must be provided to each space so that it is not necessary to move a
parked vehicle in order for another vehicle to enter or exit from the parking
space.
15-9-6: GARAGES FOR FOUR OR FEWER VEHICLES, DOORS:
Garages in residential zones as defined by the Zoning Ordinance shall be kept
in good repair and shall be equipped with doors that shall adequately screen
the interior and that shall be animal and rodent proof. (Ord. 1986-0-31, 4-21-
86)
ARTICLE 10
TOWING, IMMOBILIZATION AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES OR MOTOR VEHICLES
CONTAINING UNLAWFUL FIREARMS
SECTION:
15-10-1: Authorization
15-10-2: Towing Without Notice
15-10-3: Immobilization Of Vehicles For Parking Violations Directed By
Administrative Adjudication
15-10-4: Towing Of Vehicles; Prior Notice Situations
15-10-5: General Notice Provisions
15-10-6: Notice Procedures Prior To Towing Of Motor Vehicles
15-10-7: Pretow Or Preimmobilization List Hearing (Rep. by Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-
7-2003)
15-10-8: Recovery Of Towed Motor Vehicles
15-10-9: Posting Of Notification Of Right To Posttow Hearing
15-10-10: Request For Posttow Hearing
15-10-11: Procedures For Posttow Hearing
15-10-12: Scheduling Of Posttow Hearings
15-10-13: Hearings
15-10-14: Disposition Of Unclaimed Vehicles
15-10-15: Police Reports After Vehicle Reclaimed
15-10-16: Maintenance Of Records
15-10-17: Authority To Remove Or Relocate Vehicles In Emergencies And In
Temporary Situations
15-10-18: Responsibility For Costs Not Recovered
15-10-19: Towing Service Operator Subject To Ordinance Provisions
15-10-20: Vehicle Seizure And Impoundment
15-10-1: AUTHORIZATION:
The towing of motor vehicles by the Village of Oak Park or its contractor shall
be authorized only by the Village of Oak Park Police Department under the
circumstances provided in this article or in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes relating to the impoundment of a motor vehicle
containing an unlawful weapon; except that the Village Manager and the Chief of
the Fire Department or their designees are hereby authorized to enforce the
provisions of this article in emergency situations which, for purposes of this
article, shall be defined as any situation which adversely affects or threatens
the health, safety, welfare or property of the residents of the Village. (Ord.
2003-0-42, 10-7-2003)
15-10-2: TOWING WITHOUT NOTICE:
Motor vehicles may be towed without notice under the following circumstances:
   A.   Where a motor vehicle creates a traffic, health or safety hazard on a
public street.
   B.   Where a motor vehicle is parked in violation of the emergency snow
parking regulations of section
15-1-22 of this chapter, as amended.
   C.   Where a motor vehicle is parked in a public parking lot or in a private
parking lot which is posted with proper signage in accordance with 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/4-203(e)(5) without the consent of the lot owner,
proprietor or agent of the property, which person has requested that the
vehicle be towed.
      Within twenty four (24) hours after towing a motor vehicle pursuant to
these provisions, a notice shall be sent to the owner of the vehicle as
provided in section
15-10-5 of this article, as amended.
   D.   Where a motor vehicle is found to contain an unlawful weapon, pursuant
to section
27-4-1 of this Code, as amended, or a police officer has probable cause to
believe a vehicle contains an unlawful weapon, pursuant to section
27-2-1 of this Code, as amended.
   E.   Where a motor vehicle is parked in violation of section 15-1-28 of this
chapter, as amended. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-2003; amd. Ord. 23-38, 5-15-2023)
15-10-3: IMMOBILIZATION OF VEHICLES FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS DIRECTED BY
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION:
The immobilization of vehicles for which the registered owner has accumulated
five (5) or more final determinations of parking violation liability, for which
the fines and applicable penalties have not been paid in full, and the
subsequent towing of such immobilized vehicles shall be governed by chapter 29,
article 2, "Administrative Adjudication Of Parking Violations", of this Code.
(Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-2003)
15-10-4: TOWING OF VEHICLES; PRIOR NOTICE SITUATIONS:
Motor vehicles may be towed after notice and the affording of an opportunity
for a posttow hearing under the following circumstances:
   A.   Where the motor vehicle has been abandoned. A motor vehicle shall be
deemed to have been abandoned as follows:
      1.   When the motor vehicle is located on a street or alley within the
Village, for ten (10) hours or more, does not display a current State vehicle
registration or Municipal vehicle license, or is in a state of disrepair,
rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition;
      2.   When the motor vehicle is located on a street or alley within the
Village, for twenty four (24) hours or more, and although displaying a current
State vehicle registration or Municipal vehicle license, is in a state of
disrepair, rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition;
      3.   When the motor vehicle does not display a current State vehicle
registration or Municipal vehicle license, is located on private or public
property within the Village, has not been moved or used for at least twenty
four (24) hours, and is apparently deserted, except when such vehicle is on the
property of the owner or bailee of such vehicle;
      4.   When the motor vehicle, although displaying a current State vehicle
registration or Municipal vehicle license, is located on private or public
property within the Village, including on a street or alley, and has not been
moved for at least seven (7) consecutive days, and is apparently deserted,
except when such vehicle is on the property of the owner or bailee of such
vehicle.
   B.   A motor vehicle that has been continuously unlawfully parked in excess
of twenty four (24) hours.
   C.   An inoperable, unregistered, or discarded motor vehicle, regardless of
title, having lost its character as a substantial property and left unattended
without justification on the owner's land.
   D.   For violation of other prescribed regulations and ordinances of the
Village of Oak Park or of the State of Illinois, including section
27-2-1 of this code. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
15-10-5: GENERAL NOTICE PROVISIONS:
Notice as required pursuant to this article shall be forwarded by certified
mail and regular mail to the address of the owner of the motor vehicle as
indicated in the most current registration list of Illinois Motor Vehicles. In
the event that an out of state motor vehicle has been or will be towed, written
inquiry shall be made of the Secretary of State of the particular jurisdiction
for the furnishing of the most current registered name and address of the owner
of the motor vehicle and notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the
address furnished. In no case, however, will the Village be required to delay
towing more than seven (7) days after the inquiry mailing date or be required
to delay proceedings for the disposal of an unclaimed motor vehicle, pursuant
to section
15-10-14 of this article, more than thirty (30) days after the inquiry mailing
date. The notice in all cases shall specify that the vehicle has either been or
will be towed, the reason or reasons for same, that the owner is entitled to
recovery of the vehicle and/or a hearing as the case may be and the procedure
for obtaining the vehicle and/or a hearing. Where notice of an intention to tow
a motor vehicle is required prior to towing, a notice of intent to tow sticker
shall be affixed to the vehicle windshield, specifying the date and time such
notice of intent to tow is affixed, which affixture shall commence the running
of any time period required under section
15-10-4 of this article prior to towing. The sticker shall also specify the
reason for the tow, and when the vehicle will be towed. The general notice
provisions set forth herein above shall not apply in the following situations:
   A.   In the case of vehicles which neither display a current State vehicle
registration or Municipal vehicle license and are: 1) inoperable and apparently
abandoned on a public street or alley within the Village for ten (10) hours or
more, 2) located on public or private property other than the property of the
owner or bailee and have not been moved for at least twenty four (24) hours and
are apparently deserted, or 3) continuously unlawfully parked in excess of
twenty four (24) hours, the notice of intent to tow sticker, affixed to the
vehicle's front windshield, shall serve as the only notice required prior to
towing.
   B.   Where a vehicle is apparently inoperable and abandoned on a public
street or alley within the Village, or is continuously unlawfully parked for
twenty four (24) hours or more, and either displays a current State
registration or Municipal vehicle license, the only notice required shall be
the affixture of the notice of intent to tow sticker to the vehicle for a
minimum of twenty four (24) hours and an attempt to contact the owner by
telephone prior to the tow, if the owner's listed phone number is available, or
by a visit to the last known resident address of the owner, if such address is
within the Village. The Police Department shall perform a search of the State
vehicle registration or Municipal vehicle license files to obtain the name and
current address of the vehicle owner. The Police Department shall record the
date and time of the record search and phone call or other attempted contact
and the results thereof and shall maintain that information as a part of the
Department's permanent records. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
15-10-6: NOTICE PROCEDURES PRIOR TO TOWING OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
Where a motor vehicle is to be towed pursuant to section
15-10-4 of this article, notice prior to towing shall be furnished in
accordance with the provisions of section
15-10-5 of this article.
   A.   Ten (10) hours from the time of affixing the "notice of intent to tow"
sticker for inoperable vehicles which have been abandoned on a public street or
alley within the Village for ten (10) hours or more and do not display a
current vehicle registration or Municipal license;
   B.   Twenty four (24) hours from the time of affixing the "notice of intent
to tow" sticker to vehicles which display a current State vehicle registration
or current Municipal vehicle license, and: 1) which have been inoperable and
abandoned on a public street or alley within the Village for twenty four (24)
hours or more, or 2) have been continuously unlawfully parked in excess of
twenty four (24) hours; or
   C.   Twenty four (24) hours from the time of affixing the "notice of intent
to tow" sticker to vehicles not displaying a current registration or license
which are: 1) located on public or private property within the Village, other
than the property of the owner or bailee, which have not been moved for twenty
four (24) hours or more and are apparently deserted, or 2) have been
continuously unlawfully parked in excess of twenty four (24) hours.
Subsequent to the expiration of the above stated time period, the motor vehicle
may be towed and the provisions of section
15-10-8 of this article shall become operative and controlling. (Ord. 2003-0-
42, 10-7-03)
15-10-7: PRETOW OR PREIMMOBILIZATION LIST HEARING:
(Rep. by Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
15-10-8: RECOVERY OF TOWED MOTOR VEHICLES:
Before the owner or persons entitled to possession of any legally towed vehicle
shall be permitted to remove same from the impoundment lot, said person shall
furnish to the operator evidence of his identity and ownership of the vehicle
and/or right of possession thereto, shall sign a receipt for the vehicle and
shall pay a fee to cover the costs of towing to a vehicle pound or authorized
garage, and of storage, and shall satisfy all parking and traffic citations
and/or penalties incurred for violations of section
27-2-1 of this code relating to unlawful weapons for which said motor vehicle
was impounded and present proof of such satisfaction, or said owner or person
entitled to possession may: 1) without an immediate release of his vehicle,
request a hearing be held within twenty four (24) hours or, at the vehicle
owner's option, within fifteen (15) days, or 2) obtain an immediate release of
his vehicle by requesting said hearing to be held within seven (7) days or, at
the vehicle owner's option, within fifteen (15) days and by making a deposit to
cover said charges. The hearing referred to shall be conducted in conformity
with section
15-10-13 of this article and shall determine the validity of the impounding of
said vehicle. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
15-10-9: POSTING OF NOTIFICATION OF RIGHT TO POSTTOW HEARING:
The following notice shall be posted in all places to which members of the
public come to recover removed vehicles, in the police station and in all
garages to which vehicles are brought for impoundment:
ATTENTION: Owners or other persons lawfully entitled to possession of towed
vehicles have the following options: (1) you may pay the towing fee and storage
charges including those citation and/or penalty charges for which towing and/or
impoundment was imposed, and thereby redeem your vehicle; (2) you may demand a
hearing within twenty four (24) hours, or, at your option, within fifteen (15)
days of such towing and/or impoundment; or (3) you may obtain an immediate
release of your vehicle by requesting that said hearing be held within seven
(7) days or, at your option, within fifteen (15) days and by making a cash
deposit to cover the fees, charges and penalties involved. You should appear to
request a hearing in the Office of Adjudication at the Oak Park Village Hall
within fifteen (15) days of the mailing date of notification of the towing or
release of the vehicle, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
15-10-10: REQUEST FOR POSTTOW HEARING:
Requests for a hearing may be made in person within fifteen (15) days of the
mailing date of notification of the tow or release of vehicle, whichever occurs
first. Requests are to be made to the Office of Adjudication. (Ord. 2003-0-42,
10-7-03)
15-10-11: PROCEDURES FOR POSTTOW HEARING:
Designated personnel shall, upon receipt of a hearing request, fully and
accurately complete the request for a vehicle tow hearing form and deliver
copies of those records specified in this section to the Office of
Adjudication. The records include, but are not limited to, police reports, a
motor vehicle inventory report, any cash receipts for towing and storage fees,
towing and other cash reports, copies of outstanding parking and traffic
citations and warrants, as well as registration information. In the case of
impoundment for a violation of section 27-2-1 of this code, any and all records
in the possession of the Village relating to such alleged violation shall be
delivered to the hearing officer in a timely manner. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03;
amd. Ord. 23-38, 5-15-2023)
15-10-12: SCHEDULING OF POSTTOW HEARINGS:
Hearings are held on weekdays from nine thirty o'clock (9:30) A.M. to twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon and from one thirty o'clock (1:30) P.M. to four o'clock
(4:00) P.M. in Village Hall in rooms to be designated by the Office of
Adjudication. Hearings shall take place as follows:
   A.   In those instances where the vehicle has been released upon deposit of
funds to cover the fees, charges and penalties associated with the tow and
impoundment, the hearing shall take place within seven (7) days of such payment
unless a later date is requested by the owner, not to exceed fifteen (15) days
after release of the vehicle.
   B.   In those instances where the vehicle is still impounded, the hearing
shall take place either within twenty four (24) hours after a request for
hearing, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, or within fifteen (15) days
of said request at the option of the owner and on a date convenient for all
parties.
   C.   Where a hearing request is made after five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on a
particular day, the time period within which the hearing must be held shall not
begin to run until the first working day following the request. (Ord. 2003-0-
42, 10-7-03; amd. Ord. 23-38, 5-15-2023)
15-10-13: HEARINGS:
   A.   The hearing officer shall conduct posttow hearings.
   B.   The hearing officer, upon receipt of a completed request for hearing,
shall cause such hearing to be placed on a calendar for hearings within the
time frame established herein. The hearing officer shall review all evidence
presented by the vehicle owner and by the Village of Oak Park, and make a
finding based upon the preponderance of the evidence presented as to the lawful
authority for the towing and storage of the vehicle. The decision shall be in
favor of the owner if the preponderance of the evidence does not show such tow
to be lawful. For each request for hearing, the hearing officer shall complete
a report of the hearing and attach such report to the requested package.
   C.   After receiving all relevant evidence, the hearing officer shall make
one or more of the following findings:
      1.   That the towing and storage of the vehicle was authorized by the
laws of the State of Illinois or of the ordinances of the Village of Oak Park
and, in the case of a vehicle for which the outstanding charges remain
unsatisfied, the hearing officer may further authorize the towing and storage
of the vehicle;
      2.   That there was no authorization under Illinois law or the ordinances
of the Village of Oak Park for the towing and storage of the vehicle or that
the member causing the vehicle to be towed did not comply with the requirements
of the statute or ordinance authorizing the tow;
      3.   That the towing of the vehicle was authorized by law but the owner
was caused to incur additional storage charges because of late notification of
towing or failure to promptly release a vehicle upon which a hold had been
placed;
      4.   That the request for hearing was not made within the specified
number of days following receipt of a notice of the tow or of the date that the
vehicle was released, whichever date is earlier in time;
      5.   That the owner failed to appear, despite requesting a hearing, and
no continuance was requested; or
      6.   That a continuance was requested by the owner requesting the
hearing, in which event the hearing officer may cause a date to be selected to
reflect the continuance date requested, if the request is granted.
   D.   The hearing officer shall advise the vehicle owner of his findings at
the conclusion of the hearing. If the towing and storage was authorized by law
and is not otherwise reimbursable, the vehicle owner shall be so informed and
further advised as to the amount due. Should the towing or storage be found to
be unauthorized or reimbursable, in whole or in part, the hearing officer
shall: 1) if the vehicle has been released to the owner prior to the hearing,
determine the amount of the deposit paid and direct that a refund in an
appropriate amount shall be transmitted by the Village of Oak Park to the owner
within seven (7) days; 2) if the vehicle is still in the pound at the time of
the hearing or in a relocated garage, the hearing officer shall complete an
order for release of the vehicle and provide the vehicle owner with an original
and copy of same. Upon receipt of a copy of said release form from the owner,
the towing company shall immediately return the vehicle to the owner without
any imposition of towing or storage fees. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
15-10-14: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
   A.   Except as set forth in subsection
15-10-14C of this section, in the event that a towed and stored vehicle is not
claimed by an owner or other person evidencing ownership, the Village may
direct that the unclaimed vehicle be disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes of the Illinois Vehicle Code
either thirty (30) days after the date of a signature of the indicated owner on
the returned certified mail receipt or thirty (30) days after the date of
return of undelivered certified mail.
   B.   Except as set forth in subsection
15-10-14C of this section, in the event of towed and stored out of state
vehicles or vehicles without license plates or registration papers, record
searches and inquiries must be conducted in accordance with 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/4-205 and 5/4-206 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. When the
identity of the registered owner, lienholder and/or other person legally
entitled to the possession of a vehicle cannot be determined by any means
provided for in this article within thirty (30) days after the inquiry mailing
date pursuant to section
15-10-5 of this article, the vehicle may be disposed of as provided herein
without notice.
   C.   In the event of towed and stored abandoned vehicles of more than seven
(7) years of age, the Village shall keep such vehicles in custody for a minimum
of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining the identity of the registered
owner and lienholder and contacting the registered owner and lienholder by the
United States mail, public service or in person for a determination of
disposition; and, an examination of the State Police stolen vehicle files for
theft and wanted information. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period,
without the benefit of disposition information being received from the
registered owner or the lienholder, the law enforcement agency having
jurisdiction will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk. A vehicle
classified as an antique vehicle may however be sold to a person desiring to
restore it.
No vehicle shall be disposed of in any manner without prior written
authorization of the Chief of Police or his designee; provided, that the Chief
of Police shall not designate this responsibility to any officer below the rank
of lieutenant. The release of a vehicle to its owner or other legally
authorized person shall not require the written authorization of the Chief of
Police or his designee, but shall require the signed authorization of a sworn
police officer of the Village. The proceeds of any sale authorized by this
subsection, after deducting the costs of removal and storage and the expense of
advertising and conducting the sale shall be deposited with the Village
Treasurer. (Ord. 1988-0-103, 12-19-88)
15-10-15: POLICE REPORTS AFTER VEHICLE RECLAIMED:
When a motor vehicle in the custody of the Police Department is reclaimed by
the registered owner or other legally entitled person, or when the vehicle is
sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of, as provided in this article, a
report of the transaction shall be prepared by the Police Department and made a
part of the towing records maintained by the Police Department. (Ord. 1987-0-
71, 9-8-87)
15-10-16: MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
All vehicle tow hearing decisions, towing reports, final disposition reports
and any associated police reports or documents shall be retained for a period
of at least two (2) years after each hearing, or after each tow if no hearing
was requested or held. (Ord. 1987-0-71, 9-8-87)
15-10-17: AUTHORITY TO REMOVE OR RELOCATE VEHICLES IN EMERGENCIES AND IN
TEMPORARY SITUATIONS:
Members of the Police Department and, with regard to emergencies only, other
persons designated in section
15-10-1 of this article are hereby authorized to remove or relocate, when
reasonably necessary, any vehicle located on the public way from one location
to any other location under the following circumstances:
   A.   In response to any "emergency situation" as defined in section
15-10-1 of this article; or
   B.   To enforce temporary regulations established by the Chief of Police in
accordance with section
15-1-2 of this chapter when such temporary regulations provide for the removal
or relocation of vehicles and the area being regulated is clearly posted with
temporary signage notifying the public that any vehicle parked in violation of
the temporary regulation may be removed or relocated by the Police Department.
(Ord. 1987-0-72, 9-21-1987)
15-10-18: RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS NOT RECOVERED:
Any costs incurred by the Village for relocation, towing, impoundment,
destruction or auction of vehicles under this article not otherwise recovered
shall be paid by the registered owner or person legally entitled to possession.
(Ord. 1987-0-71, 9-8-1987)
15-10-19: TOWING SERVICE OPERATOR SUBJECT TO ORDINANCE PROVISIONS:
Notwithstanding any other ordinance or statutory provisions to the contrary,
any towing service operator authorized to perform tows in behalf of the law
enforcement agency must perform its services subject to the provisions of this
article. (Ord. 1987-0-71, 9-8-1987)
15-10-20: VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   For purposes of this section and in accordance with section 11-208.7 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code 1 , the following terms shall be defined as follows:
   HEARING OFFICER: A licensed attorney who meets the qualifications set forth
in section
29-1-8 of this Code.
   LESSEE: A person operating a motor vehicle pursuant to a lease or any other
such written document vesting exclusive possession, use, control and
responsibility of the motor vehicle during the specified time period.
   LIENHOLDER OF RECORD: A person holding a security interest in a vehicle.
   OWNER OF RECORD: The registered owner or record titleholder of a motor
vehicle as registered with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois.
   B.   Police officers shall have the right to seize and impound a motor
vehicle, operated, used or in the physical control of any person with the
permission, express or implied, of the owner of record, on any public street
within the Village that is used in the commission or furtherance of violation
of the following offenses, including any subsequent amendments to such
provisions:
      1.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to section 36-1 (Seizure), 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
36-1, of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012;
      2.   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
section 11-501 (driving while under the influence), 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-501, of the Illinois Vehicle Code of 2017;
      3.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit an offense in violation of section 550/1, et seq., 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1, et seq., of the Cannabis Control Act;
      4.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of section 570/100, et seq., 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100, et seq., of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act;
      5.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit an offense in violation of section 24-1 (Unlawful Use of
Weapons), 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1, section 24-1.5 (Reckless
Discharge of a Firearm), 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.5, or section
24-3.1 (Unlawful Possession of Firearms and Firearm Ammunition), 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/24-3.1, and section 24-3.3 (Unlawful Sale or Delivery of
Firearms On the Premises of Any School), 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-
3.3, of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012;
      6.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while possessing, carrying or
firing an unlawful weapon in violation of sections 27-2-1, "Unlawful To Possess
Or Carry; Exceptions", and 27-3-1, "Firing Of Weapons Prohibited; Exceptions",
of this Code;
      7.   Driving while a driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to section 6-303, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-303, of the Illinois Vehicle Code of 2017 except that
vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is
for unpaid citations (parking or moving) or due to a failure to comply with
emission testing;
      8.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or
attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as defined
by the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et
seq., or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
570/100 et seq.;
      9.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's
license, in violation of section 6-101 (Drivers Must Have Licenses or Permits),
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, of the Illinois Vehicle Code of 2017 if
the driver's license has been expired for more than one year;
      10.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued
a driver's license or permit or operating a motor vehicle without ever having
been issued a driver's license or permit due to a person's age, in violation of
section 6-101 (Drivers Must Have Licenses or Permits), 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-101, of the Illinois Vehicle Code of 2017;
      11.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a Circuit Court Clerk in Illinois for failing to
answer charges that the driver violated section 6-101 (No Valid Driver's
License), 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, 6-303 (Suspended or Revoked
License), 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-303, or 11-501 (Driving Under the
Influence), 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501, of the Illinois Vehicle
Code of 2017;
      12.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a theft or a related offense as set forth in article 16
(Theft and Other Related Offenses) of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-0.1 et seq.;
      13.   Sections 9-3.3 (Drug-Induced Homicide), 11-14 (Prostitution), 11-
14.1 (Solicitation of a Sexual Act), 11-14.3 (Promoting Prostitution), 11-14.4
(Promoting Juvenile Prostitution), 11-18 (Patronizing a Prostitute), 11-18.1
(Patronizing a Minor Engaged in Prostitution), 12-2 (Aggravated Assault), 12-4
(Aggravated Battery), 20-1.1 (Aggravated Arson), 24-2.1 (Unlawful Use of
Firearm Projectiles), 24-3.3 (Unlawful Sale/Delivery of Firearms On Premises of
Any School), or 33A-2 (Armed Violence) of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012 2
;
      14.   Section 3.5 (Possession of Drug Paraphernalia), 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 600/3.5, of the Drug Paraphernalia Control Act;
      15.   Section 6-101(d) through (e) (no valid driver's license), 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101 (d) - (e) of the Illinois Vehicle Code of
2017 in conjunction with a violation of section 3-707 (Operation of Uninsured
Motor Vehicle) and section 7-601 (Required Liability Insurance Policy), 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-707 and 5/7-601 of the Illinois Vehicle Code of
2017 or a similar provision of this Code;
      16.   Operation of a motor vehicle when registration is cancelled,
suspended or revoked in violation of section 3-702 (registration cancelled,
suspended or revoked), 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-702 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code of 2017;
      17.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle resulting in the personal
injury or death of person in violation of section 11-401, 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-401, of the Illinois Vehicle Code of 2017;
      18.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in a reckless manner in
violation of section 11-503 (Reckless Driving), 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-503, including without limitation: a) while the vehicle is part of a
funeral procession; or b) in a manner that interferes with a funeral
procession;
      19.   Operation of a motor vehicle while street racing in violation of
section 11-506 (Street Racing), 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-506, of the
Illinois Vehicle Code 2017;
      20.   The use of a motor vehicle as part of the commission of a felony
not otherwise expressly listed herein shall be subject to seizure and
impoundment under this section; and
      21.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in an
attempt to commit any violation set forth in section 11-208.7 (Administrative
Fees), 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code
of 2017 and/or any misdemeanor or felony offense in section 36-1 (Seizure), 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36.1 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012 which
may not otherwise be referenced herein or may be subsequently added via
amendment.
   C.   The owner of record of a vehicle that has been seized and impounded
pursuant to this section shall be liable to the Village for an administrative
penalty of five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) plus towing and storage fees.
The administrative penalty of five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) shall be
paid to the Village of Oak Park. Towing and/or storage fees shall be collected
by and paid to the person, firm, or entity that tows and stores the impounded
vehicle.
   D.   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle by a towing company
licensed under section 15-10-1 of this article. When the vehicle is towed, the
police officer shall notify, or make a reasonable attempt to notify, the owner
of record, lessee, or person identifying himself or herself as the owner of
record or lessee of vehicle, or the person who is found to be in control of the
vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the
fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner of record's or lessee's right to
request an administrative hearing to be conducted under this section. Said
vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the hearing provided for
in subsection E of this section, unless the owner of record or lessee of the
vehicle posts, with the Village a cash bond in the amount of five hundred fifty
dollars ($550.00) plus towing and storage fees.
   E.   Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant
to this section, the Village shall notify, by mailing a notice via first class
mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record or
lessee and any lienholder of record of the date, time and location of a hearing
that will be conducted pursuant to this section. Notice served under this
section is effective upon mailing of the written notice to address of the owner
of record, lessee and any lienholder of record, as contained in registration
records of the Illinois Secretary of State. The hearing shall be conducted no
later than forty five (45) days after the vehicle was seized pursuant to the
applicable procedures set forth in section
29-1-11 of this Code. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not
apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall issue a written
decision either sustaining or overruling the seizure and impoundment of the
vehicle. If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines by a
preponderance of evidence that the vehicle, operated with the permission,
express or implied, of the owner, was used in the commission of any of the
violations set forth in this section, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order
requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded until the owner of record,
lessee, or lienholder of record pays the administrative penalty of five hundred
fifty dollars ($550.00) plus payment of towing and storage fees. If an
administrative penalty is imposed pursuant to this section, such penalty shall
constitute a debt due and owing to the Village. If a cash bond was posted, the
bond shall be forfeited to the Village. If the Hearing Officer overturns the
basis for the impoundment of the vehicle, he or she shall order the return of
the vehicle and any cash bond that may have been posted.
   F.   Unless the Hearing Officer overturns the basis for the vehicle
impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee or lienholder of
record until all penalties and fines and towing and storage charges are paid.
   G.   Pursuant to chapter 4, article II of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
entitled "Abandoned, Lost, Stolen or Unclaimed Vehicles, 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/4-201 et seq.," which is adopted and incorporated herein, any motor
vehicle that is not reclaimed within thirty five (35) days after the entry of a
final order following a hearing under this section shall be deemed abandoned
and may be disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle as provided by law.
   H.   This section shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing State
or Federal laws or local ordinances pertaining to vehicle seizure and
impoundment.
   I.   The statutory provisions of the Illinois Administrative Review Act
("Review Act"), 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., and section 11-
208.7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.7,
are hereby adopted and incorporated into this section. The Administrative
Review Act shall apply to the review of all final decisions issued by the
Administrative Hearing Officer in administrative proceedings under this
section.
   J.   Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine or
penalty, imposed under this section which remains unpaid in whole or in part
after the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review under the
Review Act may be enforced in the same manner as any judgment entered by a
court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 17-325, 12-11-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-208.7.
2 1. 720 ILCS 5/9-3.3, 5/11-14, 5/11-14.1, 5/11-14.3, 5/11-14.4, 5/11-18, 5/11-
  18.1, 5/12-2, 5/12-4, 5/20-1.1, 5/24-2.1, 5/24-3.3, 5/33A-2.
ARTICLE 11
CLEAR SIGHT AREAS AT STREET INTERSECTIONS
SECTION:
15-11-1: Finding
15-11-2: Maintenance Of Clear Sight Area
15-11-3: Warrant
15-11-1: FINDING:
In order to promote greater safety at street intersections, it is in the public
interest that vegetation, fences which do not comply with the open space and
height requirements of subsection
17-1-3.1A2 of the Village Code and other interferences with the sight of
pedestrians or of operators of vehicles at such intersections be regulated in
accordance with the daylighting standards hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 1997-0-
62, 11-17-97)
15-11-2: MAINTENANCE OF CLEAR SIGHT AREA:
The maximum height of shrubs, bushes and plantings and the maximum overhang of
tree branches at intersections is governed by chapter 25 of the Village Code.
The maximum height and open space requirements for fences erected, constructed,
substantially repaired or replaced on or after December 1, 1997, on corner lots
within thirty five feet (35') of intersections are governed by subsection
17-1-3.1A2 of the Village Code.
   A.   When warranted, as set forth in section
15-11-3 of this article, fences erected, constructed, substantially repaired or
replaced on corner lots within thirty five feet (35') of an intersection prior
to December 1, 1997, which do not presently comply with the height and open
space requirements set forth in subsection
17-1-3.1A2 of the Village Code shall be required to comply therewith.
   B.   When warranted as set forth in section
15-11-3 of this article, solid structures, excluding buildings and other solid
structures constructed prior to January 19, 1981, within the "clear sight area"
as defined in section
25-1-8 of this code, shall be limited to:
      1.   A maximum height of thirty inches (30") or
      2.   A height which does not obstruct horizontal sight lines across such
clear sight areas measured from points forty five inches (45") above the
centerlines of the intersecting streets along such centerlines for a distance
of one hundred feet (100') from the center of the intersection, whichever is
less. (Ord. 1997-0-62, 11-17-97)
15-11-3: WARRANT:
The requirements of section
15-11-2 of this article and subsections
25-1-8C, E and F of this code shall not apply unless both of the following
warrants are met:
   A.   The obstruction is in a clear sight area at an intersection where one
or more right angle accidents is either reported in the Public Works
Department's most recent annual high hazard review or is reported to the
Director of Public Works; and (Ord. 1982-0-49, 9-7-82)
   B.   The Transportation Commission finds and determines after hearing
pursuant to notice that the obstruction substantially interferes with the sight
of pedestrians or of operators of vehicles at the intersection and creates a
hazard to the public safety. Notice of the time, place and date of the
Commission's hearing shall be mailed to persons who are listed for water
service at the property with the obstruction, as well as to persons so listed
within one hundred feet (100') of said property. In making its findings and
determination, the Transportation Commission shall consider traffic studies,
accident experience and testimony from all interested parties, including the
Director of Public Works or his designee. The Transportation Commission shall
announce its decision at the completion of the hearing. The decision of the
Transportation Commission is final.
If the affected owner voluntarily removes the obstruction in the clear sight
area prior to a hearing, any scheduled hearing shall be canceled.
If the Transportation Commission determines that a traffic control device is
necessary or desirable at an intersection which contains one or more
obstructions in clear sight areas, the owner of the property containing the
obstruction may pay the full cost of the installation of the traffic control
device and street markings in lieu of removing the obstruction. (Ord. 1982-0-
49, 9-7-82; amd. Ord. 2005-0-72, 12-5-05)
CHAPTER 15A
NEWSPAPERS AND NEWSPAPER STANDS
General Provisions   1
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15A-1-1: License for Sale and Delivery of Newspapers Required
15A-1-2: Application
15A-1-3: Issuance; Fee
15A-1-4: Permit for Constructing or Maintaining Newspaper Stands, Etc. Required
15A-1-5: Issuance
15A-1-6: Liability Insurance
15A-1-7: Fee; Term
15A-1-8: Transferability
15A-1-9: Specifications for Newspaper Stands
15A-1-10: Limitation on Use of Newspaper Stands
15A-1-1: LICENSE FOR SALE AND DELIVERY OF NEWSPAPERS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling
newspapers in the Village and to deliver the same at residences in the Village
without first procuring a license as provided for in this Chapter.
15A-1-2: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring to engage in the business of selling newspapers in the
Village and delivering the same to residences therein shall make application to
the Village Clerk in writing, setting out the full name and address of the
applicant, if an individual, if a firm, the full names and residences of the
applicants, and if a corporation, the full names and residences of its
principal officers, the principal office of the applicant in the Village, a
list of the newspapers which such applicant proposes to sell and deliver, and
the number of persons such applicant proposes to employ in the delivery of such
newspapers, and that the applicant shall employ in making such deliveries only
persons of good moral character.
15A-1-3: ISSUANCE; FEE:
When an application for a license to engage in the business of selling
newspapers in the Village and the agreement therein contained shall have been
signed by the applicant, the Village Clerk shall issue a license to such
applicant which shall entitle the licensee to engage in the business of selling
newspapers to inhabitants of the Village and delivering the same at the
residence of such inhabitants upon the payment of a license fee as provided in
Section
8-2-1 of this Code.
15A-1-4: PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTING OR MAINTAINING NEWSPAPER STANDS, ETC.
REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, locate, erect, construct,
maintain or use any newspaper or magazine stand on any public street or other
public place in the Village except in conformity with, and during the effective
period of, a permit thereof first obtained from the Director of Public Works,
as provided in this Chapter.
15A-1-5: ISSUANCE:
The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized, in his discretion, upon
written application in such form and with such undertakings as he may require,
to issue permits for newspaper stands on public streets or other public places
specifying in each permit the location and position to be occupied by the stand
for which the permit is issued, and imposing such restrictions and conditions,
if any, in addition to those provided by this Chapter, as he may deem
appropriate with respect to such permit. In determining whether or not a permit
shall be issued, the Director of Public Works may consider the nature and
intensity of pedestrian and vehicular traffic at and near the proposed
location, the width of pavement, parkway and sidewalk, the convenience of the
public and other elements deemed pertinent.
15A-1-6: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
No permit for a newspaper stand shall be issued unless the applicant shall
first procure and deliver to the Director of Public Works, a public liability
and property damage insurance policy in a form satisfactory to the Director of
Public Works, protecting the Village, its officers and agents, against any and
all liability for damages resulting from the construction, placing, maintenance
or use of the stand covered by the permit, such insurance to be written by a
company satisfactory to the Director of Public Works, and qualified under the
laws of the State to make such contracts, and to provide, as to each stand,
insurance of not less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) as to one
person killed or injured in a single accident, and of not less than forty
thousand dollars ($40,000.00) for two or more persons killed or injured in any
one accident, and of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in respect
to property damage in any one accident, such insurance to be kept in force by
the applicant with initial and renewal premiums prepaid in advance of the
periods covered, so long as the stand for which the permit is issued, shall
remain on public property.
15A-1-7: FEE; TERM:
The annual permit fee for each newspaper stand shall be five dollars ($5.00).
Such fee shall be due on January 1 of each year and such permit shall expire on
December 31 following the date of issuance, and when issued for a period of
less than one year, the fee to be paid shall be a proportionate part of the fee
fixed by this Section; provided, that no fee shall be less than one-half (1/2)
of the annual fee.
No permit fees shall be charged for unattended newspaper honor boxes, but a
permit shall be obtained for unattended newspaper honor boxes and all other
provisions of the Chapter complied with.
15A-1-8: TRANSFERABILITY:
No permit for a newspaper stand shall be transferred without the approval of
the Director of Public Works, and a fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be charged
for the issuance of a permit covering transfer and continuance of the permit.
15A-1-9: SPECIFICATIONS FOR NEWSPAPER STANDS:
No newspaper stand shall be placed, located, erected, constructed, maintained
or used on any public street or other public property unless it shall comply
with the following:
   A.   Each stand shall meet the requirements as to design and construction,
if any which may be imposed by the Director of Public Works, in addition to the
requirements of this Chapter.
   B.   No stand shall have an over-all height exceeding six feet (6'), nor an
over-all width exceeding four feet (4'), nor an over-all depth exceeding thirty
eight inches (38"); no canopy, base, door, shelf or other projection shall
extend beyond the above dimension limits.
   C.   No stand shall be so placed on or partly on any public sidewalk, as to
result in an unobstructed sidewalk width of less than eight feet (8').
   D.   Each stand on a public sidewalk or parkway shall be so positioned that
the larger of the two (2) horizontal dimensions shall be parallel to the
nearest curb.
   E.   The exterior surfaces of each stand shall be free from nail, hooks or
other protruding elements.
   F.   Unattended newspaper honor boxes shall be constructed of metal and
shall not exceed the following outside dimensions:
 
Height  43 inches
Width  �17 inches
Depth  �14 inches
 
15A-1-10: LIMITATIONS ON USE OF NEWSPAPER STANDS:
It shall be unlawful to exhibit, offer to sell, at or from any newspaper stand
on any public street or other public place, anything other than newspapers and
regularly published magazines or to place on any public street or other public
place at or near any such stand, or use in connection with such stand, any
rack, chair, box or other article not located wholly within the stand. (Ord.
1981-0-62, 9-8-81)
CHAPTER 16
NUISANCES
General Provisions   1
Graffiti   2
Criminal Nuisance Abatement   3
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
16-1-1: Nuisance Defined
16-1-2: Abatement
16-1-3: Notice of Nuisance
16-1-4: Schedule of Nuisances Generally
16-1-5: Violations of Ordinances of the Village of Oak Park
16-1-6: Repeated Violations of the Law
16-1-1: NUISANCE DEFINED:
It shall constitute a nuisance to commit any offense which is in fact a
nuisance or which is a nuisance according to the common law, or which is made
such by any ordinance of the Village or the Statutes of this State, and shall
include any act, occupation or use of property or premises or equipment, or
structure of any kind which:
   A.   Shall annoy, injure or endanger the safety or health of the public.
   B.   Shall offend public decency.
   C.   Shall unlawfully interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render
dangerous for passage, a public park, sidewalk, street, alley or highway.
16-1-2: ABATEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Village Manager or his agent to serve notice, in
writing, upon the owner, occupant, agent, or person in possession, or control
of any lot, building, or premises in or upon which any nuisance may be found,
or who may be the owner or cause of any nuisance requiring such person to abate
the same in such manner as the Manager shall prescribe, within a reasonable
time. It shall not be necessary in any case for the Village Manager to specify
in his notice the manner in which any nuisance shall be abated, unless he shall
deem it advisable so to do. Such notice may be given or served by any officer
who is so directed or deputed.
It shall be the duty of the Village Manager to proceed at once upon the
expiration of the time specified in said notice to cause such nuisance to be
abated, except where no emergency exists the matter shall be referred to the
Village Attorney for court action. Whenever the owner, occupant, agent or
person in possession or control of any premises, in or upon which any nuisance
may be found, is unknown or cannot be found, the Village Manager may proceed to
abate such nuisance without notice. In either case, the expense of such
abatement shall be collected from the person who may have created, continued,
or suffered such nuisance to exist, in addition to any penalty or fine, and
such cost shall constitute a lien on the property on which the nuisance exists.
16-1-3: NOTICE OF NUISANCE:
The Village Manager may cause a warning sign to be placed on any premise on
which a nuisance exists, setting forth a description of the nuisance.
16-1-4: SCHEDULE OF NUISANCES GENERALLY:
The following are declared to be nuisances as well as and in addition to any
other act, omission of act, occupation or use of property or premises,
equipment or structure deemed to be a nuisance as declared in any other section
of the Code or other ordinances of the Village.
   A.   Stagnant water upon any premises.
   B.   Carcasses of animals, or any part thereof, not buried or destroyed
within twenty four (24) hours after death.
   C.   The disposition of garbage except as provided by this Code.
   D.   The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs unless such samples
are placed in the hands of an adult person.
   E.   All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by
fire, decay or otherwise as provided in Section
12-1-9 of Chapter 12 of this Code.
   F.   All dangerous or unsanitary, unguarded, unprotected machinery or
equipment so located as to be accessible to the public.
   G.   All infestations of flies, fleas, roaches, lice, ticks, rats, mice, fly
maggots and mosquito larvae.
   H.   Any act or omission rendering drinking water unwholesome or impure.
   I.   The growth upon any premises of any noxious plants or weeds.
   J.   The shaking or beating out of any window, door or opening of any
building any mops, mat, carpet, rug, cloth, pillow, bed sheet, bedding or other
similar object.
   K.   Any building structure or premise which is in an unsanitary or
dangerous condition.
   L.   The disposal of sewerage except through the sewerage system of the
Village.
   M.   The use of any premises so as to cause noxious odors offensive beyond
the premises.
   N.   The use of poison outside of any structure without placing the same in
a receptacle so that it can be reached only by rodents for which the poison is
intended.
   O.   The use of premises for prostitution.
   P.   Except in cases of emergencies it shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to conduct any building operations between the hours of six o'clock (6:
00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. including the operation or the use of
any pile drivers, steam shovels, pneumatic hammers, derricks, steam or electric
hoists or other apparatus, the use of which is attended with loud or unusual
noise, in any block in which more than one-half (1/2) of the buildings on
either side of the street are used exclusively for residence purposes. (1981
Code)
   Q.   The maintenance of beehives in violation of chapter 20, article 11 of
this code. (Ord. 2011-0-86, 12-5-2011)
   R.   No gas tank or reservoir shall be located within five hundred feet
(500') of any building used in the Village for church, or public or parochial
school purposes. Such a structure so located and maintained is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance.
   S.   No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe in
any public elevator, elevated train, bus or other public conveyance (except for
hired transport) in the Village of Oak Park. (1981 Code)
16-1-5: VIOLATIONS OF ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF OAK PARK:
Any violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the Village of Oak Park
relating to housing, dangerous buildings, disposition of garbage, noise, food
and food establishments, gambling, health and sanitation, smoke abatement,
diseased trees and weeds is declared a nuisance and subject to abatement as
provided herein. (1981 Code)
16-1-6: REPEATED VIOLATIONS OF THE LAW:
The repeated violation of any of the provisions of the ordinances of the
Village of Oak Park, the statutes of the state of Illinois or the United States
Code or regulations adopted thereunder, is declared a nuisance and subject to
abatement as provided herein. (1981 Code)
ARTICLE 2
GRAFFITI
SECTION:
16-2-1: Purpose And Intent
16-2-2: Definitions
16-2-3: Prohibited Acts
16-2-4: Accessibility To Graffiti Implements
16-2-5: Penalties
16-2-6: Rewards And Reimbursements For Information
16-2-7: Removal Of Graffiti By Perpetrator
16-2-8: Removal Of Graffiti By Property Owner Or Village
16-2-9: Ease Of Removal Provisions
16-2-10: Prevention Provisions
16-2-11: Trust Fund
16-2-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Oak Park is enacting this
article to help prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to enhance
graffiti removal efforts from both public and private property. (Ord. 2008-0-
024, 6-16-08)
16-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER: Any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the
purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of defacing
property.
BROAD TIPPED MARKER: Any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement with a
flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width, is greater than
one-fourth (1/4) of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is
not water soluble.
ETCHING EQUIPMENT: Any tool, device, or substance that can be used to make
permanent marks on any natural or manmade surface.
GRAFFITI: Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other
defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted,
or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private
property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not
authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property, or, despite
advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the Village
Board.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT: An aerosol paint container, a broad tipped marker, gum
label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other
device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade
surface.
PAINT STICK OR GRAFFITI STICK: Any device containing a solid non water soluble
form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar non water soluble substance
capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at
least one-eighth (1/8) of an inch in width.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other
legal entity. (Ord. 2008-0-024, 6-16-08)
16-2-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Defacement: It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to
any natural or manmade surface on any Village owned property or, without the
permission of the owner or occupant, on any non Village owned property.
   B.   Possession Of Graffiti Implements:
      1.   By Minors At Or Near School Facilities: It shall be unlawful for any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any graffiti implement
while on any school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures, or
in areas immediately adjacent to those specific locations upon public property,
or upon private property without the prior written consent of the owner or
occupant of such private property. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to the possession of broad tipped markers by a minor attending or
traveling to or from a school at which the minor is enrolled if the minor is
participating in a class at the school that formally requires the possession of
broad tipped markers. The burden of proof in any prosecution for violation of
this section shall be upon the minor student to establish the need to possess a
broad tipped marker.
      2.   By Minors In Designated Public Places Or At Or Near Underpasses,
Bridge Abutments, Storm Drains, Or Similar Types Of Infrastructure: It shall be
unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any
graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility, park, playground,
swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public building or structure
owned or operated by the Village while in or within fifty feet (50') of an
underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, or similar types of infrastructure
unless otherwise authorized by the Village. (Ord. 2008-0-024, 6-16-08)
16-2-4: ACCESSIBILITY TO GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS:
   A.   Furnishing To Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person,
other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan, or
otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or
otherwise furnished, any aerosol paint container, broad tipped marker, or paint
stick to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years without the written
consent of the parents or guardian of the person.
   B.   Display And Storage:
      1.   Every person who owns, conducts, operates, or manages a retail
commercial establishment selling aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, or
broad tipped markers shall store the containers, sticks or markers in an area
continuously observable, through direct visual observation or surveillance
equipment, by employees of the retail establishment during the regular course
of business.
      2.   In the event that a commercial retail establishment is unable to
store the aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, or broad tipped markers in an
area as provided above, the establishment shall store the containers, sticks,
and markers in an area not accessible to the public in the regular course of
business without employee assistance.
   C.   Signage Required: Every person who operates a retail commercial
establishment selling graffiti implements shall:
      1.   Place a sign in clear public view at or near the display of such
products stating:
Graffiti is against the law. Any person who defaces real or personal property
with paint or any other liquid or device is guilty of a crime punishable by
imprisonment of up to sixty (60) days and/or a fine up to One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00).
      2.   Place a sign in the direct view of such persons responsible for
accepting customer payment for graffiti implements stating:
Selling spray paint, paint sticks, or broad-tipped markers to persons under
eighteen (18) years of age is against the law and punishable by imprisonment of
up to sixty (60) days and/or by a fine of up to One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00).
(Ord. 2008-0-024, 6-16-08)
16-2-5: PENALTIES:
   A.   Fines And Imprisonment: Any person violating this article shall be
punished by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first
offense; five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense; and one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent offense, or by imprisonment
for a term not to exceed sixty (60) days, or by both fine and imprisonment at
the discretion of the Court.
      1.   In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be
jointly and severely liable with the minor for payment of all fines.
      2.   Failure of the parents or legal guardian to make payment will result
in the filing of a lien on the parents' or legal guardian's property that
includes the fine and administrative costs.
      3.   Upon an application and finding of indigence, the court may decline
to order fines against the minor, parents or guardian.
   B.   Restitution: In addition to any punishment specified in this section,
the court shall order any violator to make restitution to the victim for
damages or loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator's offense in the
amount or manner determined by the court. In the case of a minor, the parents
or legal guardian shall be ordered jointly and severally liable with the minor
to make the restitution.
   C.   Community Service: In lieu of, or as part of, the penalties specified
in this section, a minor or adult may be required to perform community service
as described by the court based on the following minimum requirements:
      1.   The minor or adult shall perform at least thirty (30) hours of
community service.
      2.   At least one parent or guardian of the minor shall be in attendance
a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the period of assigned community service.
      3.   The entire period of community service shall be performed under the
supervision of a community service provider approved by the Chief of Police.
      4.   Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the minor or adult to a
type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most
rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult, including community service that
involves graffiti removal.
   D.   Civil Responsibility For Damages For Wrongful Sale, Display Or Storage:
Any person who sells, displays or stores, or permits the sale, display or
storage, of any graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be personally liable for all costs, including attorney fees and
court costs, incurred by any party in connection with the removal of graffiti,
the repair of any property containing graffiti, or such party's prosecution of
a civil claim for reimbursement or damages resulting from such graffiti removal
or property repair, arising from the use by any person of such wrongfully sold,
displayed or stored graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of this
article, provided that such liability shall not exceed one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00). (Ord. 2008-0-024, 6-16-2008)
16-2-6: REWARDS AND REIMBURSEMENTS FOR INFORMATION:
   A.   Pursuant to this section, the Village may offer a reward in an amount
to be established by resolution of the Village Board for information leading to
the identification and apprehension of any person who wilfully damages or
destroys any public or private property by the use of graffiti. In the event of
damage to public property, the offender or the parents or legal guardian of any
unemancipated minor must reimburse the Village for any reward paid. In the
event of multiple contributors of information, the reward amount shall be
divided by the Village in the manner it shall deem appropriate.
   B.   Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the Village
in the manner specified by the Village Board.
   C.   No claim for a reward shall be allowed unless the Village investigates
and verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the requirements of
this section have been satisfied. (Ord. 2008-0-024, 6-16-2008)
16-2-7: REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI BY PERPETRATOR:
Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall have the duty
to remove the graffiti within twenty four (24) hours after notice by the
Village or private owner of the property involved. Such removal shall be done
in a manner prescribed by the Chief of Police or the Director of the Department
of Public Works for public property and by the Director of the Development
Customer Services Department or the Director of the Community Relations
Department for private property. Any person applying graffiti shall be
responsible for the removal or for the payment of the removal. Failure of any
person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional
violation of this article. Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor,
the parents or legal guardian shall also be responsible for such removal or for
the payment for the removal. (Ord. 2008-0-024, 6-16-2008; amd. Ord. 15-183, 11-
2-2015)
16-2-8: REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI BY PROPERTY OWNER OR VILLAGE:
If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator according to section 16-2-7 of
this article, graffiti shall be removed pursuant to the following provisions:
   A.   Property Owner Responsibility: It is unlawful for any person who is the
owner or who has primary responsibility for control of property or for repair
or maintenance of property in the Village to permit property that is defaced
with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of seven (7) days after service by
first class mail of notice of the defacement. The notice shall contain the
following information:
      1.   The street address and legal description of the property sufficient
for identification of the property;
      2.   A statement that the property is a potential graffiti nuisance
property with a concise description of the conditions leading to the finding;
      3.   A statement that the graffiti must be removed within seven (7) days
after receipt of the notice and that if the graffiti is not abated within that
time the Village will declare the property to be a public nuisance, subject to
the abatement procedures in this section; and
      4.   An information sheet identifying any graffiti removal assistance
programs available through the Village and private graffiti removal
contractors.
   B.   Exceptions To Property Owner Responsibility: The removal requirements
of subsection 16-2-8A of this section shall not apply if the property owner or
responsible party can demonstrate that:
      1.   The property owner or responsible party lacks the financial ability
to remove the defacing graffiti; or
      2.   The property owner or responsible party has an active program for
the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part
of that program, in which case it shall be unlawful to permit such property to
remain defaced with graffiti for a period of ten (10) days after service by
first class mail of notice of the defacement.
   C.   Right Of Village To Remove:
      1.   Use Of Public Funds: Whenever the Village becomes aware or is
notified and determines that graffiti is located on a publicly or privately
owned property viewable from a public or quasi-public place, the Village shall
be authorized to use public funds for the removal of the graffiti, or for the
painting or repairing of the graffiti, but shall not authorize or undertake to
provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive an area than that
where the graffiti is located, unless the Village Manager, or the designee of
the Village Manager, determines in writing that a more extensive area is
required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic
disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the property owner or
responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the
more extensive area.
      2.   Right Of Entry On Private Property: Prior to entering upon private
property or property owned by a public entity other than the Village for the
purpose of graffiti removal the Village shall attempt to secure the consent of
the property owner or responsible party and a release of the Village from
liability for property damage or personal injury. If the property owner or
responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the time
specified by this article, or if the Village has requested consent to remove or
paint over the offending graffiti and the property owner or responsible party
has refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the Village and consistent
with the terms of this section, the Village shall commence abatement and cost
recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal according to the provisions
specified below.
   D.   Abatement And Cost Recovery Proceedings:
      1.   Notice Of Due Process Hearing: The Village Manager, or the designee
of the Village Manager, serving as the Hearing Officer, shall provide the
property owner of record and the party responsible for the maintenance of the
property, if a person different than the owner, not less than forty eight (48)
hours' notice of the Village's intent to hold a due process hearing at which
the property owner or responsible party shall be entitled to present evidence
and argue that the property does not constitute a public nuisance. Notice shall
be served in person by the Village, by registered mail or by licensed and
bonded delivery service with proof of delivery returned to the Village. If the
owner of record cannot be found after a diligent search, the notice may be
served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a
period of ten (10) days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Village at least seven (7) days prior to said hearing.
      2.   Determination Of Hearing Officer: The determination of the Hearing
Officer, after the due process hearing, shall be final and not appealable. If,
after the due process hearing, regardless of the attendance of the owner or the
responsible party or their respective agents, the Hearing Officer determines
that the property contains graffiti viewable from a public or quasi-public
place, the Hearing Officer shall give written notice in an eradication order
that, unless the graffiti is removed within three (3) days, the Village shall
enter upon the property, cause the removal, painting over in such color as
shall meet with the approval of the Hearing Officer, or such other eradication
thereof as the Hearing Officer determines appropriate, and shall provide the
owner and the responsible party thereafter with an accounting of the costs of
the eradication effort on a full cost recovery basis.
      3.   Eradication Effort: Not sooner than the time specified in the order
of the Hearing Officer, the Village Manager, or the designee of the Village
Manager, shall implement the eradication order and shall provide an accounting
to the owner and the responsible party of the costs thereof.
      4.   Cost Hearing: The owner or responsible party may request a cost
hearing before the Hearing Officer on the eradication accounting, and
appropriate due process must be extended to the owner or responsible party. If
following the cost hearing or, if no hearing is requested, after the
implementation of the eradication order, the Hearing Officer determines that
all or a portion of the costs are appropriately chargeable to the eradication
effort, the total amount set forth in the eradication accounting, or an amount
thereof determined as appropriate by the Hearing Officer, shall be due and
payable by the owner or responsible party within thirty (30) days. Any amount
of eradication charges assessed by the Hearing Officer that is less than the
total amount set forth in the eradication accounting shall be explained by
written letter from the Hearing Officer to the Village Board.
      5.   Lien: As to such property where the responsible party is the
property owner, if all or any portion of the assessed eradication charges
remain unpaid after sixty (60) days, pursuant to the authority created by this
section and by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-13, the portion thereof
that remains unpaid shall constitute a lien on the property that was the
subject of the eradication effort. The Director of Public Works shall present a
resolution of lien to the Village Board and upon passage and adoption thereof,
shall cause a certified copy of the lien to be recorded with the Cook County
Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 2008-0-024, 6-16-08)
16-2-9: EASE OF REMOVAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Common Utility Colors And Paint Type: Any gas, electric, telephone,
water, sewer, cable, telephone and other utility operating in the Village shall
paint its above surface metal fixtures with a uniform paint type and color that
meets with the approval of the Village Manager.
   B.   Condition Encroachment Permits: All encroachment permits issued by the
Village shall, among such other things, be conditioned on:
      1.   The permittee's application of an antigraffiti material to the
encroaching object of a type and nature that is acceptable to the Village
Manager, or the Village Manager's designee:
      2.   The permittee's immediate removal of any graffiti;
      3.   The Village's right to remove graffiti or to paint the encroaching
object; or
      4.   The permittee's providing the Village with sufficient matching paint
and/or antigraffiti material on demand for use in the painting of the
encroaching object containing graffiti.
   C.   Condition Tentative Maps: In approving tentative or parcel maps,
special use permits, variances, or other similar land use entitlements, the
Village shall consider imposing any or all of the following conditions, or
other similar or related conditions, at the public hearing required by law for
approval of the tentative or parcel map, special use permit, variance or other
similar land use entitlement:
      1.   Use Of Antigraffiti Material: Developer shall apply an antigraffiti
material of a type and nature that is acceptable to the Village Manager, or the
designee of the Village Manager, to the publicly viewable surfaces on the
improvements to be constructed at the site deemed by the Village Manager, or
designee, to be likely to attract graffiti;
      2.   Right Of Access To Remove Graffiti: Developer shall grant, prior to
resale of any of the parcels that are within the territory of the map, the
right of entry over and access to such parcels, upon forty eight (48) hours'
posting of notice by authorized Village employees or agents, to the Village for
the purpose of removing or painting over graffiti;
      3.   Supply Village With Graffiti Removal Material: Developer shall, for
a period of two (2) years after the resale of the final lot, provide the
Village with sufficient matching paint and/or antigraffiti material on demand
for use in the painting over or removal of graffiti; or
      4.   Owner To Immediately Remove Graffiti: Developer shall, either as
part of the general conditions, covenants and restrictions, or separate
covenants recorded against individual lots, prior to resale of any of the
parcels, covenant in a form satisfactory to the Village that the owner of the
lots shall immediately remove any graffiti placed thereon. (Ord. 2008-0-024, 6-
16-08)
16-2-10: PREVENTION PROVISIONS:
   A.   Design Of Potential Graffiti-Attracting Surfaces: Any applicant for
design review approval, variation permit, special use permit, development
agreement, or other form of development or building permit shall, to the extent
deemed feasible by the Village Manager, or the designee of the Village Manager,
have designed any building structures visible from any public or quasi-public
place in such a manner to consider prevention of graffiti, including, but not
limited to, the following:
      1.   Use of a protective coating to provide for the effective and
expeditious removal of graffiti;
      2.   Use of additional lighting;
      3.   Use of nonsolid fencing;
      4.   Use of landscaping designed to cover large expansive walls such as
ivy or similar clinging vegetation; or
      5.   Use of architectural design to break up long, continuous walls or
solid areas.
   B.   Retrofit Existing Graffiti-Attracting Surfaces; Nonresidential
Structures: The following provisions may be incorporated in a graffiti
eradication order during an abatement hearing, at the discretion of the Hearing
Officer.
      1.   At Owner's Expense: Any surface of a structure on a parcel of land
used for nonresidential purposes that has been defaced with graffiti more than
five (5) times in twelve (12) months shall be declared a public nuisance and
required to be retrofitted, at the cost of the property owner, with features or
qualities as may be established by the Village as necessary to reduce the
attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more
convenient or efficient removal of graffiti. In exercising the authority
hereunder, the Village may not impose a cost on the property owner of greater
than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00);
      2.   At Village's Cost: The owner of property used for nonresidential
purposes on which is located a surface of a structure that has been defaced
with graffiti more than five (5) times in twelve (12) months shall permit the
Village to enter the property and, at the Village's cost, make modifications as
necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as
necessary to permit more convenient or efficient removal of graffiti. (Ord.
2008-0-024, 6-16-08)
16-2-11: TRUST FUND:
The Village Board hereby creates the Village Antigraffiti Trust Fund. Penalties
assessed against violators of this article shall be placed in the fund along
with any monetary donations received from persons wishing to contribute to the
fund. The Village Board shall direct the expenditures of monies in the fund.
Such expenditures shall be limited to the payment of the cost of graffiti
removal, the payment, at the discretion of the Village Manager, of rewards for
information leading to the conviction of violation of this article, the costs
of administering this article, and such other public purposes as may be
approved by the Village Board by resolution. (Ord. 2008-0-024, 6-16-08)
ARTICLE 3
CRIMINAL NUISANCE ABATEMENT
SECTION:
16-3-1: Definitions
16-3-2: Criminal Nuisance Unlawful; Other Remedies
16-3-3: Pre-Abatement Procedure
16-3-4: Emergency Closure
16-3-5: Voluntary Abatement Agreements
16-3-6: Violations
16-3-7: Notice Of Violations
16-3-8: Abatement - Administrative Hearing; Relief; Fines
16-3-9: Alternative Enforcement
16-3-10: Criminal Nuisance Property Located At Multi-Unit Rental Residential
Property
16-3-11: Retaliation Prohibited
16-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, and the interpretation and enforcement
thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have
the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall
indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the
plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number. The
words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not
defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
BUSINESS:  Any business required to obtain a business license from the Village pursuant to
           chapter 8 ("Business Licensing") of this Code.
CHIEF OF   The Chief of Police of the Village or the Chief of Police's designee.
POLICE:
CONTROL:   The right to permit or deny entry onto property, the right to direct a person to
           leave property or the right to govern conduct that occurs on property.
           A business or lot of record or parcel of real property upon which two (2) or more
           of the criminal activities set forth below in subsections 16- 3-1A through S of
           this definition have occurred within a twelve (12) month period, except for those
           activities set forth in subsection 16-3-1S of this definition.
           A.   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 9 (homicide) of the criminal
           code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-1 et seq.
           B.   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 10 (kidnapping and related
           offenses) of the criminal code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-1 et
           seq.
           C.   Any offenses defined and prohibited by article 11 (sex offenses), subdivision
           15 (prostitution offenses) of the criminal code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled
           Statutes 5/11- 14 et seq.
           D.   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 12 (bodily harm) of the criminal
           code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12 et seq.
           E.   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 16 (theft) of the criminal code
           of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-1 et seq.
           F.   Any offense defined and prohibited by section 20-2 (possession of explosives
           or incendiary devices) of the criminal code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
           5/20-2 et seq.
           G.   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 21-1 (damage and trespass to
           property) of the criminal code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-1 et
           seq.
           H.   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 24 (deadly weapons) of the
           criminal code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et seq.
           I.   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 25 (mob action) of the criminal
           code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1 et seq.
           J.   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 26 (disorderly conduct) of the
           criminal code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-1 et seq.
           K.   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 28 (gambling) of the criminal
CRIMINAL   code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 28-1 et seq.
NUISANCE   L.   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 31 (interference with public
BUSINESS   officers) of the criminal code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/31-1 et
OR         seq.
PROPERTY:  M.   Any offense defined and prohibited by section 37-1 (maintaining public
           nuisance) of the criminal code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/37-1.
           N.   Any offense defined and prohibited by section 6-16 (prohibited sales and
           possession) or section 6-20 (transfer, possession, and consumption of alcoholic
           liquor; restrictions) of the liquor control act of 1934, 235 Illinois Compiled
           Statutes 5/6-16 and 5/6-20.
           O.   Any offense defined and prohibited by the cannabis control act, 720 Illinois
           Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq.
           P.   Any offense defined and prohibited by the Illinois controlled substances act,
           720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/1 et seq.
           Q.   Any inchoate offense defined and prohibited by article 8 (inchoate offenses)
           of the criminal code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-1 et seq., which
           is relative to the commission of any of the aforesaid principal offenses.
           R.   Any offense that constitutes a felony under state or federal law or class A
           misdemeanor under state law.
           S.   Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1.5, as amended, the following
           shall not constitute criminal activity and no tenant, landlord, guest, neighbor, or
           other individual shall be penalized for the following:
              1.   Contact made to the police or other emergency services, if: a) the contact
           was made with the intent to prevent or respond to domestic violence or sexual
           violence; b) the intervention of emergency assistance was needed to respond to or
           prevent domestic violence or sexual violence; or c) the contact was made by, on
           behalf of, or otherwise concerns an individual with a disability and the purpose of
           the contact was related to that individual's disability;
              2.   An incident or incidents of actual or threatened domestic violence or
           sexual violence against a tenant, household member, or guest occurring in the
           dwelling unit or on the premises; or
              3.   Criminal activity or a violation of this code occurring in the dwelling
           unit or on the premises that is directly relating to domestic violence or sexual
           violence, engaged in by a tenant, member of a tenant's household, guest, or other
           party, and against a tenant, household member, guest, or other party.
           For purposes of this article, a "hearing officer" means either: (1) a Village
HEARING    administrative law judge appointed pursuant to chapter 29 ("Administrative
OFFICER:   Adjudication"), article 1 ("Administrative Adjudication System") of this Code; or
           (2) the Village Manager or the Village Manager's designee.
           Any person holding a legal or equitable interest in real property or owning or
           operating a business at real property located in the Village. Owner includes, but
           is not limited to:
OWNER:     A.   A mortgagee in possession in whom is vested:
              1.   All or part of the legal title to the property; or
              2.   All or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to the present use
           and enjoyment of the premises; or
           B.   An occupant in control of property.
PERMIT:    To allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, suffer, or expressly assent
           or agree to the doing of the act.
PERSON:    Any entity capable of holding a legal or equitable interest in real property or a
           business.
           Any person in, or with the right of, actual or constructive possession of real
PERSON IN  property with the right to permit or deny entry thereon, the right to direct a
CHARGE:    person to leave the property or the right to govern conduct that occurs on the
           property. Property may have more than one person in charge at any given time.
PROPERTY:  Real property, including, but not limited to, any lot, parcel, condominium unit or
           other tract of land.
RENTAL OR  All written and oral agreements of whatever duration which embody the terms and
LEASE      conditions of the use and occupancy of a residential dwelling unit or commercial
AGREEMENT: property.
VILLAGE:   The Village of Oak Park, Cook County, Illinois.
VILLAGE    The Village Code of Oak Park, Illinois, and all codes adopted by reference as part
CODE OR    of the Village Code. (Ord. 15-182, 11-2-2015, eff. 7-1-2016; amd. Ord. 22-63, 9-6-
CODE:      2022)
 
16-3-2: CRIMINAL NUISANCE UNLAWFUL; OTHER REMEDIES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any business or property to be a criminal nuisance
business or property under this article.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person in charge to permit a business or
property under his or her control to be a criminal nuisance business or
property.
   C.   The procedures, rights and remedies set forth herein are in addition to
any other right, remedy or claim the Village may have and are not intended to
waive or limit the availability of any common law or statutory cause of action.
(Ord. 2013-0-75, 12-9-2013; amd. Ord. 22-63, 9-6-2022)
16-3-3: PRE-ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
When the Chief of Police receives a police report documenting the occurrence of
a second criminal acts or conduct on or at a business or property as described
in the definition of "criminal nuisance business or property" in section
16-3-1 of this article, the Chief of Police shall examine such reports and
determine whether the acts or conduct set forth therein constitutes criminal
nuisance activity. Upon such a finding, the Chief of Police may in the Chief of
Police's discretion:
   A.   Notify the owner or person in charge in writing that the business or
property is in danger of becoming a criminal nuisance business or property. The
notice shall contain the following information:
      1.   The street address or a legal description sufficient for
identification of the business or property;
      2.   A statement that the Chief of Police has information that the
property may be a criminal nuisance property, with a concise description of the
criminal nuisance activities that may exist, or that have occurred. The Chief
of Police shall offer the person in charge an opportunity to propose a course
of action that the Chief of Police agrees will abate the criminal nuisance
activities;
      3.   Demand that the person in charge meet with the Chief of Police or
the Village Manager within ten (10) days after service of the notice to discuss
a voluntary abatement agreement with the Village.; and
      4.   Contact information for the Chief of Police or the Village Manager.
   B.   After complying with the notification procedures described herein, if
the Chief of Police receives a police report documenting the occurrence of
additional criminal nuisance activities on or within a business or property
within the same one-year period as the acts or conduct for which notice was
issued in accordance with subsection A above and the Chief of Police determines
that the property has become a "criminal nuisance business or property" as
defined in section
16-3-1 of this article, the Chief of Police shall:
      1.   Notify the owner or person in charge in writing that the business or
property has been determined to be a criminal nuisance business or property.
The notice shall contain the following information:
         a.   The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the business or property;
         b.   A statement that the Chief of Police has determined that the
business or property is a criminal nuisance business or property with a concise
description of the nuisance activities leading to the findings supporting the
determination;
         c.   Demand that the person in charge immediately address the
conditions qualifying the business or property as a criminal nuisance business
or property;
         d.   The time and location of a hearing scheduled pursuant to this
article if applicable; and
         e.   Contact information for the Chief of Police or the Village
Manager.
      2.   Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail
addressed to the person in charge or the owner at the address of the business
or property believed to be a criminal nuisance property, or such other place
which is likely to give the person in charge or the owner notice of the
determination by the Chief of Police.
      3.   The failure of any person to receive notice that the business or
property may be a criminal nuisance business or property shall not invalidate
or otherwise affect proceedings under this article.
   C.   Statements made by the person in charge or the owner to the Chief of
Police or Village Manager regarding the nuisance activities shall not
constitute an admission that nuisance activities have occurred or are
occurring. This section does not require the exclusion of any evidence which is
otherwise admissible or offered for any other purpose. (Ord. 2013-0-75, 12-9-
2013; amd. Ord. 22-63, 9-6-2022)
16-3-4: EMERGENCY CLOSURE:
If the Chief of Police determines that due to the occurrence of acts or conduct
constituting criminal nuisance activity presents an immediate threat to the
public safety or welfare, the Chief of Police may order the immediate and
summary closure of a business in accordance with the following procedures:
   A.   The Chief of Police may abate the nuisances and the threat, and
summarily close a business by posting a notice at the business and mailing via
certified mail a copy thereof to the registered licensee of the business. The
notice must include, without limitation:
      1.   An order that all business activities immediately cease at the
business;
      2.   The reasons for the summary closure;
      3.   Information concerning the right of the owner to request a hearing
concerning the summary closure order pursuant to subsection B below; and
      4.    Contact information for the Village Manager or Police Chief.
   B.   The owner of a business summarily closed pursuant to this section may
request a hearing before a hearing officer by filing a written request therefor
with the Chief of Police not later than five days after the issuance of the
summary closure order. The hearing officer must conduct the hearing within five
days after the filing by the owner of a hearing request. After receipt of
evidence and testimony at the hearing, the hearing officer may affirm, modify,
or terminate the summary closure order, in their discretion, as may be
necessary in the determination of the hearing officer to address any immediate
threat presented by the operation of the business.
   C.   Any summary closure order issued pursuant to this section remain in
effect until the earlier to occur of: (1) the termination of the order by the
Chief of Police upon a determination that the business no longer presents an
immediate threat to the public safety and welfare; (2) the termination of the
order by a hearing officer pursuant to this section; (3) entry of an order
pursuant to Section
16-3-8 of this Code; or (4) 60 days after the date of the order unless the
Village commences an action for a declaration that the business is a criminal
nuisance business pursuant to Section
16-3-8 of this Code. (Ord. 22-63, 9-6-2022)
16-3-5: VOLUNTARY ABATEMENT AGREEMENTS:
Upon receipt of a notice pursuant to section
16-3-3 of this article, but prior to entry of an order pursuant to section
16-3-8 of this article, the owner may request that the Village and the owner
enter into a voluntary abatement agreement providing for the performance of
specific actions by the owner or its designee to address any previously
occurring criminal nuisance activity and to reasonably prevent the occurrence,
and for the agreement by the Village to suspend any proceedings under section
16-3-8 of this article during the term of the agreement, all subject to such
terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed by the Village and the owner.
The Village Manager in the Village Manager's discretion may execute any
voluntary abatement agreement that the Village Manager determines will
reasonably prevent and abate criminal nuisance activity. (Ord. 22-63, 9-6-2022)
16-3-6: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Any business or property on which criminal nuisance activities occur
may be declared a criminal nuisance business or property. No business or
property shall be declared a criminal nuisance business or property unless it
is proven by a preponderance of the evidence that there has been two (2) or
more instances of criminal nuisance activities within a one-year period of time
arising out of or arising from the business or property.
   B.   Every person has the following affirmative duties with respect to any
business or property for which they hold a legal or equitable interest:
      1.   To refrain from encouraging or permitting a business or property to
become a criminal nuisance business or property; and
      2.   To take affirmative actions to prevent, mitigate, control, or
otherwise address any conduct or activity which constitutes criminal nuisance
activity.
   C.   Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be considered
a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 2013-0-75, 12-9-2013; amd. Ord. 22-63,
9-6-2022)
16-3-7: NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS:
   A.   The service of notice of any violation under this article shall be made
either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
person in charge or the owner at the address of the nuisance property, or such
other place which is likely to give the person in charge or the owner notice of
the determination of the Chief of Police.
   B.   The failure of any person to receive notice, as provided above, shall
not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this article. (Ord.
2013-0-75, 12-9-2013; amd. Ord. 22-63, 9-6-2022)
16-3-8: ABATEMENT - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING; RELIEF; FINES:
   A.   A notice of violation shall be adjudicated pursuant to the procedures
set forth in chapter 29, article 1, "Administrative Adjudication System", of
this code, with the exception that section
29-1-12, "Notice Of Violation; Notice Of Hearing; Service", of this code as
amended, shall not be applicable.
   B.   In an action seeking the abatement of a criminal nuisance business or
property, the Village shall establish by a preponderance of the evidence that
the business or property is a criminal nuisance business or property. The owner
or person in charge shall be permitted to rebut such evidence and present any
other evidence that is, in the discretion of the hearing officer, relevant and
reliable.
   C.   It shall be an affirmative defense by the owner or person in charge to
an action seeking a determination that a property is a criminal nuisance
property that the owner or person in charge at the time in question could not,
in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property
had become a criminal nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise
of reasonable care or diligence, control the conduct of tenants or others in
possession leading to the finding that the property is a criminal nuisance
property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and
diligence, obtain an order for possession of the property pursuant to the
provisions of the forcible entry and detainer act, 735 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/9- 101 et seq., or that the owner or person in charge was the victim
of the crime, including, but not limited to, an act of domestic or sexual
violence as those terms are defined in section 10 of the safe homes act, 765
Illinois Compiled Statutes 750/10, or stalking as that term is defined in the
criminal code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-7.3.
   D.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine
on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing, whether or not the
property is a criminal nuisance property. The determination shall be in writing
and shall be designated as the findings, decisions, and order. The hearing
officer's decision shall be final and binding and subject to review under the
Illinois administrative review law as set forth in section
29-1-11 of this code, as amended. The findings, decision and order shall
include the hearing officer's findings of fact, a decision whether or not the
property is a criminal nuisance property based upon the findings of fact, and
an order for abatement of the nuisance activities or sanctioning the person in
charge or the owner, or entering a finding that a violation is not proved.
      1.   A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served upon the
person in charge or the owner if different than the person in charge, within
ten (10) business days. Service shall be in the same manner as set forth in
section
16-3-7 of this article.
      2.   In the event that the order provides for the abatement of criminal
nuisance activities, the hearing officer shall establish a status date after
the date established for the abatement of the criminal nuisance activities in
order to determine whether there has been compliance with the order. At such
time, the hearing officer shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant
to the compliance with the order and continued abatement of the nuisance
activities.
   E.   If the hearing officer makes a finding that a property was, or is, a
criminal nuisance property, the hearing officer may impose any or all of the
following remedies:
      1.   Fine: The hearing officer may fine the person in charge or the owner
if that person is different than the person in charge, not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each violation of this article. Each day a criminal nuisance activity
occurs or continues it shall be considered a separate and distinct violation.
The hearing officer may at his or her discretion impose such a fine for each
day the criminal nuisance activity goes unabated.
      2.   Aggravating Factors: In establishing the amount of any fine and any
other remedies, the hearing officer may consider any of the following factors:
         a.   The actions taken by the person in charge or the owner to
mitigate or correct the criminal nuisance activities at the property.
         b.   The repeated or continuous nature of the activities.
         c.   The magnitude or gravity of the activities.
         d.   The cooperation of the person in charge or the owner with the
Village.
         e.   The cost to the Village of investigating, correcting, or
attempting to correct the criminal nuisance activities.
         f.   The disturbance of neighbors.
         g.   The recurrence of loud and obnoxious noises.
         h.   Any other factor deemed relevant by the hearing officer.
      3.   Abatement and Security Measures: The hearing officer may order the
person in charge and/or the owner to take reasonable, timely and lawful
measures to abate the criminal nuisance activities or take certain security
measures, including specifying deadlines for the same, and in furtherance
thereof, may order a period of continued compliance wherein the matter will be
returned before the hearing officer to inform the hearing officer as to the
continued nuisance free status of the property for a period of up to one year.
Security measures may include enhanced lighting, surveillance cameras, fences
or barriers to entry and the hiring of security personnel.
      4.   Suspension or Revocation of Residential Rental License: The hearing
officer may suspend or revoke the residential rental license for the rental
unit(s) involved in the nuisance if the property is subject to such a license.
      5.   Closure and Securing of Rental Unit: The hearing officer may order
that a rental unit(s) be closed and secured against all unauthorized access,
use, and occupancy for a period of up to one year. The suspension or revocation
of any license, or any right to lease unit(s), shall not release or discharge
the license holder from paying fees or fines under this code, nor shall such
license holder be released from criminal prosecution or further civil
proceedings.
      6.   Suspension or Revocation of Occupancy Permit: The hearing officer
may suspend or revoke the occupancy permit that has been issued by the Village
for the property. The hearing officer may order that the property be closed and
secured against all unauthorized access, use, and occupancy for a period of up
to one year.
   7.   Temporary Closure: The hearing officer may order the closure of any
business, office, commercial warehouse, manufacturing, industrial, office or
research operation, plant, or any other commercial property, entity, or use
located on or in the criminal nuisance property. The hearing officer may order
that the property be closed and secured against all unauthorized access, use,
and occupancy for a period of up to one year.
      8.   Vacant or Unused Criminal Nuisance Business or Property: The hearing
officer may order that a vacant or unused criminal nuisance property of
whatever use or a vacant lot which is a criminal nuisance property, whether
residential or commercial, be closed and secured against all unauthorized
access, use, and occupancy. The hearing officer may order that the property be
closed and secured against all unauthorized access, use, and occupancy for a
period of up to one year. The hearing officer may further require that the
property be fenced and/or gated to physically restrict access. The hearing
officer may also require the hiring of security personnel to assure there is no
unauthorized access, use, and occupancy. In the event that the Village is
authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the Village
to secure the property shall be made and assessed as a judgment against the
person in charge or the owner and shall be a debt due and owing the Village. As
used herein, "costs" mean those costs actually incurred by the Village for the
physical securing of the property.
      9.   Attendance at Annual Landlord Management Seminar: The hearing
officer may require each person in charge and/or the owner who is found to have
violated this article to attend the next available annual landlord management
seminar pursuant to section
12-2-12 of this code, as amended, administered by the Village if the property
is subject to a residential rental license.
      10.   Business License Suspension or Revocation: The hearing officer may
suspend or revoke an applicable business license.
      11.   Reimbursement for Village's Extraordinary Costs or Expenses: The
hearing officer may require the person in charge or the owner to reimburse the
Village for any extraordinary costs or expenses incurred by the Village in the
provision of law enforcement, fire protection, or emergency medical services
necessary as a result of criminal nuisance activity.
   F.   Any person who is assessed the cost of closure or is fined by the
hearing officer shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the
Village.
   G.   The entry of an order by a hearing officer against a tenant pursuant to
this section shall not constitute a defense of the obligation to pay rent by
such tenant during any applicable effective period of such order.
   H.   Other remedies: In addition to any fines, fees, costs, or other
remedies set forth in this section, the Village may seek a permanent or
temporary injunction as set forth in this article, restraining order, the
appointment of a receiver, abatement measures, or other legal or equitable
remedies reasonably necessary for the prevention or abatement of a criminal
nuisance business or property. Nothing in this section shall be construed to:
(1) constitute an act of possession, ownership or control by the Village over
any private property; (2) deny a common law right to any person or entity to
abate a nuisance; (3) affect the status of ongoing Village prosecution or other
action; (4) prevent the issuance of a citation to any person or prosecution of
any person for any violation of this Code or other applicable law; or (5)
permit any activity prohibited by law. (Ord. 2013-0-75, 12-9-2013; amd. Ord.
22-63, 9-6-2023)
16-3-9: ALTERNATIVE ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Nuisance Abatement: As an alternative to the enforcement provisions set
forth in section
16-3-8 of this article, the Village may commence an action in the circuit court
of Cook County fourth municipal district or chancery division of the circuit
court of Cook County for a determination that the property is a criminal
nuisance property and/or to abate the criminal nuisance.
   B.   Injunction: Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence
that an alleged criminal nuisance property exists, the court may, without
notice or bond, enter a temporary restraining order or a preliminary injunction
or permanent injunction to enjoin any defendant from maintaining such criminal
nuisance property and may enter an order restraining any defendant named from
occupying, using or interfering with all property used in connection with the
criminal nuisance property.
   C.   Commencement Of Action, Burden Of Proof:
      1.   In an action seeking a determination that a property is a criminal
nuisance property, the Village shall have the initial burden of showing by a
preponderance of the evidence that the property is a criminal nuisance
property. The owner or person shall be permitted to rebut such evidence and
present any other evidence that is, in the discretion of the court, relevant
and reliable.
      2.   It shall be an affirmative defense by the person in charge or the
owner to an action seeking a determination that a property is a criminal
nuisance property that the owner or person in charge at the time in question
could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the
property had become a criminal nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the
exercise of reasonable care or diligence, control the conduct of tenants or
others in possession leading to the finding that the property is a criminal
nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care
and diligence, obtain an order for possession of the property, pursuant to the
provisions of the forcible entry and detainer act, 735 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/9-101 et seq., or that the owner or person in charge was the victim
of the crime, including, but not limited to, an act of domestic or sexual
violence as those terms are defined in section 10 of the safe homes act, 765
Illinois Compiled Statutes 750/10, or stalking as that term is defined in the
criminal code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-7.3.
      3.   In establishing the amount of any civil penalty or other relief
requested, the court may consider any of the following factors, if they are
found appropriate, and shall cite those found applicable:
         a.   The actions or lack of action taken by the person in charge or
the owner to mitigate or correct the criminal nuisance activities at the
property;
         b.   Whether the criminal activities at the property were repeated or
continuous;
         c.   The magnitude or gravity of the criminal nuisance activities at
the property;
         d.   The cooperation of the person in charge or the owner of the
property with the Village to correct the offending condition or abate the
nuisance;
         e.   Whether the owner or property manager, in the event of rental or
leased property, has required the tenant(s) to sign a "crime free lease
addendum";
         f.   Whether the person in charge or the owner has attended the
Village's crime free housing seminar; and
         g.   The cost to the Village of investigating and correcting or
attempting to correct the condition.
   D.   Remedy:
      1.   In the event a court determines a property to be a criminal nuisance
property, the court may order that the property be closed and secured against
all use and occupancy for a period of not less than thirty (30) days, but not
more than one hundred eighty (180) days or until the criminal nuisance activity
or violation is abated. In addition, the court may employ any other remedy
deemed by it appropriate to permanently abate the nuisance, including the entry
of a permanent injunction enjoining any tenants, co-tenants, and/or occupants
responsible or partially responsible for the property becoming a criminal
nuisance property from future use, occupancy of or presence at or upon the
property.
      2.   In addition to the remedy provided in subsection
16-3-9D1 of this section, the court may impose upon the person in charge or the
owner of the property in question a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed
the sum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day, payable to the
Village of Oak Park, for each day the person in charge or the owner had actual
knowledge that the property was a criminal nuisance property and permitted the
property to remain a criminal nuisance property.
      3.   In determining what remedy or remedies to employ, the court may
consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the property,
including, but not limited to:
         a.   The disturbance of neighbors;
         b.   The occurrence of other criminal nuisance activities at, on or
from the property;
         c.   The property's general reputation for criminal nuisance activity;
         d.   Physical damage to the property in question or surrounding
properties; and
         e.   Any hazard posed to any occupant of the property or adjoining
property occupant or owner resulting from the physical condition of the
property in question or its structures.
   E.   Secure Property: The court may authorize the Village to physically
secure the property against use or occupancy in the event the person in charge
or the owner of the property fails to do so within the time specified by the
court. In the event that the Village is authorized to secure the property, all
costs reasonably incurred by the Village to effectuate the closure shall be
made and assessed as a judgment against the owner and shall be a debt due and
owing the Village. As used herein, "costs" mean those costs actually incurred
by the Village for the physical securing of the property.
   F.   Costs To Secure Property: The Village shall prepare a statement of
costs incurred to physically secure the property and any other applicable costs
as provided by law, and the Village shall thereafter submit said statement to
the court for its review and approval.
   G.   Payment: Any person who is assessed the cost to physically secure a
property and/or civil penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the
payment thereof to the Village.
   H.   Obligation To Pay Rent: The entry of an order or injunction by the
court against a tenant pursuant to this section shall not constitute a defense
of the obligation to pay rent by such tenant during any applicable effective
period of such order or injunction. (Ord. 2013-0-75, 12-9-2013; amd. Ord. 22-
45, 6-6-2022; Ord. 22-63, 9-6-2022)
16-3-10: CRIMINAL NUISANCE PROPERTY LOCATED AT MULTI-UNIT RENTAL RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTY:
In the event any criminal nuisance property is a multi-unit rental residential
property, any order entered by the court to abate the nuisance or otherwise
vacate the property shall, in the discretion of the court, be limited in scope
as to apply only to the individual rental unit or person(s) in charge or tenant
(s) or occupants of that unit forming the basis for a finding that the property
is a criminal nuisance property. (Ord. 2013-0-75, 12-9-2013; amd. Ord. 22-63,
9-6-2022)
16-3-11: RETALIATION PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for a person in charge or owner to terminate the lease
agreement of a tenant or otherwise retaliate against any tenant because that
tenant complained or otherwise notified the Village concerning criminal
nuisance activity at a property. Such termination or retaliation shall be
enforceable as a violation of this article. (Ord. 2013-0-75, 12-9-2013; amd.
Ord. 22-63, 9-6-2022)
CHAPTER 17
OFFENSES
Identification Of Specific Offenses   1
Offenses Relating To Underage Drinking And Illicit Drugs   2
ARTICLE 1
IDENTIFICATION OF SPECIFIC OFFENSES
SECTION:
17-1-1: Assault
17-1-2: Reserved
17-1-3: Reserved
17-1-4: Birds
17-1-5: Offenses Against Public Peace
17-1-6: Burglar's Tools
17-1-7: Destroying Property
17-1-8: Disorderly Conduct
17-1-9: Disturbing Assemblies For Public Worship
17-1-10: Dog, Cock Or Other Animal Fighting
17-1-11: Houses Of Prostitution
17-1-12: Miscellaneous Sexual Offenses
17-1-13: Obscenity
17-1-14: Public Indecency
17-1-15: Profane Language
17-1-16: Curfew For Minors
17-1-17: License And Other Types Of Identification; Stealing, Detaching Or
Mutilating
17-1-18: Exhibiting Or Displaying Identification Devices Unlawfully
17-1-19: Obstructing Right-Of-Way
17-1-20: Hours Allowed For Public Music Performance
17-1-21: Rummage Sales
17-1-22: Secondhand Clothing, Wearing Apparel, Etc., Disinfection Required
Prior To Sale
17-1-23: Spiritualism And Other Forms Of Fortune Telling Prohibited
17-1-24: Trains; Playing Upon
17-1-25: Trains; Blocking Streets
17-1-26: Reserved
17-1-27: Spitting
17-1-28: Impersonating A Police Officer Or Firefighter
17-1-29: Hitchhiking
17-1-30: Noise
17-1-31: Consumption Of Alcoholic Liquors
17-1-32: Pinball Machines And Similar Amusement Devices
17-1-33: Purchases Of Precious Metals
17-1-34: School Curfew
17-1-35: Possession, Manufacture, Or Delivery Of Cannabis
17-1-36: Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia
17-1-1: ASSAULT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or an assault and
battery upon another person. (1981 Code)
17-1-2: RESERVED:
(Reserved by Ord. 22-13, 3-7-2022)
17-1-3: RESERVED:
(Reserved by Ord. 22-13, 3-7-2022)
17-1-4: BIRDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or wound or attempt to kill or
wound any bird, or to take the eggs or young of any bird from any private
enclosure or any public grounds. (1981 Code)
17-1-5: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE:
No person in the Village shall:
   A.   Disturb or aid in disturbing the peace of others by violent,
tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, and no person shall have
knowingly permitted such conduct upon any premises owned or possessed by him or
under his control;
   B.   Beat, strike, wound, imprison or inflict violence on another where the
circumstances show malice, or assault another with intent to commit murder,
rape, mayhem, robbery or larceny. Nor shall any person assault another with a
lethal weapon, instrument or thing with intent to commit upon the person of
another any bodily injury where no considerable provocation appears or where
the circumstances of the assault show malice;
   C.   Fight another person except in boxing exhibitions duly authorized and
licensed under law. (1981 Code)
17-1-6: BURGLAR'S TOOLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession any instrument,
tool or other implement for picking locks or pockets, and any implement that is
usually employed or that reasonably may be inferred to have been designed to be
employed in the commission of any felony, misdemeanor or the violation of any
ordinance, if they shall fail to account satisfactorily for the possession of
the same. (1981 Code)
17-1-7: DESTROYING PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy or injure any public property or
private property not his or her own. (Ord. 2008-0-037, 9-2-08)
17-1-8: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
Elements of the offense: A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct
when he knowingly:
   A.   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another
and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
   B.   With intent to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether or not
conversation thereby ensues; or
   C.   Transmits in any manner to the fire department of any city, town,
village or fire protection district a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or
other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its explosion
would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that there
is no reasonable grounds for believing that such a bomb threat exists; or
   D.   Transmits in any manner to the fire department of any city, town,
village or fire protection district a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time
of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that
such fire exists; or
   E.   Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public
employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at
the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing
that such an offense has been committed; or
   F.   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose
deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in it; or (1981 Code)
   G.   Loiters, either on private property, without the owner's or occupant's
consent, or on public property, within three (3) blocks of a school building;
and
      1.   Litters; or
      2.   Annoys persons by using profane language or obscene suggestions; or
      3.   Obstructs persons using the public sidewalks; or
      4.   Consumes or sells or gives away alcoholic beverages or drugs,
including cannabis; or
      5.   Encourages students to be truants; or
      6.   Refuses to leave the three (3) block area when requested by a peace
officer under circumstances where three (3) or more persons are committing acts
which are likely to cause substantial harm, annoyance or alarm. (Ord. 1981-0-
56, 8-17-81)
17-1-9: DISTURBING ASSEMBLIES FOR PUBLIC WORSHIP:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any congregation or assembly met
for religious worship, by making a noise, or by rude and indecent behavior or
profane discourse, within this place of worship, or so near the same as to
disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting. (1981 Code)
17-1-10: DOG, COCK OR OTHER ANIMAL FIGHTING:
No person shall instigate, cause or procure any dogfight, cockfight or any
animal fight. (1981 Code)
17-1-11: HOUSES OF PROSTITUTION:
No person shall keep or maintain or be an inmate of, or in any way be connected
with, or in any way contribute to the support of any houses of prostitution.
(1981 Code)
17-1-12: MISCELLANEOUS SEXUAL OFFENSES:
No person shall keep or maintain or be an inmate of or contribute to the
support of any place where persons resort for the purpose of fornication or
sexual genital stimulation for money or other consideration by whatever
physical means. (1981 Code)
17-1-13: OBSCENITY:
   A.   Elements Of The Offense: A person commits the offense of obscenity
when, with knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to
exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content
thereof, he:
      1.   Sells, delivers or provides or offers or agrees to sell, deliver or
provide any obscene writing, picture, record or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene; or
      2.   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene; or
      3.   Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
or
      4.   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his or her body for gain; or
      5.   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with
intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal laws or
regulations of the State of Illinois; or
      6.   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or
held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   B.   Obscene Defined: A thing is "obscene" if, considered as a whole, its
predominant appeal is to prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid
interest in nudity, sex or excretion, and if it goes substantially beyond
customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters. A
thing is obscene even though the obscenity is latent, as in the case of
undeveloped photographs.
A thing is obscene if it contains potentially offensive representations or
descriptions of nude persons, ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted sexual
conduct (whether actual or simulated), or potentially offensive representations
or descriptions of masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the
genitals.
   C.   Interpretation Of Evidence: Obscenity shall be judged with reference to
ordinary adults, except that it shall be judged with reference to children or
other specifically susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of
the material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed
for or directed to such an audience.
Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination,
distribution or publicity indicate that material is being commercially
exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with
respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the conclusion that the
matter is utterly without redeeming social importance.
In any prosecution for an offense under this section evidence shall be
admissible to show:
      1.   The character of the audience for which the material was designed or
to which it was directed;
      2.   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary
adults or a special audience, and what effect if any, it would probably have on
the behavior of such people;
      3.   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits of
the material, or absence thereof;
      4.   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this
Village;
      5.   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising or
other promotion of the material; or
      6.   The purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator. (1981
Code)
17-1-14: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
Any person who performs any of the following acts in a public place commits the
offense of public indecency:
   A.   An act of sexual intercourse; or
   B.   An act of deviate sexual conduct; or
   C.   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy
the sexual desire of the person; or
   D.   A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person of either sex.
"Public place" for purposes of this section means any place where the conduct
may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others. (1981 Code)
17-1-15: PROFANE LANGUAGE:
It shall be unlawful to use any profane language to the annoyance of others in
any public place or business open to the public. (1981 Code)
17-1-16: CURFEW FOR MINORS:
   A.   Offenses:
      1.   It is unlawful for a person less than eighteen (18) years of age to
be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway
at the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal
guardian or other responsible companion at least twenty one (21) years of age,
approved by a parent or legal guardian or unless engaged in a business or
occupation which the laws of the State authorize a person less than eighteen
(18) years of age to perform:
         a.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M., Saturday;
         b.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M., Sunday; and
         c.   Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday
inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
      2.   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his or her custody or control to violate this
section.
      3.   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
   B.   Defenses:
      1.   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection
17-1-16A of this section that the minor was:
         a.   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the Village, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by the Village, a civic organization, or another similar entity
that takes responsibility for the minor;
         b.   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly.
   C.   Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in
the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
subsection 17-1-16B of this section is present. (Ord. 2004-0-30, 6-21-04)
17-1-17: LICENSE AND OTHER TYPES OF IDENTIFICATION; STEALING, DETACHING OR
MUTILATING:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner or
licensee, to take, carry away, detach or mutilate any metal plate, tag, badge
or license worn by or attached to any article, substance or thing whatsoever as
a mark of identification or otherwise in compliance with the requirements of
this Code or any other ordinance of the Village. (1981 Code)
17-1-18: EXHIBITING OR DISPLAYING IDENTIFICATION DEVICES UNLAWFULLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, not being authorized by this Code or other
ordinances of the Village to exhibit or cause to be exhibited or displayed upon
his person or upon any animal or vehicle or upon any article, substance or
thing whatsoever, any metal plate or any tag, badge or license issued as a mark
of identification or otherwise in compliance with any provision of this Code or
any other ordinance of the Village. (1981 Code)
17-1-19: OBSTRUCTING RIGHT-OF-WAY:
No person shall obstruct any public place in the Village after being requested
to move on by any police officer. (1981 Code)
17-1-20: HOURS ALLOWED FOR PUBLIC MUSIC PERFORMANCE:
No person shall use or perform with any hand organ, or other musical
instrument, for pay, or in expectation of payment in any of the streets or
public places in the Village before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M. of any day.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any band of musicians or
organized musical society engaged in serenading, or civic or military parade.
(1981 Code)
17-1-21: RUMMAGE SALES:
Any person who shall desire to conduct any "rummage sale" or public sale of
wearing apparel or other articles that have been used or worn, shall first
obtain a permit from the Village Clerk, and no such permit shall be granted for
longer than ten (10) days. The person applying therefor shall make and file an
affidavit with the Village Clerk stating the purpose of the sale, from whom
each of the garments or articles was received, and that the same was not
exposed to any contagious or infectious disease, to the best of the affiant's
knowledge and belief. (1981 Code)
17-1-22: SECONDHAND CLOTHING, WEARING APPAREL, ETC., DISINFECTION REQUIRED
PRIOR TO SALE:
It shall be unlawful to sell, expose or offer for sale any article of
secondhand clothing, wearing apparel or other article by means of which disease
may be conveyed unless the same has first been thoroughly disinfected. (1981
Code)
17-1-23: SPIRITUALISM AND OTHER FORMS OF FORTUNE TELLING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any money or property from
another by fraudulent devices and practices in the name of, or by means of
spirit mediumship, palmistry, card reading, astrology, seership or like crafty
science, or fortune telling of any kind.
It shall also be unlawful for any person to hold or give any public or private
meeting, gathering, circle or seance of any kind in the name of spiritualism or
of any other religious body, society or denomination, and therein practice or
permit to be practiced fraud or deception of any kind. (1981 Code)
17-1-24: TRAINS; PLAYING UPON:
No person shall play upon or about any locomotive, engine, tender, car,
electric car or train of cars, or any platform or step thereof. (1981 Code)
17-1-25: TRAINS; BLOCKING STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railway
train or car to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner
as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of
time longer than ten (10) minutes, except that this provision shall not apply
to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. It shall be
unlawful for any railway train or car to stop within an intersection for the
purpose of receiving or discharging passengers. (1981 Code)
17-1-26: RESERVED:
(Ord. 18-410, 10-1-2018)
17-1-27: SPITTING:
It shall be unlawful to spit in any public place or any place of business open
to the public. (1981 Code)
17-1-28: IMPERSONATING A POLICE OFFICER OR FIREFIGHTER:
It shall be unlawful to impersonate a police officer or a firefighter. (1981
Code)
17-1-29: HITCHHIKING:
It shall be unlawful to hitchhike. (1981 Code)
17-1-30: NOISE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue to cause to be made or
continue any loud, unnecessary, prolonged or unusual noise which disturbs the
peace of others.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but said enumeration shall not
be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
   A.   The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, street
car, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place of the Village,
except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device
of a repetitious sound for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The
use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use
of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of
any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.
   B.   The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device
for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with
louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or
persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device
is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto.
   C.   The using of, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated,
any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound
amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound
which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising
or attracting the attention of the public to any building, structure, vehicle
or person.
   D.   Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets,
particularly between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other
type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity.
   E.   The keeping of any animal which by causing noise shall disturb the
peace.
   F.   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire
or danger, or upon request of proper municipal authorities.
   G.   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
   H.   The use of any leaf blower in excess of more than sixty-five decibels
(65 dB) as rated by a manufacturer’s specifications. The use of leaf blowers
are subject to the equipment restrictions provided in section
8-41-4 of this code.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2004-0-20, 5-17-04; Ord. 23-19, 3-13-2023)
17-1-31: CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic liquor as defined by
law on any public street, parkway or sidewalk, except during such time as
streets are closed to vehicular traffic in connection with block parties or
similar events. (Ord. 1981-0-69, 10-5-81)
17-1-32: PINBALL MACHINES AND SIMILAR AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or use in any place of business
within the Village, any pinball machines or similar amusement device. The term
"pinball machine or any similar amusement device" as used in this section shall
include, but not be limited to, a game played with any number of balls, spheres
or electrically operated devices upon a table or board having holes, pockets,
cups or electrically activated devices that are actuated by said balls or
spheres or electrical contacts, but said term shall not include a pool or
billiard table in a licensed hall. This section, except as it relates
specifically to the prohibition of pinball machines in any place of business
within the Village, shall not apply to:
   A.   Nonprofit institutions;
   B.   Private health clubs, as defined in section
8-23-3 of this Code, which keep such coin operated amusement devices
exclusively for the use of club members;
   C.   The use of token operated amusement devices in themed, indoor playland/
restaurant businesses, catering to children thirteen (13) and under, in which
the business owner controls the dispensing of such tokens and in which the
principal business is that of an indoor playland for which an admission is
charged and to which patrons thirteen (13) and under must be accompanied by a
parent or guardian over twenty one (21) years of age; or
   D.   The use of coin and/or token operated amusement devices in an indoor
restaurant business, which has a billiard hall and a designated area set aside
as a themed dining/party/play room that caters to children. (Ord. 1994-0-51, 8-
29-94)
17-1-33: PURCHASES OF PRECIOUS METALS:
There have been over forty six (46) reported thefts by juveniles of necklaces
and other items containing precious metals occurring in 1980 in Oak Park or in
the immediate vicinity thereof. It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase
any item containing precious metals including, but not limited to, silver and
gold and gemstones, from any person under the age of eighteen (18). Purchase of
said precious metals from a person over eighteen (18) years of age shall not be
made unless a record is made showing the identification of the seller,
including social security number and driver's license number, if any, and the
address of the seller and a description of the item sold. No such item
containing precious metals shall be resold or changed in any manner for a
period of seven (7) days after purchase. A copy of the record of purchases
shall be made to the Chief of Police at least weekly. This section shall not be
applicable to purchases made from wholesalers, suppliers or retailers in the
business of selling items containing precious metals and operating from a fixed
place of business. (Ord. 1981-0-69, 10-5-81)
17-1-34: SCHOOL CURFEW:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of five (5) and under
the age of eighteen (18) who is enrolled in any public, private or parochial
school to be present in any public place, building, street, or assembly in the
Village of Oak Park, other than school, while school is in session during the
regular school term, unless he or she is:
      1.   Traveling to or from school by the most direct route, or
      2.   Accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or school official, or
      3.   Engaged in school related activities with written approval of school
authorities, or
      4.   Engaged in personal business, including, but not limited to,
employment, medical care, and religious activities, with prior notice from a
parent or legal guardian to school authorities.
   B.   A police officer may stop and detain a person whom the officer
reasonably suspects to be violating this section for not to exceed fifteen (15)
minutes for the purpose of verifying the person's identity, age, school
enrollment and authority to be absent from school. The police officer shall
immediately inform the person of the reason for the detention and that he or
she will be released upon verification of authorization to be absent from
school. The person shall not be removed from the scene of the investigatory
detention unless he or she refuses to provide the officer with the necessary
information.
   C.   A person violating this section shall, if practical, be taken to school
authorities or a parent or legal guardian and may be issued a notice to appear
in the municipal court.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person
having custody or control of any person subject to this section to knowingly
permit such person to violate this section.
   E.   Any person convicted of violating this section shall be fined not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. 1995-0-66, 9-18-1995)
17-1-35: POSSESSION, MANUFACTURE, OR DELIVERY OF CANNABIS:
   A.   Definitions: All terms and phrases used in this section shall have the
same meaning as ascribed to them in the cannabis control act, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., as amended.
   B.   Possession: It is unlawful for any person knowingly to possess thirty
grams (30 g) or less of cannabis, except as provided by state law.
   C.   Manufacture; Delivery: It is unlawful for any person knowingly to
manufacture, deliver, or possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture, thirty
grams (30 g) or less of cannabis, except as provided by state law.
   D.   Penalty: A person who violates this section shall be subject to a
minimum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a first offense and a
minimum fine of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each
subsequent offense.
   E.   Exception: This section shall not be applicable to a person who legally
possesses any substance containing cannabis as a medical cannabis cardholder,
cultivator or dispenser as defined in the compassionate use of medical cannabis
program act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 130/1 et seq., as amended or under
the Cannabis Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., as
amended, or the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 Illinois Compiled
Statutes, 705/1 et seq., as amended.
   F.   Enforcement: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
Village from enforcing cannabis offenses under the cannabis control act, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., as amended, which is adopted and
incorporated herein as though fully set forth, and may be subject to
administrative adjudication as provided for in this Code for any civil law or
misdemeanor violation. References to a state employee or official in the
Cannabis Control Act may be to a corresponding Village employee or official
where such reference is applicable or necessary. Any provisions of the Cannabis
Control Act adopted herein may be cited by placing "17-1-35:" before the
appropriate Cannabis Control Act section (for example, 17-1-35:550/4, Oak Park
Village Code). (Ord. 16-113, 9-16-2016; amd. Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
17-1-36: POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Definitions: All terms and phrases used in this section shall have the
same meaning as ascribed to them in the drug paraphernalia control act, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 600/1 et seq., as amended.
   B.   Possession With Intent: It is unlawful for any person to knowingly
possess an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the
human body, or in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use,
except as provided by state law.
   C.   Penalty: A person who violates this section shall be subject to a
minimum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a first offense and a
minimum fine of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each
subsequent offense.
   D.   Enforcement: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
Village from enforcing cannabis offenses under the drug paraphernalia control
act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 600/1 et seq., as amended, which is adopted
and incorporated herein as though fully set forth, and may be subject to
administrative adjudication as provided for in this Code for any civil law or
misdemeanor violation. References to a state employee or official in the Drug
Paraphernalia Control Act may be to a corresponding Village employee or
official where such reference is applicable or necessary. Any provisions of the
Drug Paraphernalia Control Act adopted herein may be cited by placing "17-1-36:
" before the appropriate Drug Paraphernalia Control Act section (for example,
17-1-36:600/3.5, Oak Park Village Code).
   E.   Exception: This section shall not be applicable to a person who legally
possesses any drug paraphernalia as a medical cannabis cardholder, cultivator
or dispenser as defined in the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program
Act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 130/1 et seq., as amended or under the
Cannabis Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., as amended,
or the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes, 705/
1 et seq., as amended. (Ord. 16-113, 9-16-2016; amd. Ord. 20-013, 2-24-2020)
ARTICLE 2
OFFENSES RELATING TO UNDERAGE DRINKING AND ILLICIT DRUGS
SECTION:
17-2-1: Definitions
17-2-2: Possession Of Alcoholic Beverages By Underage Persons
17-2-3: Providing Alcoholic Beverages To Underage Persons
17-2-4: Social Hosting Prohibited
17-2-5: Attendance At An Event Where Alcoholic Beverages Or Illicit Drugs Are
Consumed
17-2-6: Exceptions
17-2-7: Possession Or Sale Of Cannabis And Cannabis Paraphernalia By Minors
17-2-8: Penalty
17-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey,
rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or
solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half
of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.
CANNABIS: The definition of cannabis shall be that set forth in the cannabis
control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/3(a).
CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA: Articles or equipment commonly used in the consumption
or ingestion of cannabis or synthetic cannabis including, but not limited to,
pipes, water pipes, roach clips, cannabis grinders, or rolling papers.
EVENT OR GATHERING: A group of three (3) or more underage persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
HOST (Noun): A person who hosts.
HOST (Verb): A. To knowingly authorize or permit underage persons to consume
alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs at the host's residence or premises by
failing to control access to the residence or premises or access to the
alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs in the residence or premises; or
   B.   To conduct, supervise, control, suffer or permit underage persons to
consume alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs at an event or gathering at the
host's residence or premises regardless of whether or not the host is present.
ILLICIT DRUGS: Any drug, substance, or compound prohibited by law, including
drugs prescribed by a physician that are in the possession of or used by
someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.
MINOR: A minor is any person under the age of eighteen (18).
REASONABLE STEPS: Steps taken to prevent underage persons from possessing or
consuming alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Controlling access to alcoholic beverages and illicit drugs at the
event or gathering in such a manner that no underage person has access to them
at the event or gathering;
   B.   Verifying the age of persons attending the event or gathering by
inspecting driver's licenses or other government issued identification cards to
ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs while at
the event or gathering;
   C.   Supervising the activities of underage persons at the event or
gathering either in person or through a responsible adult;
   D.   Calling for police assistance in the event underage persons are in
possession of alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs at the event or gathering;
   E.   Terminating the event or gathering because the host has been unable to
prevent underage persons from consuming alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs;
   F.   Advising law enforcement in advance of departing one's residence or
premises for any length of time that no underage person is authorized to be
present and consume alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs at the residence or
premises.
RESIDENCE OR PREMISES: Any location, including a home, yard, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room,
park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied: a)
on a temporary or permanent basis, b) as a dwelling or specifically for an
event, gathering or other social function; and whether owned, leased, rented,
or used with or without permission or compensation.
UNDERAGE PERSON: A person under the age of twenty one (21). (Ord. 2012-0-28, 6-
4-2012)
17-2-2: POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY UNDERAGE PERSONS:
It is unlawful for an underage person to be in possession of any alcoholic
beverage, except in connection with the underage person's employment and except
as provided in section 17-2-6 of this article. (Ord. 2012-0-28, 6-4-2012)
17-2-3: PROVIDING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS:
It is unlawful for any person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining any
alcoholic beverage, to sell, give or deliver such alcoholic beverage to an
underage person. (Ord. 2012-0-28, 6-4-2012)
17-2-4: SOCIAL HOSTING PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to host an event or gathering when the
host knows or should reasonably know that an underage person:
      1.   Is consuming or will consume any alcoholic beverage or illicit
drugs; or
      2.   Possesses any alcoholic beverage or illicit drug with the intent to
consume it; and
      3.   The host fails or has failed to take reasonable steps to prevent
possession or consumption by the underage person.
   B.   It is also unlawful for any person to fail to take reasonable steps to
prevent possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs by an
underage person at an event or gathering held at his or her residence or
premises. (Ord. 2012-0-28, 6-4-2012)
17-2-5: ATTENDANCE AT AN EVENT WHERE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES OR ILLICIT DRUGS ARE
CONSUMED:
It is unlawful for an underage person to attend any event or gathering where
the person knows or reasonably should know that alcoholic beverages or illicit
drugs are being consumed.
For purposes of this section, an underage person is presumed to know that
alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs are being consumed at an event or
gathering if illicit drugs or open containers of alcoholic beverages are so
conspicuous that a reasonable person of the same age would have knowledge of
their presence.
It shall be a defense to a charge of violating this section that the underage
person was not present at the residence for a sufficient length of time to have
an opportunity to observe the presence of illicit drugs or open containers of
alcoholic beverages.
It shall be a defense if the underage person lives at the residence and is not
the host of the event or gathering. (Ord. 2012-0-28, 6-4-2012)
17-2-6: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The prohibitions set forth in sections
17-2-2,
17-2-3,
17-2-4 and
17-2-5 of this article shall not apply in the following situations:
      1.   When the underage person is in the presence of his or her parent or
legal guardian, with the supervision and approval of the parent or legal
guardian; or
      2.   In connection with the performance of a religious ceremony or
service in observation of a religious holiday. (Ord. 2012-0-28, 6-4-2012)
17-2-7: POSSESSION OR SALE OF CANNABIS AND CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA BY MINORS:
   A.   Possession Of Cannabis: It is unlawful for a minor to be in possession
of cannabis in any amount which does not exceed thirty grams (30 g). Nothing in
this section shall be construed to prohibit the Village from enforcing cannabis
offenses under the Illinois criminal code.
   B.   Possession Of Cannabis Paraphernalia: It shall be unlawful for a minor
to be in possession of any cannabis paraphernalia.
   C.   Sale To Minors: It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell
cannabis in an amount less than thirty grams (30 g), or cannabis paraphernalia,
to a minor. (Ord. 2012-0-28, 6-4-2012)
17-2-8: PENALTY:
The maximum fine for a violation of this article shall not exceed seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). In addition to, or, in lieu of a fine, any person
found to be in violation of any provision of this article may be ordered to
perform some reasonable public service work, or be ordered to complete a
community based education, counseling or treatment program. (Ord. 2012-0-28, 6-
4-2012)
CHAPTER 18
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Peddlers And Solicitors   1
Farmers' Market   2
Garage Sales   3
ARTICLE 1
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
SECTION:
18-1-1: Definitions
18-1-2: Licensing of Peddlers, Commercial Solicitors and Itinerant Vendors
18-1-3: Issuance of License
18-1-4: Regulation of Solicitors for Funds
18-1-5: Regulations Applicable to All Soliciting and Peddling
18-1-6: Place of Peddling
18-1-7: Food Peddlers
18-1-8: License Revocation
18-1-9: Waiver of Fees
18-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
ITINERANT VENDOR: Every itinerant merchant and every person who, by himself or
by another, within the limits of the Village, engages in or conducts a
temporary or transient business of selling goods, wares or merchandise with the
intention of continuing in such business in the Village for a period of not
more than one hundred twenty (120) days, and who, for the purpose of carrying
on such business, uses, leases or occupies, either in whole or in part, an
outdoor or indoor location, which may include a room, building or other
structure, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares or merchandise,
shall be deemed an itinerant vendor of merchandise. All regulations applicable
to peddlers shall apply to itinerant vendors, except Section
18-1-6.
PEDDLER: A person who engages in peddling.
PEDDLING: The sale or offering for sale of property, for immediate delivery
from other than a fixed place of business on private property, not including
the sale of religious books or pamphlets. Peddling, commercial solicitation and
itinerant vending shall not include the sale of goods by local not-for-profit
organizations organized for educational, religious or charitable purposes on
not to exceed two (2) days in any calendar year.
SOLICITING or SOLICITATION: Shall include any of the following:
   A.   Commercial Soliciting. The selling or offering for sale of property,
not including religious books or pamphlets, for future delivery from other than
a fixed place of business on private property.
   B.   Fund Soliciting. Soliciting of funds not involving the sale of
property, including solicitation where religious pamphlets or books are given
or sold to a donor of funds.
   C.   Other Soliciting. Other soliciting shall include soliciting support for
political, charitable or other causes, not involving the solicitation of funds.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 1984-0-23, 6-4-84; Ord. 1986-0-13, 3-17-86)
18-1-2: LICENSING OF PEDDLERS, COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT VENDORS:
Every person engaging in the business of peddling, commercial soliciting or
itinerant vending must obtain a license from the Village of Oak Park as
hereinafter provided. The application shall set forth the following:
APPLICATION FOR LICENSE: Application for a license shall be made upon a form
provided by the Village Clerk. In addition to the information required by the
Business License Chapter, Chapter 8, the applicant shall truthfully state in
full the information requested on the application, to wit:
   A.   Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence
at such address; business address if other than residence address; also social
security number;
   B.   Address of place of residence during the past three (3) years, if other
than present address;
   C.   Physical description of the applicant;
   D.   Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association by
whom the applicant is employed or represents, and the length of time of such
employment or representation;
   E.   Name and address of employer during the past three (3) years, if other
than the present employer;
   F.   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the
soliciting in which the applicant will engage;
   G.   Period of time for which the license is sought;
   H.   The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for
license under this Article, if any;
   I.   Whether a license issued to the applicant by the Village of Oak Park or
any other municipality has ever been revoked;
   J.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any of
the provisions of this Article or ordinance of any other Illinois municipality
regulating soliciting;
   K.   Evidence that the applicant is authorized to solicit for the
organization represented;
   L.   Whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony within the
preceding ten (10) years, or convicted of a misdemeanor or ordinance violation
within the preceding five (5) years, and the nature of the offense.
18-1-3: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The application for license shall be investigated by the Village Clerk and the
Police Department. If the investigation or the application discloses a
conviction of a misdemeanor or a felony, the prior revocation of a license or a
conviction of any ordinance regulating peddlers or solicitors, and if the
conviction of a felony has occurred within the last ten (10) years and if the
conviction of a misdemeanor or ordinance violation or revocation of a license
has occurred within the last five (5) years, and if the conviction bears a
reasonable relationship to the peddling and soliciting activities by the
licensee, then the license shall not be issued. In all other cases, upon
payment of the license fee and upon compliance with the provisions of this Code
relating to business licenses, the license shall issue within seven (7) days of
the application.
18-1-4: REGULATION OF SOLICITORS FOR FUNDS:
Solicitors for funds must comply with an Act to Regulate Solicitation and
Collection of Funds for Charitable Purposes (chapter 23, Illinois Revised
Statutes, 1977, sec. 5101 et seq.), if applicable, and must register with the
Village Clerk at least three (3) days prior to soliciting funds. The applicant
in registering must furnish all the information required in the application for
license provided in Section
18-1-2 of this Chapter and evidence of compliance with Chapter 8 aforesaid, if
applicable, but no license fee or license shall be required.
Solicitors for funds for organizations that have had a fixed place of operation
in Oak Park for over two (2) years shall be exempt from registering under this
Article, providing said organization has on file in the Village of Oak Park, at
a place accessible to the Village Clerk, a list of names and addresses of its
solicitors available for inspection; and providing that said organization is in
compliance with the Act to Regulate Solicitors referred to in this Section.
18-1-5: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SOLICITING AND PEDDLING:
   A.   No person shall engage in solicitation or peddling upon any private
property after having been asked by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such
property.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling or
solicitation upon any private premises or residence or business located thereon
if such premises or residence is posted against solicitation or peddling by
means of a notice, prominently displayed upon which is printed the legend:
   "NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS"
For purposes of the preceding sentence, a private property shall be deemed to
be posted against solicitation or peddling if there is exhibited, on or near
the main entrance to the property or on or near the main door to any structure
located thereon, a sign at least three inches (3") by four inches (4") in size
and with letters at least one-third (1/3) the height, which bears the above
legend.
Signs complying with the foregoing requirements shall be made available at cost
at the office of the Village Cashier to persons requesting the same.
   C.   No person who engages in solicitation or peddling shall use any plan,
scheme or ruse or make any statement which indicates or implies that the
purpose of such person's solicitation is other than to obtain orders for or to
make sales of goods or services.
   D.   No person who engages in solicitation or peddling shall misrepresent
the right of a buyer to rescind or cancel a sale under the provisions of
applicable law.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in commercial
solicitation or peddling at any time prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after
five o'clock (5:00) P.M. local time of any weekday, or at any time on Sunday,
or on a State or national holiday. It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in fund soliciting at any time prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or
after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. local time.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to cheat, deceive or
fraudulently misrepresent any product or the price thereof, whether through
himself or through an employee, while acting as a peddler or solicitor in the
Village, or to barter, sell or peddle any goods, merchandise or wares other
than those specified in his application for a license.
   G.   No solicitor or peddler shall interfere with either vehicular or
pedestrian traffic on the public right of way.
   H.   No peddler or solicitor shall peddle or solicit by shouting or by using
any sound device in connection with peddling or soliciting, including bells or
amplifying systems. (1981 Code)
   I.   No peddler shall peddle within five hundred feet (500') of the grounds
of any elementary or secondary school between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and
four o'clock (4:00) P.M. during days said schools are in session. (Ord. 1983-0-
72, 10-24-83)
18-1-6: PLACE OF PEDDLING:
So that there is not an unreasonable interference with pedestrian and vehicular
traffic and so that the activities of the peddler do not unreasonably burden
any particular property owner, business or area, no person may peddle for a
period in excess of thirty (30) minutes within the same block in any day. A
block is defined as that portion of a street, including both sides, measured
between two (2) other streets that either intersect or junction with said
street. (Ord. 1982-0-59, 10-4-82)
18-1-7: FOOD PEDDLERS:
All peddlers of food shall comply with all applicable regulations of Chapters 8
and 20 of this Code as well as any other references to food dealers.
18-1-8: LICENSE REVOCATION:
Any license issued to a peddler or solicitor according to this Article may be
revoked, as provided in Chapter 8 on licensing, because of any violation of
this Article or of any other ordinance of the Village, or of any State or
Federal law, or whenever the registrant shall cease to possess the
qualifications and character required in this Article for the original
registration. (1981 Code)
18-1-9: WAIVER OF FEES:
Fees required for itinerant vendors pursuant to Section
18-1-2 of the Oak Park Village Code may be waived by the Village Board for two
(2) consecutive days per calendar year, where the vendor or the person in
control of property upon which the vendor is conducting business, is a
governmental or quasi-governmental agency, a not-for-profit corporation or a
charitable organization. (Ord. 1986-0-12, 3-17-86)
ARTICLE 2
FARMERS' MARKET
SECTION:
18-2-1: Public Policy Statement
18-2-2: Definitions
18-2-3: Market Manager; Appointment, Responsibility
18-2-4: Location Of Market; Market Dates And Hours
18-2-5: Space Rental Fee
18-2-6: Application
18-2-7: Assignment Of Spaces
18-2-8: General Regulations; Certificate Of Production
18-2-9: Penalties For Violation
18-2-10: Notice, Review And Hearing; Requirements
18-2-11: Creation Of Farmers' Market Commission
18-2-12: Farmers' Market Online Sales Program
18-2-1: PUBLIC POLICY STATEMENT:
It is in the public interest for the Village to allow producers of food to sell
directly to the public as provided in 505 Illinois Compiled Statutes 70/1.
Therefore, food products may be sold in a farmers' market in Oak Park as
hereinafter provided without individual vendor licensing subject to the
conditions hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 18-347, 4-16-2018)
18-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article only, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings, and are hereby defined, as follows:
                                    Any person in the five (5) state region
                                    of Illinois, Iowa, Wisconsin, Michigan
                                    and Indiana offering for sale at the
                                    farmers' market only cheese products that
                                    are made by such persons in an artisanal
                                    fashion primarily by hand, in small
                                    batches, with particular attention paid
CHEESE MAKER:                       to the tradition of the cheese maker's
                                    art and using as little mechanization as
                                    possible to make the cheese. The cheese
                                    maker shall obtain its milk from their
                                    immediate locale/state, or any of the
                                    other four (4) states, and shall be
                                    licensed as an itinerant vendor by the
                                    Village.
                                    A designated area where, on designated
                                    days and times, growers and producers may
                                    sell directly to the public in accordance
FARMERS' MARKET:                    with Village regulations. The Village
                                    shall have the right to relocate or
                                    discontinue the market, to specify the
                                    days and times of its use, and to
                                    stipulate what goods may be sold.
                                    The flesh of any numerous cold blooded
                                    aquatic vertebrates of the superclass
FISH:                               Pisces, having a bony skeleton, jaws,
                                    fins, gills and normally a streamlined
                                    body.
                                    Any person that raises or catches
                                    freshwater fish in Illinois, Iowa,
FISHERMAN/FISHER:                   Wisconsin, Indiana and Michigan and uses
                                    local processing facilities for the sale
                                    of freshwater fish.
                                    Any person that has a valid Village
                                    peddler's or solicitor's license pursuant
FOOD SERVICE VENDOR:                to this Code that offers a service
                                    related to the farmers' market, such as
                                    home food production, processing or
                                    preparation or knife sharpening.
                                    Any person from the five (5) state region
                                    of Illinois, Iowa, Wisconsin, Indiana and
                                    Michigan offering for sale articles for
                                    human consumption, with the exception of
                                    persons offering for sale frozen pre-
                                    packaged fish, including fruits,
                                    vegetables, edible grains, nuts and
                                    berries, apiary products, maple sugars
                                    and syrups, eggs, dairy products, bread
                                    products, baked goods, cheese, cider,
                                    prepackaged meat, poultry or fish that
                                    are frozen and that have been processed
                                    and properly labeled at a Federal or
GROWER OR PRODUCER:                 State licensed facility or nonedible
                                    articles such as cut or potted flowers as
                                    long as all such edible and nonedible
                                    articles have been raised and prepared by
                                    the grower or producer, members of their
                                    families, or by persons in their employ.
                                    All meat, poultry, fish, bread products/
                                    baked goods or any other processed food
                                    item offered for sale at the farmers'
                                    market shall conform with all applicable
                                    local, Village, State and Federal
                                    Statutes, rules, regulations and codes.
                                    Sale of any article proscribed by the
                                    Director of Public Health shall be
                                    prohibited.
                                    Organizations which are located in Oak
                                    Park or which have most of their members
LOCAL NOT-FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS: in Oak Park, and which are incorporated
                                    as not for profit corporations or which
                                    are operated solely for educational,
                                    religious or charitable purposes.
                                    Any person licensed by a governmental
                                    entity as a food retailer in a permanent
                                    location in which such person makes non-
                                    potentially hazardous one hundred percent
                                    (100%) natural bread products and/or
                                    baked goods by hand and from scratch with
                                    no premade or premixed ingredients and
                                    without preservatives or other additives
PROCESSORS OF BREAD PRODUCTS/BAKED  and from which he or she transports his
GOODS:                              or her bread products and/or baked goods
                                    directly to the farmers' market and whose
                                    business is more than fifty percent (50%)
                                    from bread products (not including other
                                    bakery goods) and is licensed as an
                                    itinerant vendor by the Village. Bread
                                    products must make up more than fifty
                                    percent (50%) of the product which the
                                    person has available for sale at the
                                    market.
                                    Farm products including, and limited to,
                                    apiary products, fruits and vegetables
PRODUCE:                            and products made from animals which are
                                    raised on the farm where the products are
                                    made. (Ord. 19-15, 2-19-2019; amd. Ord.
                                    23-76, 7-31-2023)
 
18-2-3: MARKET MANAGER; APPOINTMENT, RESPONSIBILITY:
A Market Manager, appointed by the Village Manager, shall review and approve or
deny the application of any grower or producer, cheese maker, local not-for-
profit organization, processors of bread products/baked goods or food service
vendor, issue permits and collect fees therefor, assign spaces to approved
applicants, establish a system of bookkeeping for the market, maintain the
market's cleanliness and shall be authorized to enforce this article and any
rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this article on behalf of the
Village. An applicant's history of cooperation with the Market Manager and the
Manager's designees and good faith effort to obey this article and any rules
and regulations promulgated pursuant to this article as a permittee during
prior market seasons shall be considered by the Market Manager when reviewing
applications for approval or denial. The permit fee for any application which
is denied shall be refunded by the Market Manager to the applicant in full as
soon after the time of the denial as is reasonably possible. The Village
Manager may designate such other person to perform the duties of the Market
Manager and act on behalf of the Village as set forth in this article in lieu
of an appointment of the Market Manager. (Ord. 19-15, 2-19-2019)
18-2-4: LOCATION OF MARKET; MARKET DATES AND HOURS:
The farmers' market may be located at a place approved by the Village Board.
The farmers' market shall be in operation every Saturday beginning on the
second to the last Saturday in May through the last Saturday in October from
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) P.M. with participant set-up
beginning no earlier than six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 18-347, 4-16-2018)
18-2-5: SPACE RENTAL FEE:
Rental fees for farmers' market spaces shall be established each year by the
Farmers' Market Commission with the approval of the Village Board.
   A.   Maximum Rental Space Allowed: A maximum of six (6) market spaces may be
rented by any one permittee. Each market space is approximately ten (10) linear
feet wide. The number of spaces to be rented to any one permittee shall be
determined by the Market Manager, with consideration given to the market's mix
of producers and growers and the market's needs at the time of application.
   B.   Permanent Space: A permanent market space on the same site at the
market may be rented for the entire season at the fee set forth in this
section. Permittees with permanent market spaces shall be present at all market
dates unless a permittee receives prior written approval from the Village to be
absent.
   C.   Space For One Day: Space for one day may be rented at the discretion of
the Village at the fee set forth in this section.
   D.   Market Space Permit Fee Tables:
 
Category          Rental Fee Per Space
Permanent space   $300.00
Space for one day 25.00
 
   E.   Fees: Fees will be collected by the Market Manager. Season permits are
not transferable and no refunds will be given. Participation in the market will
not be permitted until the full fee has been received by the Market Manager.
(Ord. 18-347, 4-16-2018; amd. Ord. 23-11, 1-17-2023)
18-2-6: APPLICATION:
   A.   An applicant for a space to sell goods or services within the market
may request an application from the Market Manager and shall submit to the
Market Manager together with the required fee, said application in writing
containing the following information:
      1.   Name and address of the applicant;
      2.   Product(s) or service(s) for which a permit is sought;
      3.   A warrant that such product is fit for human consumption or use;
      4.   State Sales Tax permit number and satisfactory evidence of payment
of the State Sales Tax, if any, for the preceding year. The Village shall be
the sole determiner of whether the evidence presented is satisfactory;
      5.   Agreement to abide by this article and any rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant to this article;
      6.   Additional information required by this article and any rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant to this article;
      7.   Such other information as may be required by the Market Manager; and
      8.   A non-refundable application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) if
the applicant is applying for a space for the first time. If the application is
approved, the one hundred dollars ($100.00) fee will be deducted from the total
space rental fee due.
   B.   Only those products set forth in a permit application may be sold by a
permittee at the market. (Ord. 19-15, 2-19-2019; amd. Ord. 23-11, 1-17-2023)
18-2-7: ASSIGNMENT OF SPACES:
Except as otherwise provided in section
18-2-3 or
18-2-5 of this article, spaces shall be assigned to all applicants as
determined by the Market Manager. Fees shall be paid in advance of occupancy.
The Village has discretion to make operational changes to the market layout to
accommodate special events or changes to market participation. Permittees'
vehicle displays and employees must remain within their assigned space. (Ord.
18-347, 4-16-2018; amd. Ord. 24-105, 2-20-2024)
18-2-8: GENERAL REGULATIONS; CERTIFICATE OF PRODUCTION:
   A.   No permittee shall:
      1.   Sell any product other than produce of the permittee's farm,
orchard, vineyard or garden except as follows:
         a.   A "local not-for-profit organization" shall be allowed a maximum
of two (2) spaces per year for bake sale (additional spaces for bake sales may
be allocated when space is available), provided that each use of a space for a
bake sale shall constitute a "day" upon which goods are sold for purposes of
licensing itinerant vendors in accordance with section
18-1-2 of this chapter.
         b.   A maximum of two (2) parking spaces per Saturday will be reserved
for "food demonstrations". Food demonstration participants shall adhere to the
requirements of this Code and any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to
this article and shall be exempt from the temporary food service event fee set
forth in section
8-2-1 of this Code. Dates will be scheduled on a first submitted, first
assigned basis and Oak Park businesses will receive preference for
participation in the demonstrations.
         c.   A grower or producer may be permitted to sell the products of
another grower or producer upon approval by the Market Manager. An affidavit
signed by the permittee and grower shall be submitted by the permittee to the
Village in conformity with this article and any rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant to this article. Only products of another grower or
producer not currently grown and/or produced by the permittee grower or
producer, may be sold at the market and shall not make up more than twenty
percent (20%) of the items available for sale by the permittee grower or
producer. All products shall be clearly labeled with the name and address of
the grower or producer or a placard shall be displayed at the market that
provides the grower's or producer's name and address.
      2.   Sell or offer any article according to weight except in accordance
with the established standards for weight of the State of Illinois.
      3.   Sell apiary products, maple sugars and syrups or any processed food
unless properly labeled in accordance with State standards for labeling.
      4.   Sell or offer any unwholesome or spoiled articles.
      5.   Create or produce such loud, unnecessary, prolonged or unusual noise
which disturbs the peace of others.
      6.   Sell or offer any article without first obtaining current Illinois
Sales Tax number and producing evidence satisfactory to the Market Manager of
the payment of the preceding year's Sales Tax or fail to display prominently
the Illinois Sales Tax number.
      7.   Transport or display food without adequate protection against
contamination. Delivery trucks and other equipment used for transportation and
display shall be kept clean at all times. Semi-trailer trucks are prohibited at
the market.
      8.   Allow any waste, garbage or any other refuse to remain on or near
the space after the closing hour of any market day.
      9.   Begin set-up of its market space prior to six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
      10.   Leave its market space prior to one o'clock (1:00) P.M. without
prior written approval from the Village.
      11.   Locate in walkways in order to attract customers to its market
space.
   B.   No animals or pets shall be allowed in the market except for service
animals accompanying the disabled.
   C.   No motorized vehicles, skateboards or bicycles other than those
authorized by the Village shall be allowed in the market, except for motorized
wheelchairs.
   D.   All approved dairy products and frozen meat, poultry and fish offered
for sale must be prepared and packaged under conditions meeting the
requirements of Federal, State and local laws, packaged individually, stored
and displayed at a temperature of forty one degrees Fahrenheit (41°F) or below
in the case of dairy products and frozen meat, poultry and fish shall be kept
frozen at all times in facilities that meet the requirements of State and local
rules and regulations, and served directly to the customer in the unopened
container in which it was packaged. An existing permittee may sell frozen
freshwater fish upon approval by the Market Manager subject to the permittee’s
compliance with all applicable local, Village, state and federal Statutes,
rules, regulations and codes. The fish must be sourced from a fisherman/fisher
that is approved by the Market Manager. No fish sourced from a retailer or
wholesaler shall be resold at the Market.
   E.   Permittees and growers and producers who sell their produce through the
permittees, as authorized under subsection
18-2-8A of this section (hereinafter referred to as "affidavit growers") shall
cooperate fully and in good faith with the Market Manager in response to
requests by the Market Manager to inspect the land used by the permittee or
affidavit grower for the production of products sold at the farmers' market. It
shall be the responsibility of the permittee or affidavit grower to provide the
Market Manager or the Manager's designee with a timely opportunity to inspect
and verify that the products sold by the permittee at the market is grown and
produced by the permittee or affidavit grower on the land or processing
facilities designated in the permittee's application or affidavit.
   F.   The permittee shall at all times abide by the regulations of the
farmers' market.
      1.   Village staff shall have the right to conduct an inspection of any
permittee's market space.
      2.   Participants shall conduct themselves in a manner that is courteous
to other participants, market staff and the public.
      3.   Smoking is prohibited at the market.
      4.   Prices must be either displayed with each item or a list of all
prices must be posted.
      5.   Price fixing among permittees is not allowed.
      6.   Permittees shall secure their tents with weights of sufficient size
to prevent their tents moving due to high winds or other severe weather events.
      7.   All produce to be sold at the market shall be sold by legal weights
and measures. Permittees are responsible for having their scales certified for
compliance annually. The use of non-certified scales that do not conform to the
State of Illinois regulations is prohibited. At the Market Manager's
discretion, scale checks shall be performed.
      8.   Only those products set forth in a permit application may be sold by
a permittee at the farmers’ market. (Ord. 18-347, 4-16-2018; amd. Ord. 23-76,
7-31-2023)
18-2-9: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association violating any of the
provisions of this article including the regulations adopted hereunder, shall
be subject to a penalty pursuant to section
1-1-5 of this Code. Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
The Market Manager may, in the Manager's discretion, suspend or revoke the
license or permit of any individual for a violation of this article or any rule
and regulation promulgated pursuant to this article pursuant to the provisions
of section
18-2-10 of this article. (Ord. 18-347, 4-16-2018)
18-2-10: NOTICE, REVIEW AND HEARING; REQUIREMENTS:
The Market Manager shall provide any permittee with written notice of a
suspension or revocation of a permit. The notice shall state the reason for the
suspension or revocation and shall set forth the time, manner and location for
the filing of a request for review by the permittee.
Any permittee may request a review of the Market Manager's action by the
Farmers' Market Commission within three (3) working days of the service of such
notice or within five (5) working days of the mailing date of such notice of
said action.
The request for review shall state the name, address and permit number of the
permittee and shall contain a brief statement by the permittee relating the
reason or reasons why the proposed suspension or revocation should not be
imposed. The request for review shall be signed and dated by the permittee and
must be received by the Market Manager within three (3) working days of receipt
of the Market Manager's notice or within five (5) days of the mailing of the
notice.
A permittee may only request a review of actions which are punitive in nature
as to the permittee. Decisions of the Market Manager concerning the general
operation of the market may not be appealed, even though such decisions may
impact on individual permittees. There shall be no refund of any portion of the
permit fee if a permit has been suspended or revoked for cause.
Any suspension or revocation of a farmers' market permit imposed by the Market
Manager against a permittee for which the permittee has requested a review
shall be postponed until completion of the review by the Farmers' Market
Commission. A hearing shall be held on the request for review at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Farmers' Market Commission in compliance
with the Open Meetings Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq.
The Market Manager and the Farmers' Market Commission shall receive and
consider such relevant information as is available from the Market Manager and
presented by the permittee. Within five (5) days of the completion of the
review, the Farmers' Market Commission shall provide the Market Manager with a
written recommendation stating the commission's opinion as to: a) whether or
not the permittee has violated any farmers' market rule or regulation as set
forth or adopted by reference in this article and b) if a violation is found to
have occurred, the recommended penalty therefor. The Market Manager shall
render written findings of fact and a decision within ten (10) days following
the conclusion of the review. Once the written findings and decision have been
prepared, the Market Manager shall cause a copy of the recommendation of the
commission and the findings and decision of the Market Manager to be delivered
to the permittee requesting the review and the full commission, either in
person or by regular mail.
The permittee may appeal the decision of the Market Manager by filing with the
Village Manager within three (3) days after the receipt of the Market Manager's
decision, or, if the decision is delivered by mail, within five (5) days of the
mailing date of said decision, specific written exceptions to the findings of
fact and decision of the Market Manager. The Village Manager shall immediately
provide the Market Manager with a copy of the written exceptions filed with the
Village Manager by the permittee. The Village Manager shall establish a hearing
date not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days from the date of
receipt of the written exceptions and shall immediately inform the parties of
the date by letter. The Market Manager shall have seven (7) days from the date
of receipt of the written exceptions to file a written response to the
exceptions with the Village Manager, along with a copy of the written findings
of fact and decision and all supporting documentation presented at the original
review. The Market Manager shall also cause a copy of the response to be
delivered to the appealing permittee, either in person or by regular and
certified mail, at the time of filing the response with the Village Manager.
The Village Manager shall preside over the hearing and shall provide both
parties with an opportunity to orally state their positions. Evidence which was
not presented at the review conducted by the Market Manager, and was readily
ascertainable prior to the review, will not be received by the Village Manager
in hearing the appeal of the decision of the Market Manager.
The Village Manager shall render a decision affirming, reversing or modifying
the decision of the Market Manager within seven (7) days of the hearing and
shall serve the decision by either personal delivery or regular mail. In
rendering the decision, the Village Manager shall consider the arguments of the
parties, the written findings of fact and decision, the documentation presented
at the original hearing, the appealing party's written exceptions to the
decision and the Market Manager's written response thereto. The decision of the
Village Manager shall be final. The Village Manager may delay the imposition of
any suspension or revocation which has been appealed hereunder until the
completion of the appeal process in the Manager's discretion. (Ord. 18-347, 4-
16-2018)
18-2-11: CREATION OF FARMERS' MARKET COMMISSION:
   A.   Members: There is hereby created a Farmers' Market Commission composed
of eleven (11) members including a Chairperson, each of whom shall serve
without compensation.
   B.   Appointment And Term Of Office: The Chairperson and ten (10) members of
the commission shall be appointed by the President, with the advice and consent
of the Board of Trustees. Such appointment shall be on a staggered basis for a
term of three (3) years, with the Chairperson and three (3) members appointed
during one year, three (3) members appointed the following year and four (4)
members appointed in the following year. Commissioners shall be eligible for
reappointment. Any vacancy shall be filled in like manner to an original
appointment and shall be for the balance of the term of the vacated office. Any
member may be removed by the President for failure to regularly attend meetings
or for inattention to duties. All Commissioners shall be residents of the
Village. Each Commissioner shall have one vote.
   C.   Ex Officio Members Of The Commission: In addition to the eleven (11)
members of the commission appointed hereunder, the Public Health Director or a
member of that staff designated by the Director shall be an ex officio member
of the commission.
   D.   Powers And Duties: It shall be the duty of the Farmers' Market
Commission to review the activities of the market and make recommendations to
the Village Board for any changes in operating policies or regulations
necessary to improve the operations of the market. Further, the commission will
review permit suspensions or revocations for which the aggrieved permittee has
submitted a timely request for review. The Market Commission shall also, at its
discretion, recruit owners and producers and publicize the market. (Ord. 18-
347, 4-16-2018)
18-2-12: FARMERS' MARKET ONLINE SALES PROGRAM:
The Market Manager shall operate an online sales program for the pickup of
farmers' market products ordered online to run concurrently with the farmer's
market dates and hours set forth in section
18-2-4 above. An administrative fee of three dollars ($3.00) shall be charged
for each online sales order to offset the cost to operate the online sales
program. (Ord. 21-24, 3-15-2021)
ARTICLE 3
GARAGE SALES
SECTION:
18-3-1: Definitions
18-3-2: Property Permitted to be Sold
18-3-3: Limitation on Number of Sales
18-3-4: Hours of Operation
18-3-5: Display of Sale Property
18-3-6: Display of Signs
18-3-7: Maintenance of Order
18-3-8: Parking
18-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
GARAGE SALE: Includes all general sales open to the public, conducted from a
residential premise for the purpose of disposing of personal property
including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage", "lawn", "yard",
"attic", "porch", "room", "backyard", "patio", "flea market" or "rummage" sale.
This definition shall not include a situation where no more than five (5)
specific items are held out for sale and all advertisement of such sale
specifically names those items to be sold.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an
individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the normal course
of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which
was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
18-3-2: PROPERTY PERMITTED TO BE SOLD:
It shall be unlawful for any individual to sell or offer for sale, under
authority granted by this Article, property other than personal property;
however, members of more than one residence may join in a garage sale to be
conducted at the residence of one of them.
18-3-3: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF SALES:
No more than two (2) sales may be conducted by members of one residence and/or
family household during any calendar year. If members of more than one
residence join in conducting a sale then this sale shall be considered as one
for each and all participating residences.
18-3-4: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Such garage sales shall be limited in time to no more than the daylight hours
of three (3) consecutive days.
18-3-5: DISPLAY OF SALE PROPERTY:
Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within the residence, in a
garage, carport and/or a rear yard, but only in such areas. No personal
property offered for sale at a garage sale shall be displayed in the front or
side yard areas of any such premises or in any public right of way; provided,
however, when the owners of seventy five percent (75%) of the residences on
both sides of the street in a block request a joint garage sale, the street in
that block may be closed and personal property may be offered for sale as
provided herein and also in the front and side yards and on the public right of
way.
18-3-6: DISPLAY OF SIGNS:
A sign advertising a garage sale may be displayed only on the property of the
residence where the garage sale is being conducted during the time the sale is
in progress, and may not exceed eight (8) square feet in surface area.
18-3-7: MAINTENANCE OF ORDER:
The individual conducting the sale and the owner or tenant of the premises on
which such sale or activity is conducted shall be responsible for the
maintenance of good order on the premises during such sale. In the event good
order is not maintained or the sale shall violate any of the provisions of this
Article, the person violating the provisions of this Article shall be subject
to the penalties provided in accord with Section
1-1-5 of this Code.
18-3-8: PARKING:
The Police Department may enforce temporary traffic and parking controls to
alleviate any hazards or congestion created by any garage sale.
CHAPTER 19
POLICE DEPARTMENT
General Operational Provisions   1
Special Police   2
Miscellaneous Provisions   3
Alarm Business Regulation And
Registration Fees   4
Citizen Radio Patrol (REACT) Volunteers   5
Law Enforcement Surveillance Oversight   6
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL OPERATIONAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
19-1-1: Creation and Composition
19-1-2: Oath of Police Officers
19-1-3: Adoption of Police Pension Fund
19-1-4: Duties of Police, Generally
19-1-5: Duties; Reports Generally
19-1-6: Duties; Report on Conditions of Sidewalks and Public Property
19-1-7: Duty of Arresting Officers to Attend Trial, Present Evidence, Etc.
19-1-8: Appointment by Entry Level Appointment Committee and Promotion,
Discipline and Discharge of Various Designated Members by the Village Manager,
Police Chief and/or Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
19-1-9: Suspension of Members by Chief of Police
19-1-10: Gifts for Police Services Not to be Shared by Members; Exception
19-1-11: Reports to Chief of Police; Officers to Obey Orders of Chief of
Police; Disposition of Seized Property
19-1-12: Police Badge
19-1-13: Authority of Police to Arrest; Preferring Charges Against Those
Arrested; Confinement of Persons Under Arrest
19-1-14: Powers Relative to Service and Execution of Warrants and Other Legal
Process, Etc.
19-1-15: Resisting Arrest; Hindering Police; Aiding Prisoners to Escape;
Disobey Police Directive
19-1-16: Duty to Aid Police
19-1-17: Authority of Police to Enter Buildings to Apprehend Violators
19-1-1: CREATION AND COMPOSITION:
The Police Department of the Village shall consist of a Chief of Police and
such other officers as shall from time to time be determined by the Board of
Trustees. (Ord. 1990-0-34, 6-18-90)
19-1-2: OATH OF POLICE OFFICERS:
All members of the Police Department shall, before entering upon duty as police
officers, take and subscribe an oath of office substantially in the following
form:
"I do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States
and of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties
of the office of police officer of the Village of Oak Park to the best of my
ability."
Such oath shall be subscribed and sworn to before some officer authorized by
the laws of this State to administer oaths and the certificates thereof shall
be filed in the office of the Village Clerk. (1981 Code)
19-1-3: ADOPTION OF POLICE PENSION FUND:
Article 5/3 of Chapter 40 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes is adopted by
reference. (1981 Code)
19-1-4: DUTIES OF POLICE, GENERALLY:
The several members of the Police Department of the Village, including the
Chief of Police, shall devote their time and attention to the discharge of
their duties, according to the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of
the Village and the rules and regulations which the Board of Trustees may from
time to time adopt and prescribe. It shall be the duty of each member of the
Police Department of the Village to preserve order, peace and quiet and enforce
the provisions of this Code and other laws and ordinances throughout the
Village. (1981 Code)
19-1-5: DUTIES; REPORTS GENERALLY:
The several members of the Police Department of the Village shall report to the
Chief of Police all cases where buildings may be in process of erection prior
to the issuance of a permit, all cases of unlawful obstruction of streets and
alleys and other public grounds, all cases of contagious diseases, all cases of
unsanitary conditions, all thefts and robberies and other infractions of the
provisions of this Code and other laws and ordinances of the Village, and all
serious accidents. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the recording
of such reports in a record to be provided for such purpose. The Chief or his
designee shall immediately report in writing to the department having control
of the respective matters all such defective, unsanitary and illegal
conditions.
Reports showing the conditions of the Village, and any pertinent information
about the operation of the Department shall be provided as often as requested
by the Village Board or the Village Manager, or as the Chief may determine.
(1981 Code)
19-1-6: DUTIES; REPORT ON CONDITIONS OF SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It shall be the duty of all police personnel to report to the Director of
Public Works all defects or dangerous conditions in sidewalks, and in case of
accidents, they shall report the same to the Village Manager together with the
names of any witnesses to such accident, if known to them, and such other
information as may be required by the Village Manager. Policemen shall also
report such defects or dangerous conditions in sidewalks to owners or occupants
of abutting property. (1981 Code)
19-1-7: DUTY OF ARRESTING OFFICERS TO ATTEND TRIAL; PRESENT EVIDENCE, ETC.:
All officers making arrests shall attend any resultant trial as witnesses when
required by the court where the trial may be had, and also upon any appeal, and
shall procure all necessary evidence in their power, and furnish a list of
witnesses to the court. (1981 Code)
19-1-8: APPOINTMENT BY ENTRY LEVEL APPOINTMENT COMMITTEE AND PROMOTION,
DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE OF VARIOUS DESIGNATED MEMBERS BY THE VILLAGE MANAGER,
POLICE CHIEF AND/OR BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS:
The Village Manager is authorized to appoint, suspend or discharge the Chief of
Police, the two (2) Deputy Chiefs of Police and four (4) Commanders, including
sworn Commanders commissioned to perform police duties and Civilian Commanders-
Administration hired to perform administrative duties.
Civilian Commanders-Administration will not be sworn, commissioned or
authorized to perform police duties, and will not be responsible to detect
crime or enforce the laws of the state of Illinois or the Village of Oak Park.
The power of appointment of all other officers of the Police Department shall
be in the Entry Level Appointment Committee, comprised of the Chief of Police,
the Director of Human Resources, or such other administrative or Human
Resources employees of the Village as the Manager may designate, and the Board
of Fire and Police Commissioners of the Village, heretofore created and now
acting pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois municipal code, except as
amended by Village ordinance.
The power of promotion of all officers, except the Chief of Police, the two (2)
Deputy Chiefs of Police and the four (4) Commanders of the Police Department
shall be in the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the Village
heretofore created and now acting pursuant to the Illinois municipal code,
except as amended by Village ordinance. The Entry Level Appointment Committee
shall exercise its powers of appointment and the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners of the Village shall exercise its powers of promotion in
consultation with the Human Resources Director for the Village, who shall also
serve as the Village's Equal Employment Opportunity Coordinator, and in
accordance with the Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Recruitment Plan
for the Village as set forth in appendix V of the Personnel Manual for the
Village adopted as ordinance 1989-0-21 on April 3, 1989, and as hereafter
amended. The Chief of Police shall participate in the oral interview process as
a member of the Entry Level Appointment Committee, comprised of the Chief of
Police, the Fire and Police Commissioners and the Human Resources Director, or
other designee of the Village Manager as set forth hereinabove, including full
participation in the oral interview of entry level police recruits in
accordance with the rules of the Entry Level Appointment Committee and the
scoring of each orally interviewed recruit in accordance with the procedures
set forth in subsection
2-28-1D of this code.
In the event the Village Manager discharges the Chief of Police, a Deputy Chief
of Police or a Commander, said officers shall revert to their permanent ranks,
if any, in the Police Department as established under the fire and police
commission act. The power of discharge, or discipline in accordance with
subsection
2-28-1C of this code, of all officers and members of the Police Department,
other than the Chief of the Police Department, or a Deputy Chief or Commander
of the Police Department, shall be in the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners of the Village, heretofore created and now acting pursuant to the
provisions of the Illinois municipal code except as amended by Village
ordinance. (Ord. 2013-0-57, 10-7-2013)
19-1-9: SUSPENSION OF MEMBERS BY CHIEF OF POLICE:
The Chief of Police shall have the power to suspend any police officer from
duty for not to exceed five (5) days, but he shall report such suspension to
the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners at its next regular meeting or
within thirty (30) days, whichever is the earlier, and the reasons for his
action. On such report being made, such Board shall take such action thereon as
shall seem to them just and right in the premises. Any police officer so
suspended for just cause shall not be entitled to pay while so suspended, nor
until he shall be returned to duty by the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners. (1981 Code)
19-1-10: GIFTS FOR POLICE SERVICES NOT TO BE SHARED BY MEMBERS; EXCEPTION:
No member of the Police Department of the Village shall for his own benefit
share in any gift for police services, without the consent of the Chief of
Police. (1981 Code)
19-1-11: REPORTS TO CHIEF OF POLICE; OFFICERS TO OBEY ORDERS OF CHIEF OF
POLICE; DISPOSITION OF SEIZED PROPERTY:
It shall be the duty of each police officer to report to the Chief at such
times and places as he may require, at all times to obey the orders and
instructions of the Chief, and also to deliver to him all property seized or
found by him immediately after the same shall come into his possession, which
property, with the date of delivery and a description of the same and name of
the officer, shall be entered into a book to be kept for that purpose by the
Department. (1981 Code)
19-1-12: POLICE BADGE:
Every member of the Police Department shall wear a suitable badge to be
furnished by the Village and any member who shall destroy the same shall be
required to pay the cost of replacing it. Whenever any member of the Department
shall leave, resign, be suspended or discharged, he shall immediately deliver
his badge to the Chief of Police. (1981 Code)
19-1-13: AUTHORITY OF POLICE TO ARREST; PREFERRING CHARGES AGAINST THOSE
ARRESTED; CONFINEMENT OF PERSONS UNDER ARREST:
All police officers shall immediately stop the progress of any and all
violations of this code and other ordinances of the Village, and they shall
have the power to arrest all persons on view found in violation of any
provision of this code or other law or ordinance of the Village or those aiding
and abetting in any such violation, and shall take all such persons so arrested
before a judge of competent jurisdiction and prefer charges or make complaint
against such persons so arrested and prosecute the same, or confine such person
or persons until such time as they may be taken before a court of competent
jurisdiction where they will be formally charged with an offense. Any person so
arrested shall be confined in some safe place provided for that purpose. In all
cases where it becomes necessary to confine any person under arrest, all
property on the person of such individual shall be removed and kept in a safe
place by the Department. When such person shall be released from arrest or
confinement, the Department shall return all such articles to the person from
whom the same have been taken, if the same shall not have been otherwise
lawfully disposed. (1981 Code)
19-1-14: POWERS RELATIVE TO SERVICE AND EXECUTION OF WARRANTS AND OTHER LEGAL
PROCESS, ETC.:
The Chief of Police and all police officers shall have power and authority
within the Village to serve and execute all warrants, writs and other process
for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with an offense, crime
or misdemeanor or held for examination or trial for the violation of any
provision of this code or other law or ordinance of the Village. They shall
also have power and authority within the Village to serve and execute any and
all writs, warrants, summonses or other processes or assist in the service of
the same. Such police officers shall have and possess all the powers and
authorities conferred by the statutes of the state. (1981 Code)
19-1-15: RESISTING ARREST; HINDERING POLICE; AIDING PRISONERS TO ESCAPE;
DISOBEY POLICE DIRECTIVE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any member of the Police
Department of the Village, in the discharge of his duty, or in any way
interfere with or hinder or prevent any police officer from discharging his
duty, or to endeavor to do so, or to assist in any manner, any person in
custody of any police officer, to escape or attempt to escape from such
custody.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey or disregard any lawful
direction of a police officer. (1981 Code)
19-1-16: DUTY TO AID POLICE:
It shall be the duty of all persons, when called upon by a police officer to
promptly aid and assist him in the discharge of his duties. (1981 Code)
19-1-17: AUTHORITY OF POLICE TO ENTER BUILDINGS TO APPREHEND VIOLATORS:
Police officers of the Village shall have power and authority, in a peaceable
and quiet manner, to enter any house, store, shop or other building in the
Village, in which any person may reasonably be expected to be for unlawful
purposes. If any person shall be found therein, in the commission of any crime,
misdemeanor or violating any provision of this code or any other ordinance for
the preservation of peace and good order of the Village, or who may reasonably
be suspected thereof, or who shall be aiding and abetting such person so doing,
they shall apprehend and keep in custody such person, as in cases of other
arrests. (1981 Code)
ARTICLE 2
SPECIAL POLICE
SECTION:
19-2-1: Special Police Defined
19-2-2: Appointment
19-2-3: Qualifications
19-2-4: Powers
19-2-1: SPECIAL POLICE DEFINED:
The term "special police" is defined as any person who, for hire, guards or
protects any property or person within the Village, provided this term shall
not apply to regularly appointed police officers of the Village or to any
sheriff or deputy sheriff of the County. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 1982-0-57, 9-20-
1982)
19-2-2: APPOINTMENT:
Applications showing the necessity of the appointment of a person to serve as a
special police person shall be made to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police
or the Village Clerk shall have the power to appoint and administer the oath to
any number of special police persons for special police duty at any fixed place
in the Village or at any necessary places for the protection of persons and
property. The expenses and charges of the special police shall be paid by the
applicant. The appointment shall extend only for such specific purpose and
territory and during such time as limited in said appointment and in no event
exceeding one year from its date. Every such appointment shall be revocable at
any time by the Board of Trustees.
Additionally, under the provisions of section
28-2-6 of this code the Village Inspector of Weights and Measures and any
authorized deputies are to be considered as special police. (1981 Code; amd.
Ord. 1982-0-57, 9-20-1982)
19-2-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
   A.   Each special police person must meet the following requirements:
      1.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age;
      2.   Be a citizen of the United States;
      3.   Not have been convicted of a felony or not have been dishonorably
discharged from the Armed Services of the United States;
      4.   Not have been discharged for cause from any branch of the state or
municipal government.
   B.   Additionally, the following qualifications are required for
appointment:
      1.   A special police person must comply, if applicable, with "an act to
provide for the licensing and regulating detectives and detective agencies".
Three (3) copies of said act being on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
      2.   If a special police person is to carry a firearm, he must have
successfully completed a course of study approved by and supervised by the
Department of Registration and Education consisting of not less than thirty
(30) hours of training, which shall include theory of law enforcement,
liability for acts, and the handling of weapons, as set forth in section 24-
2 of the criminal code. Three (3) copies of said act having been placed on file
in the office of the Village Clerk. Special police shall not carry exposed
weapons away from their place of employment.
      3.   Each special police person shall furnish the Police Department with
a complete set of fingerprints.
      4.   Each special police person shall take an oath of office. (1981 Code;
amd. Ord. 1982-0-57, 9-20-1982)
19-2-4: POWERS:
Special police shall possess the powers of arrest of regular police at the
places for which they are respectively appointed or in the line of duty for
which they are engaged. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 1982-0-57, 9-20-1982)
ARTICLE 3
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
19-3-1: Impersonating A Police Officer
19-3-2: Custodian Of Lost And Stolen Property; Designation
19-3-3: Custodian; Duties Generally
19-3-4: Disposition Of Seized Property Generally
19-3-5: Disposition; Perishables, Bulky Or Dangerous Commodities
19-3-6: Disposition Of Proceeds From Sale Of Seized Property
19-3-1: IMPERSONATING A POLICE OFFICER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself or assume or
pretend to be a police officer of the Village or a member of the police force
or Police Department of the Village, or with the intent to deceive, use or wear
in public or imitate any of the signs, signals or devices adopted and used by
the Police Department of the Village, or to wear in public the uniform or badge
adopted or used as the police uniform or badge of the Village or any other
which shall be similar in appearance. (1981 Code)
19-3-2: CUSTODIAN OF LOST AND STOLEN PROPERTY; DESIGNATION:
One of the employees of the Police Department shall be designated by the Chief
of Police to be the custodian of lost and stolen property and such employee
shall at all times be under the supervision and direction of the Chief of
Police. As custodian, he or she shall take possession of all property seized or
taken by the police. (Ord. 1988-0-24, 4-18-1988)
19-3-3: CUSTODIAN; DUTIES GENERALLY:
It shall be the duty of the custodian of lost and stolen property to keep a
record of all property which may be seized or otherwise taken possession of by
the Police Department of the Village. (1981 Code)
19-3-4: DISPOSITION OF SEIZED PROPERTY GENERALLY:
If property seized or taken possession of by the Police Department as provided
in the Village code shall not be claimed by the rightful owner within sixty
(60) days from the date of the final disposition of the court proceedings in
connection with which such property was seized or otherwise taken possession
of, or in case there are no such court proceedings, then if such property so
seized or taken possession of shall not be claimed by the rightful owner
thereof and possession surrendered to such owner within sixty (60) days from
the date of such seizure or taking by the police, the custodian shall cause to
be published, in any newspaper published within the Village, a description of
such property, together with the date of seizure or the taking possession
thereof and shall give notice that if such property be not claimed by the
rightful owner or owners thereof within ten (10) days from the date of such
publication, such property will be sold at public auction at such places as the
Chief of Police may direct and in such a manner as to expose to the inspection
of bidders all property so offered for sale; provided, that if such unclaimed
property is deemed by the Chief of Police to be of use to the Police
Department, the same may be retained for the use of the Department; provided
further, that no member of such Department directly or indirectly shall
purchase or participate in the bidding for, or purchase of, such unclaimed
property. The term "rightful owner" shall include any person entitled by law to
the possession of the property.
Weapons such as pistols, revolvers, bowie knives, dirks, slingshots, metallic
knuckles or other deadly weapons of like character not able to be lawfully
returned to their rightful owner shall, within six (6) months after the receipt
thereof, be taken by either the custodian of lost and stolen property or his
duly appointed deputy and destroyed. (1981 Code)
19-3-5: DISPOSITION; PERISHABLES, BULKY OR DANGEROUS COMMODITIES:
If any property is seized or taken possession of by the Police Department, as
provided in this code shall be of a perishable nature or so bulky or of such a
nature as to make it dangerous or inadvisable to retain possession thereof for
the length of time specified in the preceding section the custodian of lost and
stolen property, upon certifying such facts to the Chief of Police setting
forth his reason why such property should not be retained for the period
hereinabove fixed before selling the same, shall, with the approval of the
Chief of Police, cause such property to be advertised forthwith in any
newspaper published within the Village and sell such property at public auction
at any time after three (3) days shall have elapsed from the seizure or taking
possession thereof; provided, that nothing in this section shall be held to
require such custodian to take possession of, or to make disposition of, any
lost or stolen property, the disposition or possession of which is otherwise
provided for in and by any other ordinance of this Village, such as animals
required to be impounded. (1981 Code)
19-3-6: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS FROM SALE OF SEIZED PROPERTY:
The proceeds of any sale made under the provisions of section
19-3-4 of this article after deducting the cost of storage, advertising,
selling and other expenses incident to the handling or selling of lost, stolen
or seized property, shall be paid by such custodian to the police pension fund
of the Village. (1981 Code)
ARTICLE 4
ALARM BUSINESS REGULATION AND REGISTRATION FEES
SECTION:
19-4-1: Definitions
19-4-2: Alarm Licenses And Permits; General
19-4-3: Alarm Business License
19-4-4: Alarm Permits
19-4-5: False Alarms, Penalties And Revocation Procedures
19-4-6: Special Alarm Provisions
19-4-7: Liability Of Village Of Oak Park Limited
19-4-8: Central Station Alarm Monitoring
19-4-9: Enforcement And Penalties
19-4-10: Miscellaneous Provisions
19-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, certain terms are defined as follows:
ALARM BUSINESS: A business by any individual, partnership, corporation, or
other entity selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing any of the above to
occur in or on any building, structure or facility.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to
signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity or condition
requiring urgent attention and to which the Police and/or Fire Department are
expected to respond; however, this does not include audible alarms or fire
detectors affixed to automobiles, or other motor vehicles, nor does it include
audible alarm signals which may be heard only within a building, such as a
smoke detector.
ALARM USER: A person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
other organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or
facility where an alarm system is maintained or activated.
ALARM USER PERMIT: Permit issued annually by the Village permitting the alarm
user to activate or maintain an alarm system. Permit issuance shall be
evidenced by inclusion in the Village annual alarm permit user registration
list. Paper permits shall be provided to any alarm user upon request.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: A device which is interconnected to a telephone line
and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by a
voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating the need for an
emergency response.
EMERGENCY ALARM ADMINISTRATOR: An employee of the Village of Oak Park, as
designated by the Village Manager, whose responsibility is to coordinate the
administration and documentation of alarm businesses and alarm systems
performance as it relates to the effective enforcement of the provisions of
this article.
FALSE ALARM: Any emergency alarm signal, either audible outside or delivered to
a central station (including the Police Communications Center), that requires a
response by emergency equipment where no emergency exists, as a result of
equipment malfunction, improper installation or human error. The initial
classification of alarms as false shall be the responsibility of the Police or
Fire Departments as appropriate.
INTERCONNECT: To connect an alarm system, including an automatic dialing device
to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that
utilizes the telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit
a message upon activation of the alarm system.
LICENSE DIVISION: The division of the Fire Department of the Village of Oak
Park authorized to issue permits and licenses and collect the fees for same as
provided herein.
LOCAL ALARM: Those alarms that activate an audible signal within the proximity
of a premises only.
PERMIT YEAR: A twelve (12) month period, beginning the first day of October and
ending the last day of September of each year.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE: A telephone line leading directly into the Oak Park Police
Department for the purpose of handling emergency calls on a person to person
basis, or which is identified by a specific number in the telephone directory.
(Ord. 2010-0-46, 7-19-2010)
19-4-2: ALARM LICENSES AND PERMITS; GENERAL:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly to
conduct any business or not for profit enterprise that installs, connects,
repairs or otherwise does any work on emergency alarms without first obtaining
a license to do business as required by the state.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to install or have installed any
emergency alarm designed to protect any residential, commercial or business
premises, or any other building either by local alarm or by any system that
connects to a central station alarm without first obtaining a permit to install
and operate said system as required by section
19-4-4 of this article.
   C.   Application for permits shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk
as provided in section 19-4-4 of this article.
   D.   All permits issued shall be renewed at the end of each permit year.
(Ord. 2010-0-46, 7-19-2010)
19-4-3: ALARM BUSINESS LICENSE:
   A.   Every individual, firm or corporation that sells, installs, maintains
or services, or does any other thing that would constitute an alarm business
shall be licensed as required by the state as provided in the "private
detective and private security act of 1983".
   B.   Every individual, firm or corporation that does engage in an alarm
business in the Village shall notify the Emergency Alarm Administrator in
writing indicating that such individual, firm or corporation is doing business
in the Village. Such written notice shall include the name of the business, its
address, telephone numbers where service personnel can be reached, and the
license number given by the state. (Ord. 2010-0-46, 7-19-2010)
19-4-4: ALARM PERMITS:
   A.   Every alarm user in the Village shall apply to the Licensing Division
of the Village for an alarm user permit for each system used. The use of an
alarm system is prohibited until a permit is secured.
   B.   Application for an annual alarm user's permit shall be accompanied by a
permit fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each application on behalf of a
residential user, and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each application on behalf of
a nonresidential user. The alarm user's permit application shall include:
      1.   The name, address, telephone number(s) and e-mail contact of the
protected business, home, or other protected place.
      2.   The names, addresses, telephone numbers and e-mail contacts of at
least three (3) responsible employees (or other persons for a residential
location) who can be contacted by the Oak Park Communications Center in the
event of break in, fire, other emergency or system malfunction. Persons named
shall not reside in the alarmed premises.
      3.   The type of alarm to be installed: local, dialer or direct.
      4.   The purpose of the alarm, which, for example, may be single purpose
burglar, fire, or dual purpose fire and burglar, holdup and burglar, or medic
alert.
      5.   The method of protection interior and exterior, which, for example,
may be foil tape, vibration sensor, ultrasonic, infrared, or panic switch.
      6.   The name, address and telephone number of the installation and
service company responsible for the alarm system.
   C.   Alarm permits shall be valid from the date of issuance until the
following September 30, provided, however, that a new alarm system permit which
is applied for on or after August 15 of each year shall be valid until
September 30 of the following year.
Application for a permit for a new alarm system must be made prior to the
installation of the alarm, and no new alarm shall be installed or operated
until the user obtains a permit.
Application for the renewal of alarm user permits shall be made by September 30
of each year. The permit fee for applications received after September 30 shall
escalate as follows:
 
                                Residential   Business
October 1 through November 30  $ 50.00      $100.00
On or after December 1         100.00       200.00
 
If any date falls on a day when Village Hall is closed for business, the
effective date will be extended to the next Village business day.
   D.   Applications will be reviewed by the Emergency Alarm Administrator who
shall approve the issuance of the permit upon determining that the applicant
has fulfilled the requirements of this article.
   E.   Alarm permits are subject to revocation for reasons outlined in
subsection
19-4-5D of this article. (Ord. 2012-0-35, 7-16-2012)
19-4-5: FALSE ALARMS, PENALTIES AND REVOCATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Each person servicing the operation or maintenance of an alarm of any
type covered by this code shall be responsible for any false alarms transmitted
by the device which they service.
   B.   The Emergency Alarm Administrator shall maintain a record of all alarms
transmitted and, pursuant to the required notice and opportunity to be heard,
may revoke the permit for the operation of an alarm involved in the
transmission of six (6) false alarms in any calendar month not caused by
unusual weather conditions or interruption of any telephone line service not
the fault of the permit user.
   C.   The Emergency Alarm Administrator may order any alarm temporarily
disconnected without prior notice in the event of a failure by that alarm
system that jeopardizes the operation of other alarm systems in the Oak Park
Communications Center. Pursuant to such action immediate steps will be taken to
notify the permit user of such action and in every case, a letter shall be sent
no later than the first regular business day after such disconnect to the user
informing the user of this action. No alarm system shall be reconnected until
repairs have been made and reported to the Oak Park Communications Center.
   D.   If the Emergency Alarm Administrator records a false alarm from the
user's protected premises, the following procedure shall be utilized:
      1.   Upon receipt of the fourth false alarm within a one year period on
an annual rolling basis, the Emergency Alarm Administrator shall issue a "P"
ticket to the permit holder for each violation of this article which shall
require a penalty per occurrence according to the following schedule or shall
require a court appearance; except if said alarm is connected to the central
alarm monitoring system located in the Police Department, in which case the
alarm business owning the board shall pay to the Village, in addition to its
monthly rental of the space for its central alarm monitoring system, a sum
according to the following schedule per false alarm received through the alarm
system.
   PENALTY SCHEDULE
False Alarm Per Penalty
One Year Period
False Alarm Per  Penalty
One Year Period
   Fourth     $100.00
   Fifth      100.00
   Sixth      100.00
   Seventh    200.00
   Eighth     200.00
   Ninth      200.00
   Tenth or mo300.00
 
"Exception - No charge shall be imposed for false alarms for thirty (30) days
from the date of installation and/or the date of major alterations or
additions, nor shall a charge be made for false alarms activated by weather
related conditions, telephone or electric line interruptions or other such
unusual occurrences outside the ability of the alarm user to prevent."
      2.   On receipt of the fifth false alarm within the calendar month, the
Emergency Alarm Administrator shall notify the permit holder and servicing
alarm business by certified mail that any additional false alarms within the
calendar month shall be cause to begin the process to revoke the alarm permit.
      3.   On receipt of the sixth false alarm within a calendar month, the
Emergency Alarm Administrator shall notify the permit holder and servicing
alarm business by certified mail that the alarm permit shall be revoked ten
(10) days from the mailing date unless the alarm user and/or servicing alarm
business:
         a.   Submits a report indicating corrective action that has been taken
to correct the problems that has resulted in false alarms, or
         b.   Requests a hearing with the Emergency Alarm Administrator to
indicate corrective action that has been taken or is planned, or reasons that
the problems cannot currently be corrected but will be corrected in the near
future. Such hearing must take place within twenty (20) days of the mailing of
notice of intent to revoke the permit.
      4.   If the permit holder submits a written report, the Alarm
Administrator shall determine if the corrective action may reasonably be
expected to prevent further false alarms. If he or she determines that the
actions should prevent additional false alarms, he or she shall notify the
permit holder in writing that the permit will not be revoked.
      5.   If a hearing is requested, it shall be held within ten (10) working
days of the request. The Emergency Alarm Administrator shall provide the permit
holder with an opportunity to present such information as necessary to explain
the false alarms and what actions have been or will be taken to prevent further
occurrences. If the Alarm Administrator determines that corrective action is
being taken to prevent false alarms, the permit holder shall be advised that
the permit will not be revoked.
      6.   If no report is submitted and no hearing requested or if the
information provided by the permit holder does not indicate that proper
corrective action is being taken to prevent false alarms, the Emergency Alarm
Administrator shall notify the permit holder that the alarm permit is revoked
and that use of the alarm is not allowed.
      7.   If the permit holder is dissatisfied with the action taken by the
Emergency Alarm Administrator, the permit holder may request a hearing before
the Village Manager or his designee. Such request must be delivered in writing
to the Village Manager within three (3) working days of the receipt of the
notice of revocation, and such hearing must be held within ten (10) days of
notice of revocation. A finding shall be rendered within ten (10) days of the
hearing. No alarm will be disconnected by the Village during the hearing
process, which shall include: a) the mandatory time allowed for the appeal of
the decision of the Emergency Alarm Administrator, and b) the maximum time
allowed to render an administrative decision.
   E.   An alarm permit may be revoked for failure to renew the permit. If no
renewal application is made sixty (60) days after the renewal date the
Emergency Alarm Administrator shall notify the permit holder by certified mail
or e-mail that revocation shall take place ten (10) days from the mailing date
unless the permit holder renews the permit accompanied by a new permit
application fee per subsection
19-4-4B of this article or requests a hearing as outlined in this section.
   F.   Any building required to have a fire alarm system by the codes of the
Village or the rules and regulations of the Illinois State Fire Marshal shall
be exempt from the disconnection provisions of this article. However, all other
penalties shall remain in effect. (Ord. 2010-0-46, 7-19-10)
19-4-6: SPECIAL ALARM PROVISIONS:
   A.   Automatic dialing devices as defined in section
19-4-1 of this article shall within sixty (60) days from the effective date of
this article be disconnected from any primary trunk line of the Village and
shall be keyed to the central alarm monitoring system maintained in the Police
Department. The content of the recorded message to be transmitted by such
device shall be a digital tone approved by the alarm company maintaining the
central alarm monitoring system.
   B.   All alarm users having an automatic dialing device which does not
transmit a digital tone approved by the alarm company maintaining the central
alarm monitoring system shall be given sixty (60) days to obtain a central
answering point other than the Village. The alarm user may, at his expense,
convert such automatic dialing device to a compatible digital tone.
   C.   Local alarms shall not resemble the sound of any emergency signal or
civil defense alarm or siren. All local alarms shall have the capacity to reset
themselves after fifteen (15) minutes. Local alarms presently in use as of the
effective date of this article shall have six (6) months to comply with the
requirements of this section.
   D.   Every alarm business selling, leasing, or furnishing to any user an
alarm system for use in the Village shall furnish to the user instructions that
provide information to enable the user to operate the alarm system properly and
to obtain service for the alarm system at any time.
   E.   The sensory mechanism used in connection with any alarm system must be
adjusted to suppress false indications of fire or intrusion so that the devices
will not be actuated by impulses due to transient pressure changes in water
pipes, short flashes of light, wind noises such as the rattling or vibrating of
doors or windows, vehicular noise adjacent to the installation, or other forces
unrelated to genuine alarms.
   F.   All components comprising an alarm system must be maintained by the
permit holder in good repair to assure reliability of operation.
   G.   No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of an alarm system
designed to make direct connection with the Police Department without first
obtaining permission from the communication center. (Ord. 2010-0-46, 7-19-10)
19-4-7: LIABILITY OF VILLAGE OF OAK PARK LIMITED:
The Village shall take every reasonable precaution to assure that alarm signals
received by the Oak Park Communications Center are given appropriate attention
and are acted upon with dispatch. Nevertheless, the Village shall not be liable
for any defects in operation of any alarm system, for any failure or neglect of
any person in connection with the installation and operation of equipment, the
transmission of signals or the relay of such signals and messages. In the event
that the Village finds it necessary to disconnect a defective device, the
Village shall incur no liability by such action taken pursuant to subsection
19-4-5C of this article. (Ord. 2010-0-46, 7-19-10)
19-4-8: CENTRAL STATION ALARM MONITORING:
   A.   The Village shall provide for the installation of a uniform central
monitoring system to receive alarm signals. The system shall have a capacity to
meet present needs and the ability to expand for future needs, and shall be
available to those who meet the requirements for permits under this code.
   B.   The exclusive right to install and maintain a central monitoring system
with the Village's Emergency Communications Center shall be by bid and contract
with the successful bidder. The successful bidder shall have the right to
charge line fees, set by contract, during the length of the agreement.
   C.   A monthly rental fee of five dollars ($5.00) per alarm connection shall
be charged by the Village to the alarm business which is provided space within
the Village's Emergency Communications Center to maintain an alarm board to
which all direct alarms to the Village are connected for all alarms. A monthly
rental fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per alarm connection shall be charged by the
Village to the alarm business which is provided space within the Village's
Emergency Communications Center to maintain an alarm board to which all direct
alarms to the Village are connected. (Ord. 2010-0-46, 7-19-10)
19-4-9: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the general
penalty provisions of section
1-1-5 of this code. (Ord. 2010-0-46, 7-19-10)
19-4-10: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   Construction: Nothing in this article shall be construed or applied to
necessarily require or excuse noncompliance with any provision of the laws of
the state or the laws of the United States.
   B.   Rules And Regulations: The Village Manager shall have the authority to
promulgate rules and regulations necessary or appropriate to carry out the
provisions of this article and to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
   C.   Severability: If any provisions of this article or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this
article and the applicability of such provision to any other persons not
similarly situated or to other circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 2010-0-46, 7-19-10)
ARTICLE 5
CITIZEN RADIO PATROL (REACT) VOLUNTEERS
SECTION:
19-5-1: Citizen Volunteers For Enforcement Of Parking For The Disabled Defined
19-5-2: Appointment
19-5-3: Citizen Radio Patrol (REACT) Volunteers
19-5-4: Qualifications
19-5-5: Powers
19-5-6: Chief To Issue Regulations
19-5-7: Chief To Provide Training
19-5-8: Parking Citations
19-5-1: CITIZEN VOLUNTEERS FOR ENFORCEMENT OF PARKING FOR THE DISABLED DEFINED:
The phrase "citizen volunteer for enforcement of parking for the disabled" as
used in this Article shall mean any person who is a citizen of Oak Park and
twenty one (21) years of age and meets the other qualifications set forth in
Section
19-5-4 below and who volunteers, and is appointed by the Chief of Police, to
enforce State and Village laws which regulate parking for the disabled within
the Village, including but not limited to Section
15-1-24 of the Village Code and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3.
(Ord. 1995-0-28, 5-1-95)
19-5-2: APPOINTMENT:
The Chief of Police shall have the power to appoint any number of citizen
volunteers to enforce parking regulations for the disabled within the Village.
The appointment shall be for a period of one year from the date of appointment.
Every appointment shall be revokable by the Chief of Police at any time and for
any reason. (Ord. 1995-0-28, 5-1-95)
19-5-3: CITIZEN RADIO PATROL (REACT) VOLUNTEERS:
The citizens radio patrol (REACT) is a volunteer group of citizens, established
through the general order of the Chief of Police to patrol the community on
foot or in private vehicles, reporting observed criminal activity to the
Department by citizen band radio, but never taking direct police action.
Members of REACT may volunteer to assist the citizen volunteers for enforcement
of parking for the disabled, but in no case shall any member of REACT issue
citations for the violation of such regulation. (Ord. 1995-0-28, 5-1-95)
19-5-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
   A.   Each citizen volunteer must meet the following requirements for
appointment as a citizen volunteer to enforce parking regulations for the
disabled within the Village: 1) be at least twenty one (21) years of age, 2) be
a resident of the Village and a citizen of the United States, and 3) not have
been convicted of a felony or any crime of moral turpitude.
   B.   To qualify for appointment, the applicants must also successfully
complete the following:
      1.   The applicant must submit to a criminal history records checked by
the Police Department;
      2.   The applicant must successfully complete a training program by the
Oak Park Police Department;
      3.   The applicant must execute an agreement with the Village to perform
the abovementioned volunteer services, which agreement requires the volunteer
to submit to supervision by the Oak Park Police Department, use his or her
personal vehicle in the performance of volunteer duties, which vehicle and
driver shall at all times be properly registered, licensed and insured, accept
responsibility for providing the volunteer's own personal medical coverage and
acknowledge that the Village of Oak Park does not provide such volunteers with
medical or worker's compensation insurance and provides for the commitment of
the Village to provide protection to such volunteers for civil liability for
injuries or damages to persons or property while such volunteers are engaged in
the performance of their specific volunteer task on behalf of the Village and
conditioned upon the volunteer's actions not involving wilful or wanton conduct
and such other conditions or provisions as the Chief of Police may deem
appropriate for inclusion in the citizen volunteer agreement. (Ord. 1995-0-28,
5-1-95)
19-5-5: POWERS:
The citizen volunteers for enforcement of parking for the disabled shall
possess the power to issue citations for the violation of any parking
regulation related to disabled person within the Village of Oak Park. (Ord.
1995-0-28, 5-1-95)
19-5-6: CHIEF TO ISSUE REGULATIONS:
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to issue regulations for the
performance of the citizen volunteer function of enforcing parking regulations
within the Village. (Ord. 1995-0-28, 5-1-95)
19-5-7: CHIEF TO PROVIDE TRAINING:
The Chief of Police shall provide training to the citizen volunteers prior to
authorizing them to issue parking citations for violations of parking
regulations for the disabled. (Ord. 1995-0-28, 5-1-95)
19-5-8: PARKING CITATIONS:
Parking citations for violations of parking regulations related to the disabled
issued by a citizen volunteer appointed under this Chapter shall have the same
force and effect as a parking citation issued by a sworn police officer for the
same offense. (Ord. 1995-0-28, 5-1-95)
ARTICLE 6
LAW ENFORCEMENT SURVEILLANCE OVERSIGHT
SECTION
19-6-1: Definitions
19-6-2: Village Board Review
19-6-3: Use Of Unapproved Technology During Exigent Circumstances
19-6-4: Oversight Following Board Approval
19-6-5: Incorporation Of State Law; Conflict
19-6-6: Prohibitions And Penalties
19-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, The following words and phrases shall have
the meanings, and are hereby defined, as follows:
 
               An annual written report concerning surveillance technology that is used by the
               Police Department.
               A.   The annual surveillance report shall include all of the following:
                  1.   A general description of the surveillance technology used, including
               locations and neighborhoods where technology or equipment was deployed;
                  2.   A general description of whether and how often data acquired through the use
               of the surveillance technology was shared with outside entities, the type(s) of
               data, and general justification for the disclosure(s);
                  3.   A summary of community complaints about the surveillance technology item;
                  4.   The results of any internal audits required by the surveillance use policy
               and information about violations of the policy;
ANNUAL            5.   Information that may assist the Village Board assess whether the
SURVEILLANCE   surveillance technology has been effective at achieving its identified purposes;
REPORT:           6.   An analysis of any discriminatory or other adverse impacts the use of the
               surveillance technology may have had on the public's civil rights and civil
               liberties, including but not limited to those guaranteed by the First, Fourth, and
               Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution and the Illinois
               Constitution;
                  7.   Total costs, to the extent possible, including maintenance, and other
               ongoing costs, for the surveillance technology and anticipated funding for the
               technology as needed;
                  8.   Any requested modifications to the surveillance technology use policy
               applicable to the item; and
                  9.   Aggregate information concerning technology or tools exempted pursuant to
               subsection A(16) under the definition of surveillance technology below.
               The Police Chief's or the Police Chief's designee's good faith belief that there
EXIGENT        exists an emergency involving imminent danger of death, serious physical injury to
CIRCUMSTANCES: any person, or imminent danger of significant property damage that poses a risk of
               harm to the safety of the occupants of the property or the public which requires the
               use of the surveillance technology or the information it provides.
               A cellular telephone that has not been modified beyond stock manufacturer
PERSONAL       capabilities, a personal digital assistant, a wireless capable tablet, or similar
COMMUNICATION  wireless two-way communications and/or portable Internet accessing devices, whether
DEVICE:        procured or subsidized by the Village or personally owned, that is used in the
               regular course of conducting Village business.
               A written report including at a minimum the following:
               A.   Information describing the surveillance technology and how it works;
               B.   Information on the proposed purpose(s) and use(s) for the surveillance
               technology, along with any existing independent evaluations demonstrating that the
               surveillance technology can help achieve that purpose;
               C.   If applicable, the location(s) where it may be deployed and crime statistics
               for such location(s);
               D.   The known fiscal costs for the surveillance technology, including initial
SURVEILLANCE   purchase, personnel, and other known ongoing costs, and any current or potential
IMPACT REPORT: sources of funding;
               E.   A description of any possible adverse impacts the use of the surveillance
               technology may have on civil rights and liberties, and:
                  1.   The safeguards that will be implemented to prevent the impacts; and
                  2.   The potential uses of the surveillance technology that will be expressly
               prohibited; and
               F.   Whether use or maintenance of the surveillance technology will require data
               gathered by the technology to be handled or stored by a third-party vendor on an
               ongoing basis.
               Any device or system designed, used, or intended to be used to collect, retain,
               process, or share audio, electronic, visual, location, thermal, olfactory, or
               similar information associated with, or capable of being associated with, any
               specific individual or group of specific individuals by the Police Department for
               law enforcement purposes. Examples of surveillance technologies include, but are not
               limited to: cell site simulators (stingrays); automatic license plate readers;
               gunshot detectors; facial recognition software; gait analysis software; surveillance
               enabled or capable light bulbs or light fixtures; social media monitoring software;
               video cameras that record audio or video and can transmit or be remotely accessed;
               and software designed to integrate or analyze data from surveillance technology,
               including surveillance target tracking and predictive policing software based on
               surveillance. The enumeration of surveillance technology examples herein shall not
               be interpreted as an endorsement or approval of their use by the Police Department.
               A.   "Surveillance technology" does not include the following devices, hardware, or
               software:
                  1.   Body-worn cameras as required by the Illinois Law Enforcement-Worn Body
               Camera Act, 50 ILCS 706/10-1 et seq., as amended;
                  2.   In-vehicle Police Department squad cameras;
                  3.   Office hardware, such as televisions, computers, credit card machines, copy
               machines, telephones, and printers that are in widespread use by Village departments
               and used for routine Village business and transactions;
                  4.   Village databases and enterprise systems that contain information kept in
               the ordinary course of Village business and do not contain any data or other
               information collected, captured, recorded, retained, processed, intercepted, or
               analyzed by surveillance technology, including, but not limited to human resources,
               permits, parking, business records, payroll, accounting, or other fiscal databases;
                  5.   Information technology security systems, including firewalls and other
               cybersecurity systems;
                  6.   Physical access control systems, employee identification management systems,
               and other physical control systems;
                  7.   Infrastructure and mechanical control systems, including those that control
               or manage street lights, traffic lights, electrical, natural gas, water or sewer
SURVEILLANCE   functions, and pedestrian and bicycle traffic management;
TECHNOLOGY:       8.   Manually-operated technological devices used primarily for internal Village
               and departmental communications and are not designed to surreptitiously collect
               surveillance data, such as radios, Personal Communication Devices, and email
               systems;
                  9.   Manually-operated, non-wearable, handheld cameras, audio recorders, and
               video recorders that are not designed to be used surreptitiously and whose
               functionality is limited to manually capturing and manually downloading video and/or
               audio recordings;
                  10.   Surveillance devices that cannot record or transmit audio or video or be
               remotely accessed, such as image stabilizing binoculars or night vision equipment;
                  11.   Computers, software, hardware, or devices used in monitoring the work and
               work- related activities involving Village buildings, employees, contractors, and
               volunteers or used in conducting internal investigations involving Village
               employees, contractors, and volunteers;
                  12.   Medical equipment and systems used to record, diagnose, treat, or prevent
               disease or injury and are used and/or kept in the ordinary course of providing
               Village services;
                  13.   Parking enforcement and management devices;
                  14.   Police department interview room, holding cell, and Police Department
               internal security audio/video recording systems;
                  15.   Police Department computer aided dispatch (CAD), records/case management,
               live scan, booking, and related dispatch and operation or emergency services systems
               and state and federal law enforcement databases;
                  16.   Camera systems employed for the safety and security of the public at
               Village-owned facilities and for the security of such facilities;
                  17.   Access control systems, including license plate recognition technology,
               used at Village- parking facilities to administer Village parking permit programs
               and to administer daily parking fee programs, including license plate recognition
               technology solely used in this capacity and for this purpose;
                  18.   Smart meter technology employed for water and sewer utility purposes;
                  19.   Any technology that collects information exclusively regarding Village
               employees or contractors; and
                  20.   Technology or tools used by Village police officers solely while they are
               working as part of an established federal task force.
               A policy adopted by the Police Chief for the use of the surveillance technology.
               Such policy shall be posted and available to the public on the Village's website for
               as long as the policy is in effect. The policy must, at a minimum, provide as
               follows:
               A.   Purpose: The specific purpose(s) that the surveillance technology item is
               intended to advance.
               B.   Authorized Use: The uses that are authorized, and the rules and processes
               required prior to and associated with such use.
               C.   Data Collection: The information that can be collected by the surveillance
               technology, including "open source" data.
               D.   Data Access: The category of individuals or entities who can access or use the
               collected information, and the rules and processes required prior to access or use
               of the information.
               E.   Data Protection: The general safeguards that protect information from
               unauthorized access, including encryption and access control mechanisms. Nothing in
               this subsection shall be construed to require the disclosure of information that
               could reveal vulnerabilities to, or otherwise increase the potential for an attack
               on, any information technology system of the Village.
               F.   Data Retention: The time period, if any, for which information collected by the
               surveillance technology will be routinely retained, the reason such retention period
               is appropriate to further the purpose(s), the process by which the information is
               regularly deleted and purged after that period lapses, and the specific conditions
               that must be met to retain information beyond that period.
SURVEILLANCE   G.   Whenever fixed surveillance technology is moved or deployed, the Police
USE POLICY:    Department shall provide notice of the locations of the surveillance technology in
               accordance with its policy. The Police Department will attempt to provide notice as
               soon as practicable, but at a minimum will require posting the notice on the
               Village's website. Such notice will not be provided if the surveillance technology
               is being used to investigate specific criminal incidents or if the disclosure would
               otherwise impair an investigation.
               H.   Public Access: How collected information can be accessed or used by members of
               the public, including criminal defendants.
               I.   Third Party Data Sharing: If and how other Village or non-Village entities can
               access, use, or retain the information, including any required justification or
               legal standard necessary to do so and any obligations imposed on the recipient of
               the information.
               J.   Training: The training required for any individual authorized to use the
               surveillance technology or to access information collected by the surveillance
               technology.
               K.   Auditing and Oversight: The mechanisms to ensure that the surveillance use
               policy is followed, including internal personnel assigned to ensure compliance with
               the surveillance use policy, internal record keeping of the use of the technology or
               access to information collected by the technology, technical measures to monitor for
               misuse, any independent person or entity with oversight authority, and the legally
               enforceable sanctions for violations of the surveillance use policy. The
               surveillance use policy will provide for an audit of all technology used by the
               Police Department, which shall include technology or tools exempt from this article
               and will restrict the use of information obtained from such exempt technology or
               tools. (Ord, 24-127, 6-4-2024)
 
19-6-2: VILLAGE BOARD REVIEW:
   A.   The Police Department must obtain Village Board approval subsequent to
a public hearing at which the public is afforded an opportunity to provide
written and verbal comments prior to any of the following:
      1.   Seeking funds for new law enforcement surveillance technology,
including but not limited to applying for a grant, or soliciting or accepting
state or federal funds or in- kind or other donations;
      2.   Acquiring or borrowing new law enforcement surveillance technology,
whether or not that acquisition is made through the exchange of monies or other
consideration;
      3.   Using new or existing surveillance technology for a purpose or in a
manner not previously approved by the Village Board in accordance with this
Ordinance, including the sharing of surveillance data therefrom; or
      4.   Soliciting proposals for or entering into an agreement with any
other person or entity to acquire, share or otherwise use law enforcement
surveillance technology or surveillance data.
   B.   Prior to seeking Village Board approval pursuant to this section, the
Police Department shall submit to the Village Board a surveillance impact
report and a proposed surveillance use policy at least thirty (30) days prior
to the public hearing required by subsection A above. Within twenty-four (24)
hours of submission, notice of the public hearing, the surveillance impact
report and proposed surveillance use policy shall be posted on the Village's
website with a notice that any written public comment must be filed with the
Village Clerk prior to the scheduled public hearing. The Village Clerk shall
post the timely received public comments on the website. In addition, notice of
the public hearing, the surveillance impact report, and the proposed use policy
shall be promptly emailed to all individuals that have filled out a request for
notice of the Reports with the Division of Public Affairs and shall be posted
to the Village's social media channels.
   C.   Prior to approving or rejecting any action described in subsection (a),
the Village Board may request that revisions be made by the Village Manager or
Police Department as appropriate.
   D.   Upon consideration of the surveillance impact report and any public
comment, and consideration and reliance upon the proposed use policy, the
Village Board may approve any action described in this section by a majority
vote.
   E.   Notwithstanding any other provision in this article, nothing herein
shall be construed to prevent, restrict or interfere with any person providing
evidence derived from surveillance technology to the Police Department for the
purposes of conducting a criminal investigation, nor require the Village to
violate any applicable law, including, but not limited to, the Protecting
Household Privacy Act, 5 Illinois Compiled States 855/1 set seq., the Freedom
from Drone Surveillance Act, 725 Illinois Compiled Statutes 167/1 et seq., and
the Freedom from Location Surveillance Act, 725 Illinois Compiled Statutes 168/
1 et seq. (Ord, 24-127, 6-4-2024)
19-6-3: USE OF UNAPPROVED TECHNOLOGY DURING EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCES:
The Police Chief or the Police Chief's designee may authorize the Police
Department's temporary acquisition or temporary use of surveillance technology
in exigent circumstances without following the provisions of this article
before that acquisition or use. If the Police Department acquires or uses
surveillance technology pursuant to this Section, the Police Department shall:
   A.   Use the surveillance technology to solely respond to the exigent
circumstance;
   B.   Cease using the surveillance technology as soon as practicable or when
the exigent circumstance ends, whichever is sooner. All use must end when the
exigent circumstances end;
   C.   Only keep and maintain data related to the exigent circumstance and
dispose of any data that is not relevant to an ongoing investigation;
   D.   Within thirty (30) days from when the exigent circumstances began or as
soon as practicable, whichever comes first, submit a report to the Village
Manager to be provided with the Village Board. The report must explain the
exigent circumstances, why the technology or equipment was needed to address
the exigent circumstances, how the exigent circumstances prevented the Police
Department from following the approval process in this ordinance, and describe
how the technology or equipment was used. This report shall be promptly posted
on the Village's website. (Ord, 24-127, 6-4-2024)
19-6-4: OVERSIGHT FOLLOWING BOARD APPROVAL:
   A.   By the end of each fiscal year, the Police Department must present a
written annual surveillance report to the Village Board. If the Police
Department is unable to meet the deadline, the Police Chief shall notify the
Village Board in writing and request an extension, including the reasons for
that request. The Village Board may grant a reasonable extension(s) for the
Police Department comply with this section.
   B.   Within five (5) business days of the submission of the annual report,
the report shall be made publicly available on the Village's website. At least
thirty (30) days after the posting of the report, the Village Board shall have
on a Board meeting agenda a presentation of the report. At such meeting,
citizens will be given an opportunity to comment on the report, including in
writing. The Village Board need not take any action on an annual report but may
vote to cease the use of any particular surveillance technology or may propose
modifications to the use policy for any of the surveillance technologies in the
report. (Ord, 24-127, 6-4-2024)
19-6-5: INCORPORATION OF STATE LAW; CONFLICT:
The Protecting Household Privacy Act, 5 Illinois Compiled States 855/1 set
seq., the Freedom from Drone Surveillance Act, 725 Illinois Compiled Statutes
167/1 et seq., and the Freedom from Location Surveillance Act, 725 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 168/1 et seq., are incorporated herein by reference as part
of this article. In the case of a conflict between a provision of state law and
a provision of this article, the more stringent provision shall control. (Ord,
24-127, 6-4-2024)
19-6-6: PROHIBITIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   The Village shall not enter into any contract or agreement that
conflicts with the provisions of this article.
   B.   Any Village officer or employee who knowingly violates this article
shall be subject to appropriate discipline pursuant to the Village's
disciplinary procedures for officers or employees. (Ord, 24-127, 6-4-2024)
CHAPTER 20
PUBLIC HEALTH
Oak Park Department Of Public Health   1
Board Of Health   2
Environmental Health Services   3
Human Health Services   4
Vital Records   5
Food Service Sanitation Training And Certification   6
Garbage, Weeds And Littering   7
Single-Use Plastic Foodware And Polystyrene Foam Packaging   8
Village Indoor Clean Air Policy   9
Pesticide Application License, Notice And Recordkeeping Requirements   10
Beekeeping   11
Concealed Carry Prohibited Areas   12
Commercial Solid Waste Hauling And Recycling   13
Retail Single-Use Bag   1   4
ARTICLE 1
OAK PARK DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH
SECTION:
20-1-1: Establishment; Composition
20-1-2: Purpose
20-1-3: Definitions
20-1-4: Qualifications Of Director
20-1-5: Selection And Appointment
20-1-6: Authority And Duties Of The Director
20-1-7: Public Health Nursing Supervisor
20-1-8: Environmental Health Supervisor
20-1-9: Reciprocal Agreements With Other Public Bodies
20-1-10: Issuance Of Orders; Court Petitions
20-1-11: Placarding For Disease Control
20-1-12: Ordinance Violations; Punishment
20-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby established a department of the Village which shall be known as
the Oak Park Department of Public Health. It shall include the Director of
Public Health, a Nursing Supervisor, Environmental Health Supervisor, clerks
and such professional personnel as the Board of Trustees may provide. (1981
Code)
20-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Department is to protect and promote the health of the
people within its jurisdiction:
   A.   In accordance with the Statutes of the State of Illinois.
   B.   In compliance with the rules and regulations established by the
Illinois Department of Public Health.
   C.   In compliance with the Code of the Village of Oak Park.
   D.   In a manner consistent with good public health practices. (1981 Code)
20-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
DAYCARE CENTER: As stated in section 2.09 of the State of Illinois Child Care
Act of 1969.
DEPARTMENT: The Oak Park Department of Public Health.
DIRECTOR: The Director of Public Health.
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SUPERVISOR: The person responsible under the Health
Director for overall direction of environmental health activities of the
Department.
HOSPITAL: Any institution, place, building or agency, public or private,
whether organized for profit or not, devoted primarily to the maintenance and
operation of facilities for the diagnosis and treatment or care of two (2) or
more unrelated persons admitted for overnight stay or longer in order to obtain
medical care including: obstetric, psychiatric and nursing, care of illness,
disease, injury, infirmity or deformity. The term "hospital" shall also include
(without regard to length of stay): a) any facility which is devoted primarily
to providing psychiatric and related services and programs for the diagnosis
and treatment or care of two (2) or more unrelated persons suffering from
emotional or nervous diseases; b) all places where pregnant females are
received, cared for, or treated during delivery, irrespective of the number of
patients received. The term "hospital" includes general and specialized
hospitals, tuberculosis sanitaria, mental or psychiatric hospitals and
sanitaria, and includes maternity homes (lying-in homes), and homes for unwed
mothers in which care is given during delivery. The term "hospital" does not
include nursing and convalescent homes. Nursing and convalescent homes shall be
defined as stated in the "Nursing Homes, Sheltered Care Homes and Homes for the
Aged Act" of the State of Illinois.
NIGHTCARE FACILITY OR NIGHTTIME CENTER: As stated in section 2.19 of the State
of Illinois Child Care Act of 1969.
NURSING SUPERVISOR: The person responsible under the Health Director for
overall direction of human health services performed by the Department.
PERSONAL CARE SERVICES: "Personal care services" are defined in article 4 of
this chapter and shall be performed only by licensed nurses acting under the
supervision of the Director of Public Health.
PUBLIC HEALTH: Shall include, but not be limited to, the social, mental,
physical and emotional health of the Village residents and all environmental
aspects which affect that health.
PUBLIC HEALTH NURSING: The provision of personal care services to residents of
the community.
SCHOOLS: As stated in article III of the Village of Oak Park Zoning Ordinance.
(1981 Code)
20-1-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF DIRECTOR:
The Director shall possess a minimum of a master's degree in public health from
a recognized school of public health, and shall have a minimum of three (3)
years' service in an administrative capacity in a health department. (1981
Code)
20-1-5: SELECTION AND APPOINTMENT:
The Village Manager, with the assistance of the Board of Health, shall select
and appoint the Director. (1981 Code)
20-1-6: AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR:
The Director, subject to regulation approval by the Village Board and the
direction of the Village Manager, shall have the power, and it shall be the
Director's duty to:
   A.   Enforce all State laws, all rules, regulations and orders of the State
and Village Departments of Public Health, the Village Health Department Code,
and all Village ordinances relating to public and environmental health.
   B.   Investigate the existence of any contagious or infectious disease
within the Village and to adopt measures to prevent or arrest progress of the
same.
   C.   Initiate and carry out, at the direction of the Board, programs and
activities of all kinds not inconsistent with law that may be deemed necessary
or desirable in the promotion and protection of health and the control of
disease or conditions which threaten the public's health.
   D.   Make all necessary sanitary and health investigations and inspections.
   E.   Cause all nuisances affecting the health of the public (and all
violations of Statutes and ordinances relating to public health) to be abated
with all reasonable promptness.
   F.   Develop statistical data as an administrative tool which may be used in
other lawful Village activities as well as in planning, executing and
evaluating Health Department programs and activities.
   G.   Cooperate with federal and state health authorities to combat new or
evolving public health threats and, where appropriate, make or adopt public
health proclamations, guidelines, bulletins or health advice published or
promoted, in any form, by federal or state health officials pertaining to the
preservation of the public's health.
   H.   Coordinate any and all health plans and activities with local area
municipal, county and state health planning efforts to provide a coordinated
response for the control of diseases or conditions which threaten the public
health.
   I.   Investigate the existence of any contagious or infectious diseases and
take measures necessary to prevent the spread of dangerously contagious
diseases including, but not limited to, directing the performance of physical
examinations and tests, the collection of laboratory specimens, the
administration of vaccines, medications, or other treatments and the
observation and monitoring of persons who may have been exposed to a
dangerously contagious disease.
   J.   Determine when diseases are contagious or epidemic or when a danger to
the public's health exists and order those measures deemed necessary to protect
the public's health including, but not limited to, the quarantine or isolation
of persons or closure of places when such action is required to protect the
public's health, until such time as the condition can be corrected or the
danger to the public health eliminated or reduced in such a manner that no
immediate threat to the public health any longer exists.
   K.   Provide such temporary public clinics as may be deemed necessary.
   L.   Provide for professional health educator services.
   M.   Provide for necessary laboratory services.
   N.   Give professional advice and information to all Village, Township and
school authorities within the Village in all matters pertaining to
environmental and public health.
   O.   Provide continuing education and in-service training for staff.
   P.   Serve as Local Registrar of Vital Statistics and compile same as
required by law.
   Q.   Prepare annual reports on the actions of the Department.
   R.   For any suspected violation of this chapter or state law, enter any
building, structure or premises, according to law, for the purpose of
determining whether there is a violation of any of the health provisions of
this chapter or the health provisions of state law.
   S.   Cause to be confined, and specify the conditions of such confinement,
any person who fails to comply with an order of the Department or the Court or
who, in the judgment of the Department, may not be relied upon to comply with
an order of the Department, where such confinement is necessary to protect the
public health.
   T.   Cause to be arrested any person who violates an order of the Illinois
Department of Public Health.
   U.   In a manner consistent with federal and state requirements, as
applicable, during an occurrence of biological or chemical terrorism or during
a declared disaster which threatens the public's health, request, and at sites
designated by the Department of Public Health, receive and cause to be
distributed pharmaceutical and medical supplies from the Illinois
Pharmaceutical Stockpile, the Strategic National Stockpile and/or any
additional sources in order to aid the state and local emergency response
authorities when local resources have been depleted or when the need for
additional resources is reasonably anticipated.
   V.   During a declared disaster which threatens the public's health, take
such actions as may be requested by the President and the Board or the
President's designee in order to protect the health of the residents of the
Village.
   W.   Inspect and survey any and all facilities, programs and personnel
within the Village of Oak Park which provide health services to ensure that
adequate standards of healthcare are being met.
   X.   Take whatever measures are necessary to secure the public's health in
the event that a serious condition exists which endangers the health of the
public, whether individually or severally, including the authority to issue
cease and desist orders or placard any residence, public or private building,
any establishment or other public place until such time that the health hazard
no longer exists.
   Y.   Have and exercise general supervision over all activities of the Health
Department. All orders and directions emanating from the Department of Public
Health shall be issued in the name of the Director.
   Z.   Make such reasonable rules, regulations and orders and such sanitary
investigations as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the
preservation and improvement of the public health and for the suppression of
disease, including, but not limited to, rules and regulations which require the
reporting to the Department of circumstances defined by the Department which
may result in action by the Department to protect public health; and/or the
enforcement when so authorized of applicable rules and regulations promulgated
by other authorities having the power to make such rules and regulations, such
as the Illinois Department of Public Health. Except in cases of emergency,
before implementation of such rules and regulations, they shall be reviewed by
the Village Board of Health, be approved by the Village Board of Trustees and
be entered into the Health Department Code and enforced by the Village
Department of Public Health.
   AA.   Perform such other duties as may be required to secure and preserve
the public's health.
   BB.   Make such reasonable rules, regulations and orders as may from time to
time be deemed necessary without review by the Village Board of Health and
approval by the Village Board of Trustees due to the outbreak of COVID-19
disease in the State of Illinois as long as there is a disaster proclamation in
place by the Governor of the State of Illinois due to the outbreak of COVID-19
disease. Any rules, regulations and orders promulgated by the Public Health
Director prior to November 15, 2021 due to the outbreak of COVID-19 disease
which are not due to expire on or before November 15, 2021 shall remain in
effect through their respective expiration dates as long as there is a disaster
proclamation in place by the Governor of the State of Illinois due to the
outbreak of COVID-19 disease as applicable. (Ord. 2007-0-49, 7-30-07; amd. Ord.
20-041, 6-1-2020; Ord. 20-094, 10-19-2020; Ord. 21-8, 1-19-2021; Ord. 21-47, 6-
14-2021; Ord. 21-92, 11-22-2021)
20-1-7: PUBLIC HEALTH NURSING SUPERVISOR:
The Nursing Supervisor shall coordinate and supervise public health nursing
activities under supervision of the Director. (Ord. 2007-0-49, 7-30-07)
20-1-8: ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SUPERVISOR:
The Environmental Health Supervisor shall coordinate and supervise
environmental health activities under supervision of the Director. (Ord. 2007-
0-49, 7-30-07)
20-1-9: RECIPROCAL AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER PUBLIC BODIES:
The Village may enter into reciprocal agreements with other public bodies for
the provision of public and environmental health services. (Ord. 2007-0-49, 7-
30-07)
20-1-10: ISSUANCE OF ORDERS; COURT PETITIONS:
The Department may order measures it deems necessary to protect the public's
health including, but not limited to, an order requiring that a person or a
group of persons be quarantined or isolated or that a place be closed and made
off limits to the public. Such orders shall be issued with the consent of the
person(s) or owner of the place affected or upon the prior order of a court of
competent jurisdiction. If, in the judgment of the Department, immediate action
is required to protect the public health, the Department may order, on an
immediate basis without prior consent or court order, measures it deems
necessary to protect the public's health including, but not limited to, an
order requiring that a person or a group of persons be quarantined or isolated
or that a place be closed and made off limits to the public, until such time as
the condition can be corrected or the danger to the public health eliminated or
reduced in such a manner that no immediate threat to the public health any
longer exists. In addition to other circumstances in which such orders are
appropriate, the Department may order that an individual be quarantined or
isolated in order to prevent the spread of a dangerously communicable disease
when an individual refuses or fails to submit to measures required by the
Department in order to investigate whether a person is or may be infected with
or capable of communicating a dangerously communicable disease. In the event of
an immediate order issued without prior consent or court order, the Department
shall, as soon as practicable thereafter, obtain the consent of the person or
owner or file a petition requesting a court order authorizing the continuation
of the order of the Department. Pending a court order on the matter, all
Department orders shall remain in full force and effect until lifted by the
Department. The Village shall make payment of reasonable attorney fees, if
ordered by the Court, with respect to the representation of indigent persons
who object to a Department order. (Ord. 2007-0-49, 7-30-07)
20-1-11: PLACARDING FOR DISEASE CONTROL:
   A.   Placarding is rarely, if ever, necessary, and should be considered only
in unusual and compelling circumstances when isolation, quarantine, examination
or treatment of a case, carrier or suspect of a communicable disease is
necessary and cannot otherwise be implemented.
   B.   If placarding is determined to be necessary, the following rules shall
apply:
      1.   The Oak Park Department of Public Health shall post a placard in a
conspicuous place at each outside entrance of the premises wherein the person
is isolated. (However, if the patient is isolated in a hospital in the manner
prescribed by these rules and regulations, a placard need not be posted.)
      2.   The placard shall be not less than six inches by ten inches (6" x
10") in size, and shall have printed thereon, in letters not less than one and
one-half inches (11/2") in height, the name of the disease and the words "KEEP
OUT" in similar type not less than one inch (1") in height. (The name of the
disease may be hand lettered.) At the bottom of the card shall appear these
words in small type: "All persons who violate these rules subject themselves to
a fine not to exceed seven hundred dollars ($700.00) for each offense, and each
day's failure to comply with such rules constitutes a separate offense".
      3.   Whenever the premises wherein contacts are under quarantine are
placarded, the placard shall be as described above, except the name of the
disease need not be stated.
      4.   Placards shall not be concealed from public view, shall not be
mutilated or defaced, and shall remain posted until the requirements of these
rules and regulations relative to the duration of the period of isolation or
quarantine for the specific disease have been fulfilled.
      5.   Placards may be removed only by order of the Oak Park Department of
Public Health. (Ord. 2007-0-49, 7-30-07)
20-1-12: ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS; PUNISHMENT:
   A.   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter, or any
regulations promulgated hereunder, or any Department orders authorized under
this chapter or under applicable law shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor
and shall be subject to arrest and a fine of seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each violation.
   B.   In addition to any other remedies permitted under this chapter, the
Department or the State's Attorney may file a complaint in the Circuit Court of
Cook County to enjoin any person from violating the provisions of this chapter,
or any regulations promulgated hereunder or any Department orders provided for
under this chapter. (Ord. 2007-0-49, 7-30-07)
ARTICLE 2
BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION:
20-2-1: Establishment; Term Of Members
20-2-2: Secretary
20-2-3: Board Of Health Authority
20-2-4: Quorum
20-2-5: Meetings
20-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT; TERM OF MEMBERS:
There is hereby established an advisory board in and for the Village which
shall be known as the Oak Park Board of Health and which shall be composed of
seven (7) members including a chairperson and six (6) other members to be
appointed by the Village President with the concurrence of the Board of
Trustees. As this Commission provides technical and public health advice to the
Health Department and the Village Board, the Commission shall include:
   A.   A medical doctor (MD or DO);
   B.   A registered nurse (RN);
   C.   One member may be a dentist (DDS);
   D.   One member may be a high school student;
   E.   Members of the Commission other than the student member shall have a
demonstrated interest in and knowledge of public health issues; and
   F.   All appointments, other than the student member, shall be for three (3)
year terms on a staggered basis with approximately one- third (1/3) of the
Board being appointed each year. If a student member is appointed, the student
member term shall be for a one (1) year term. (Ord. 2011-0-8, 2-7-2011; amd.
Ord. 2022-84, 11-7-2022)
20-2-2: SECRETARY:
The Director of Public Health shall serve as secretary of the Board of Health
but shall not have the right to vote. It shall be the secretary's duty to keep
a written record of all meetings of the Board which shall be kept on file in
the office of the Director. (1981 Code)
20-2-3: BOARD OF HEALTH AUTHORITY:
The Board of Health is an advisory body to the Director of the Department of
Public Health and the Board of Trustees, and as such has authority to make
recommendations as to such rules, regulations and orders as it may deem
necessary for the preservation and improvement of public health and for the
prevention and/or suppression of disease. (1981 Code)
20-2-4: QUORUM:
Four (4) members of the Board of Health shall constitute a quorum thereof.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-0-47, 4-2-2001)
20-2-5: MEETINGS:
The Board of Health shall hold monthly meetings and may also hold such
additional special meetings as may be deemed advisable upon call of the
chairman of the Board of Health, or upon request by the Director of Public
Health, the Village Manager, or the Board of Trustees. (1981 Code)
ARTICLE 3
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
SECTION:
20-3-1: Environmental Health Inspections; Places Of Public Assemblage
20-3-2: Environmental Health Inspections; Facilities, Definitions
20-3-3: Abatement Of Dangerous And Imminent Public Health Hazard
20-3-4: Placarding Premises
20-3-5: Conflict Of Ordinance
20-3-6: Facilities To Be Inspected
20-3-7: Licensing
20-3-8: Food Permit
20-3-9: Environmental Health Services Fees
20-3-10: Payment Of Fees, Delinquent Fee, Waiver
20-3-11: Schedule Of Environmental Health Service Fees
20-3-12: Penalty
20-3-13: Home Kitchen And Cottage Food Operations
20-3-1: ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH INSPECTIONS; PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLAGE:
The Director of Public Health shall cause to be made annually or as often as
practicable, a thorough inspection of the sanitary conditions of all
facilities, whether public or private, which are used by any assembly of
people. Such places of public assemblage shall include, but are not limited to,
schools and their premises, hotels, motels, lodging houses, churches,
recreational or social clubs, day or night care centers, nursing homes,
hospitals, theaters, public halls, respite care centers, adult day or night
care centers, or any facility where public gatherings of any kind were held.
The Public Health Director shall specify and require any improvements in the
sanitary conditions of such premises which are necessary to protect and promote
the public health. (Ord. 1994-0-8, 2-7-1994)
20-3-2: ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH INSPECTIONS; FACILITIES, DEFINITIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Health to cause to be inspected
at least annually or as often as necessary, the sanitary conditions of all
licensed equipment, facilities or establishments which provide services of a
public nature and which may cause a potential health hazard by their continued
operation.
Such facilities or establishments shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
   A.   Food establishments as defined by section
8-24-1 of this code;
   B.   Daycare and nightcare centers;
   C.   Facilities which provide respite care;
   D.   Hospitals;
   E.   Nursing homes;
   F.   Veterinary hospitals;
   G.   Swimming pools, whirlpools and spas;
   H.   Theaters;
   I.   Tanning facilities;
   J.   Body art establishments. (Ord. 2014-0-52, 8-4-2014)
20-3-3: ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS AND IMMINENT PUBLIC HEALTH HAZARD:
The Village Manager or Director of Public Health shall have the authority to
close any facility or abate any condition which is existing or potentially
dangerous and an imminent public health hazard. Any such premises may be
ordered vacated until such time as the health hazard has been abated, as
determined by the Village. (Ord. 1994-0-8, 2-7-1994)
20-3-4: PLACARDING PREMISES:
Whenever any dwelling unit, facility or establishment is so damaged, decayed,
dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin infested that it creates an immediate
and serious hazard to the health and safety of the public, the Director shall
declare such premises as unfit for habitation and without awaiting judicial
determination, placard the premises. (Ord. 1994-0-8, 2-7-1994)
20-3-5: CONFLICT OF ORDINANCE:
Whenever a provision of this health chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any section of this code or other ordinance of the Village, the
requirement which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. (Ord. 1994-0-
8, 2-7-1994)
20-3-6: FACILITIES TO BE INSPECTED:
The Director shall provide that those facilities to be inspected by the
Environmental Health Division before a business license is to be granted to the
proprietor, are so inspected and the results promptly reported to the Village
Clerk. (Ord. 1994-0-8, 2-7-1994)
20-3-7: LICENSING:
The Director shall provide a recommendation on each application for a business
license submitted by the Village Clerk. It will be the responsibility of the
Clerk to deny the business license application of any establishment which is
inspected and found not to be in compliance with the rules and regulations
established in this code. (Ord. 1994-0-8, 2-7-1994)
20-3-8: FOOD PERMIT:
All establishments whose business is that of routinely providing food to the
public shall have a current Village food permit. No such establishment shall
operate without such food permit as provided in chapter 8, article 24, "Foods
And Food Establishments", of this code. (Ord. 1994-0-8, 2-7-1994)
20-3-9: ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SERVICES FEES:
Any person conducting, operating or engaging in any business, occupation,
facility or establishment shall be liable for the environmental health services
fees specified in this article. (Ord. 2014-0-52, 8-4-2014)
20-3-10: PAYMENT OF FEES, DELINQUENT FEE, WAIVER:
Environmental health services fees required by this article shall be made
payable to the Village of Oak Park. If not paid in full within thirty (30) days
from the due date, a penalty equal to five percent (5%) of the fee shall be
imposed. For each subsequent thirty (30) days the fee remains unpaid or
fraction thereof, an additional five percent (5%) penalty shall be assessed.
All environmental health services fees may be billed and become due, prior to
or subsequent to, any actual inspections. (Ord. 2014-0-52, 8-4-2014)
20-3-11: SCHEDULE OF ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SERVICE FEES:
 
Field consultations                                                     $224.00
Food establishment disaster investigations                              112.00
Plan reviews:                                                            
  Full plan review for a new or extensively remodeled food
  establishment covering all facilities and operations, construction
 consultation, final preopening inspection and environmental health    300.00
  services fee for balance of calendar year. The fee for a plan review
  shall be due upon submission of the plans
 Limited plan review involving remodeling of less than 50 percent of a 120.00
  facility, consultation(s) and final inspection
Recheck inspection:                                                      
  Any food establishment obtaining a rating score of 60 or below or one
  that is found to have critical violations during inspection that are
 linked to food borne illness and require compliance verification      50.00
  shall be reinspected, as provided in section
  8-24-2 of this code, and subject to the reinspection fee
 
Note: No fees will be assessed for any public school, governmental body, not
for profit charitable, religious and educational institution when the building
or part thereof so inspected is used exclusively for charitable, religious or
education purposes.
(Ord. 2014-0-52, 8-4-2014)
20-3-12: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined in accordance
with the provisions of section
1-1-5 of this code. Failure to pay any fee when due may be grounds for
suspension and revocation of a business license in accordance with the
provisions of section
8-1-14 of this code. (Ord. 2014-0-52, 8-4-2014)
20-3-13: HOME KITCHEN AND COTTAGE FOOD OPERATIONS:
   A.   The provisions of the food handling regulation enforcement act, 410
Illinois Compiled Statutes 625/1 et seq., as amended, are adopted and
incorporated herein by reference.
   B.   Home kitchen operations and cottage food operations, as defined by the
food handling regulation enforcement act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 625/
3.6 and 625/4 respectively, as amended, are permitted within the Village. The
sale of nonpotentially hazardous food by home kitchen operations and cottage
food operations is also permitted in accordance with the food handling
regulation enforcement act.
   C.   The direct sale of baked goods as set forth in the food handling
regulation enforcement act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 625/4, as amended,
shall be permitted in the Village.
   D.   The Village's Health Department may inspect a home kitchen operation or
cottage food operation in the event of a complaint or disease outbreak as
provided in the food handling regulation enforcement act, 410 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 625/3.6 and 625/4, as amended.
   E.   A home kitchen operation or cottage food operation that seeks to
operate in the Village shall register with the Village on an annual basis and
shall pay a twenty five dollar ($25.00) annual registration fee. Said
registration shall expire on March 31 of each year. (Ord. 16-129, 11-7-2016)
ARTICLE 4
HUMAN HEALTH SERVICES
SECTION:
20-4-1: Purpose
20-4-2: Personal Care Services
20-4-1: PURPOSE:
Human health services shall include but not be limited to the provision of
personal care, institutional surveillance and licensing, health screening
programs and the staffing of temporary clinics. The foregoing shall not be
deemed to include those acts of medical diagnosis or prescription of
therapeutic or corrective measures which are properly performed only by
physicians licensed in the State. (1981 Code)
20-4-2: PERSONAL CARE SERVICES:
Personal care services shall include, where possible, education, prevention and
early detection of disease and control and health monitoring of those afflicted
with disease. These services shall be provided through mental health, maternal
and child health, communicable disease, chronic disease, dental health, poison
control, and home health programs performed by the Human Health Services
Divisions:
   A.   Maternal Health Care: The Director of Public Health shall assume the
availability and accessibility to maternal health services, family planning
services and general health services for all mothers, newborn infants and
children in accordance with Illinois Department of Public Health Standards for
Local Health Departments, (sections 12.1.0 through 12.1.5) as adopted October,
1977 or as subsequently amended.
   B.   Child Health Care: The Director of Public Health shall establish and
execute, coordinate or facilitate programs and services for comprehensive
health services to be provided to children of all ages in accordance with
Illinois Department of Public Health Standards for Local Health Departments
(sections 13.1.0 through 13.1.5) as adopted October, 1977 or as subsequently
amended.
   C.   Communicable Disease: The Director of Public Health shall establish and
execute programs and services to prevent and control communicable diseases in
accordance with Illinois Department of Public Health Standards for Local Health
Departments (sections 11.1.0 through 11.9.4) as adopted October, 1977 or as
subsequently amended.
These programs shall include activities to prevent, control and treat the
incidence of tuberculosis; and the prevention, detection, control and treatment
of sexually transmitted diseases.
   D.   Chronic Disease: The Director of Public Health shall establish and
execute, coordinate or facilitate programs and services for the prevention,
early detection, control and treatment of chronic diseases. Such programs shall
be in accordance with Illinois Department of Public Health Standards for Local
Health Departments (sections 10.1.0 through 10.1.8) as adopted October, 1977 or
as subsequently amended.
   E.   Dental Health: The Director of Public Health shall promote or establish
public health programs which encourage dental hygiene in accordance with
Illinois Department of Public Health Standards for Local Health Departments
(sections 14.1.0 through 14.5.4) as adopted October, 1977 or as subsequently
amended.
   F.   Poison Control: The Director of Public Health shall promote or
establish local public health programs which prevent, control or treat
poisoning of human beings in accordance with Illinois Department of Public
Health Standards for Local Health Departments (sections 15.1.0 through 15.4.5)
as adopted October, 1977 or as subsequently amended.
   G.   Mental Health: The Director of Public Health shall promote or establish
programs and services in the field of mental health in accordance with Illinois
Department of Public Health Standards for Local Health Departments (sections
19.1.0 through 19.7.6) as adopted October, 1977 or as subsequently amended.
ARTICLE 5
VITAL RECORDS
SECTION:
20-5-1: Local Registrar Of Vital Records; Designation
20-5-2: Deputy Registrars; Designation
20-5-3: Duties
20-5-4: Reciprocal Agreements With Other Vital Records Departments
20-5-5: Fees; Certified Copies Of Vital Records
20-5-1: LOCAL REGISTRAR OF VITAL RECORDS; DESIGNATION:
The Director of Public Health shall serve as Local Registrar of all births,
deaths and fetal deaths occurring within the limits of the Village of Oak Park
pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Vital Records Act, 410 Illinois
Compiled Statutes. In the event that the position of Director of Public Health
is vacant the Village Clerk shall serve as Local Registrar on an interim basis.
(1981 Code)
20-5-2: DEPUTY REGISTRARS; DESIGNATION:
The Local Registrar shall appoint one or more deputies. Such deputies shall be
subject to all rules and regulations governing local registrars. (1981 Code)
20-5-3: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Local Registrar and deputy registrars to enforce
all State laws and all rules and regulations of the Illinois Department of
Public Health pertaining to the proper registration of all births, deaths and
fetal deaths; and to enforce all rules, regulations and orders of the Oak Park
Department of Public Health pertaining to births, deaths and fetal deaths.
(1981 Code)
20-5-4: RECIPROCAL AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER VITAL RECORDS DEPARTMENTS:
The Village may enter into reciprocal agreements for mutual provision of vital
records documents with any other official government body having charge of
vital records, provided the decision to enter into such agreement is approved
by the Board of Trustees. (1981 Code)
20-5-5: FEES; CERTIFIED COPIES OF VITAL RECORDS:
Fees for certified copies of birth, death and fetal death records provided by
the Local Registrar shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for the first copy of each
such record and four dollars ($4.00) per copy for each additional copy thereof.
(Ord. 2006-0-73, 12-13-06, eff. 1-1-07)
ARTICLE 6
FOOD SERVICE SANITATION TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION
SECTION:
20-6-1: Training
20-6-2: Examination
20-6-3: Certification, Revocation or Suspension
20-6-1:TRAINING:
   A.   Each food service establishment in operation in Oak Park, shall be
under the operational supervision of a manager or supervisor who has been
certified in food service sanitation under this Article. A minimum of one
certified person at each establishment is required; provided, however:
      1.   New food service establishments shall have three (3) months from the
initial day of operation to comply.
      2.   Food service establishments which are not in compliance because of
employee turnover or other loss of certified personnel, shall have three (3)
months from date of loss of certified personnel to comply.
   B.   Certification shall be achieved by successfully completing an
examination monitored by the Illinois Department of Public Health or its
representative. A certificate of certification will be issued to candidates
attaining the passing grade as determined by the Illinois Department of Public
Health.
   C.   The certificate evidencing such training shall be maintained by the
holder in the place of business/employment.
   D.   The Oak Park Department of Public Health will recognize similar
certificates issued by local health departments in Illinois and other states,
provided the standards for certification are essentially equivalent to those
utilized by the Illinois Department of Public Health.
20-6-2: EXAMINATION:
   A.   The examination offered by the Illinois Department of Public Health (or
other approved examinations) to candidates for certification, under this
Article, must cause the candidate to demonstrate knowledge in food service
sanitation, including but not limited to: microbiology of foodborne diseases;
food service law, rules and regulations; food storage, preparation and service;
equipment design and construction; personal hygiene; cleaning and sanitizing
procedures; and rodent and insect control.
   B.   Training programs to prepare candidates for the examinations will be
made available throughout the State through cooperation with industry and
universities.
20-6-3: CERTIFICATION REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
Any certificate evidencing such training may be revoked or suspended by the Oak
Park Department of Public Health when the holder or person under his
supervision repeatedly fails to comply with the provisions of this Code
relating to Food and Food Establishments. Prior to such suspension or
revocation, the holder of said certificate shall be given the opportunity for a
hearing before the Board of Health.
ARTICLE 7
GARBAGE, WEEDS AND LITTERING
SECTION:
20-7-1: Definitions
20-7-2: Storage And Collection Of Garbage, Refuse, Yard Waste And Recyclable
Materials For Residential Buildings Containing Five Units Or Less; Storage And
Collection Of Yard Waste For All Buildings
20-7-3: Storage And Collection Of Garbage For Other Buildings
20-7-4: Scavengers; License Required
20-7-5: Scavengers; Vehicle Hauling Garbage To Be Strong, Tight And Flyproof
20-7-6: Scavenger's Report
20-7-7: Scavengers; Disposition Of Garbage, Refuse, Yard Waste, Recyclable
Materials And Bulk Materials
20-7-8: Accumulation Of Garbage; Nuisance
20-7-9: Removal
20-7-10: Lien
20-7-11: Littering; Generally
20-7-12: Litter From Vehicles
20-7-13: Litter On Private Property
20-7-14: Illegal To Allow Growth Of Weeds
20-7-15: Removal Of Weeds By Village
20-7-16: Lien By Village
20-7-17: Construction Sites
20-7-18: Junk Dealers
20-7-19: Enforcement
20-7-20: Payments To Avoid Prosecution, Penalties
20-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby defined
as follows:
BACK DOOR COLLECTION SERVICE: Collection of waste and recycling that is not at
the alley or the street curb.
BUILDING: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property.
BULK ITEM: Any item of "municipal solid waste", as defined herein, which is not
able to be adequately reduced to fit into a ninety six (96) gallon municipal
solid waste container, such as discarded furniture, fixtures, rolls of
carpeting and small amounts of construction or demolition debris. Bulk items
shall not include hazardous waste, excluded materials or white goods.
COMPOST: A mixture of decomposing materials, which produces humus for
fertilizing and conditioning the soil. Materials that can be composted include,
but are not limited to, yard waste and compostable kitchen waste. Garbage
(except vegetable waste) and untreated animal excreta shall be specifically
excluded as compost materials.
COMPOST PILE: A portion of a property set aside for the purpose of encouraging
the rapid decomposition of yard and vegetable waste into compost. The compost
pile must show signs of active management and is not meant to store or dump
waste.
COMPOSTABLE KITCHEN WASTE: Organic waste resulting from the growing, handling,
preparing, cooking or consumption of food, including vegetable waste, coffee
grounds, eggshells, and grain based products, but excluding animal waste and
food cooked in animal products such as lard, meat or cheese.
COMPOSTING: The conversion of yard and compostable kitchen waste into compost.
CONTRACT WASTE HAULER: The Village's franchisee for the collection of solid
waste, compostable materials, yard waste and/or recyclable materials pursuant
to this article.
CUSTOMER: An owner, operator, occupant or responsible party that is a non-
institutional customer that receives services pursuant to this article.
DIRECTOR: The Director of Public Health, the Director of Development Customer
Services, the Director of Public Works or the Director's duly appointed
representative.
DUMPSTER: A one cubic yard or larger container for the disposal of garbage or
refuse.
DWELLING UNIT: A room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a
single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used as
a housekeeping unit for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
GARBAGE: The putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparing, cooking and consumption of food.
GARBAGE AND REFUSE CONTAINER: A standard, waterproof container constructed of
metal or other durable material with handles and a tight-fitting cover which
holds no more than forty (40) gallons or a "mobile cart" as defined herein.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: A waste or combination of wastes which, because of its
quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics,
may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious, irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or pose
a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment
when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise
managed or which has been identified, by characteristics or listing, as
hazardous, pursuant to section 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act of 1976, 42 United States Code section 6921, as amended, or which is
designated as special, hazardous or toxic, pursuant to other applicable law,
ordinance or regulation.
IN VESSEL: Composting which is conducted entirely within a fully enclosed
container, with no opening having a dimension greater than one-fourth inch (1/
4") in any direction.
INSTITUTIONAL CUSTOMER: A local governmental entity, private and public school,
church and not for profit corporation or organization or charitable
organization receiving services pursuant to this article.
LITTER: Shall include, but is not limited to: garbage; other putrescible waste,
including dead animals, vegetable waste, yard clippings and leaves; non-
putrescible solid waste (except body waste), including rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, abandoned automobiles,solid market and industrial wastes, paper,
wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, metal cans, glass, bedding, crockery and
similar materials; and all other materials which, if thrown or deposited as
herein prohibited, deem to create a danger to public health, safety and
welfare.
MIXED PAPER: Paper recycling material consisting of magazines, phone books,
paperback books and any other paper, except newspaper, generated in the home
which is not treated with wax or plastic or any other laminates and which is
not contaminated by food or other waste.
MOBILE CART: A heavy duty plastic container of either ninety six (96) or sixty
four (64) gallons in size, provided by the Village to the citizens of Oak Park,
which cart is equipped with wheels and a hinged top and is specially adapted to
the hydraulic lift mechanism mounted on all packer type refuse or recycling
vehicles. Ninety six (96) and sixty four (64) gallon mobile carts used as solid
waste containers shall be green. Sixty four (64) gallon mobile carts used as
recycling containers shall be blue.
MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURE: A building with more than five (5) residential living
units which is not included in the Village of Oak Park curbside refuse,
recyclables and landscape waste collection and disposal service.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE: Refuse, garbage or other discarded material generated by
those residing in residential structures of five (5) or fewer dwelling units
within the Village. Municipal solid waste does not include hazardous waste or
waste which any of the facilities to which it is sent is not permitted to
receive.
OCCUPANT: Any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having actual
possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part
thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
OWNER: Any person or group of persons who shall have legal or equitable title
to a multiple-family structure or dwelling unit, the agent of said person, or
any person having management or control of any multiple-family structure or
dwelling unit; provided, however, that no person acting as managing agent or
collector of rents of any property involved in any proceeding hereunder shall
be liable hereunder if such person, within five (5) days after receipt of
notice of any alleged violation or of summons, shall have notified in writing,
by registered or certified mail, the owner or owners of the property or the
employer of such person of the purported violation or violations of any
provision or provisions of this article and shall have delivered to the
Director of Public Health of the Village a copy of the notice with proof of
service thereof on the owner, owners or employer.
PARKWAY: The portion of real property generally between a public sidewalk and a
street curb.
PLACED FOR COLLECTION: Placed, as permitted by the Village, at the curb, alley,
or at the back door for collection by the Village.
POST-COLLECTION SEPARATION: A process that separates recyclable materials from
other solid waste after the point of collection for the purpose of recycling
such materials.
PRIVATE CONTRACTOR: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the removal of
solid waste, compostable material and/or recyclable material from any location
within the Village not covered by either an exclusive collection contract
between the Village and a contracted hauler, or a franchise agreement between
the Village and a franchised hauler.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Materials which would otherwise be disposed of or
discarded but which can be utilized in the secondary material market.
RECYCLING: The process by which recyclable materials are collected, separated,
processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials
or products. Recycling does not include incineration or composting for volume
reduction or for energy recovery.
RECYCLING CONTAINER: A special blue eighteen (18) gallon bin or sixty four (64)
gallon mobile cart. Said containers shall remain the property of the Village of
Oak Park, but shall be made available without charge to each household in the
Village for the purpose of donating recyclable materials to the Village.
REFUSE: All non-putrescible solid waste (except ashes), including paper, rags,
cardboard, metal cans, bottles, glass, wood, bedding, crockery, metals and
similar materials.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Except as may otherwise be specified herein, the owner or
the owner's designated agent shall be considered a responsible party for
ensuring compliance with this Code. In addition, any other person or entity
that may be reasonably considered to have a role or responsibility in the
creation, continuation, or correction of any violation of this Code shall be
considered a responsible party or additional responsible party for such
violation.
SHARED: The use of one refuse cart and/or one compost cart by more than one
customer or the use of one compost cart by more than one customer.
SOURCE SEPARATION: A process that separates recyclable material from other
solid waste prior to collection for the purpose of recycling such materials.
SPECIAL PICK UP: The curbside or alley pick up of more than one bulk item, or
large unbundled quantities of landscape waste.
TREATED ANIMAL EXCRETA: The commercially packaged and distributed manure of
animals together with whatever other dried, pulverized, shredded, composted or
otherwise processed or manipulated organic bedding or other materials are
necessary to maintain proper sanitation conditions, conserve plant food
elements in the excreta, and absorb the liquid portion without the addition of
other materials. Such excreta must also be registered with the United States
Department of Agriculture.
VERMICOMPOSTING: The process of using worms ("vermi" is Latin for "worm") to
process organic food waste into nutrient rich soil. Worms, specifically red
wigglers (Eisenia foetida), are the only worms that should be used in a
vermicompost bin.
WEEDS: Any undesirable plant growth such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle
or cockle bush.
YARD WASTE: Includes grass clippings, trimmings from shrubs, hedges and other
vegetation, brush, branches and limbs presented for collection by the Village
in accordance with section
20-7-2  of this article.
Size limitations and bundling requirements, as expressed in section
20-7-2  of this article, determine whether specific yard waste is eligible for
collection under the Village's Yard Waste Collection Program or whether the
resident owner of the yard waste must request a special bulk pick up from the
Village. Fees for the regularly scheduled collection of yard waste bags,
containers, or brush bundled in the manner prescribed by section
20-7-2  of this article, or for special bulk pickups of yard waste consisting
of logs, large tree limbs and/or large quantities of brush and limbs shall be
established in the then current agreement between the Village and its solid
waste collection and disposal agent for yard waste services.
For purposes of the Yard Waste Collection Program, leaves shall not be
considered to be yard waste during the annual fall leaf collection period and
during this time period shall be disposed of in the manner specified in section
20-7-2  of this article.
YARD WASTE BAGS: Any thirty (30) gallon, heavy duty, kraft paper bag designed
for yard waste collection which are acceptable at a licensed compost facility.
(Ord. 18-454, 11-19-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; amd. Ord. 19-119, 11-18-2019; Ord. 24-
118, 4-30-2024)
20-7-2: STORAGE AND COLLECTION OF GARBAGE, REFUSE, YARD WASTE AND RECYCLABLE
MATERIALS FOR RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS CONTAINING FIVE UNITS OR LESS; STORAGE AND
COLLECTION OF YARD WASTE FOR ALL BUILDINGS:
   A.   Containers: It shall be the duty of every owner, operator, occupant or
responsible party of every residential building containing five (5) or less
dwelling units to store all garbage, except compostable kitchen waste placed in
a compost pile, and refuse in a "mobile cart" as defined in section
20-7-1  of this article, except for permissible shared mobile carts under this
article. Mobile carts which weigh in excess of fifty (50) pounds when filled
will not be collected by the Village. Garbage and refuse in any other type of
container will not be collected by the Village. It shall be the duty of every
owner, operator or occupant of every residential building containing five (5)
or less dwelling units to store all garbage and refuse in a mobile cart and/or
in garbage and refuse containers of standard, waterproof metal or plastic
construction with handles and a tightfitting cover, which containers shall be
no larger than forty (40) gallons in capacity and sufficient in size and number
to hold one week's accumulation. Leaking or otherwise defective garbage and
refuse containers shall be repaired or replaced.
   It shall be the duty of every owner, operator, occupant or responsible party
of every building within the Village presenting yard waste for collection by
the Village to separately dispose of yard waste in the form of grass clippings
and small yard material and brush only in "yard waste bags" as defined in
section
20-7-1  of this article, or in a rigid container of up to thirty (30) gallons,
which container is clearly labeled "Yard Waste Only". Limbs of less than three
inches (3") in diameter and two feet (2') or less in length may also be
disposed of in yard waste bags. Bundles of brush, securely tied and not
exceeding four feet (4') in length may be neatly stacked next to the yard waste
bags for the separately scheduled regular yard waste collection. The Village
will not collect bundles of brush tied with either wire or plastic cord. Yard
waste will only be collected if it is disposed of in yard waste bags or
containers to which is affixed a Village yard waste sticker. Yard waste
stickers may be purchased at Village Hall and through local vendors.
Information as to the location of vendors shall be available through the
Village's Director of Public Works or his designee.
   Recyclable material may only be donated to the Village for recycling by
placement of specified materials in official Village boxes or at designated
Village of Oak Park recycling stations located throughout the Village or by
placement in the official Village recycling container owned by the Village but
made available to individual residents exclusively for the collection of
recyclable materials; except that when the amount of recyclable material
exceeds the space available in the recycling container, recyclable materials
may be placed in Kraft paper bags, or in the case of newspaper, either placed
in Kraft paper bags or bundled and tied only with string, and then placed on
top of or next to the recycling container for collection. Mixed paper may also
be placed inside of, on top of or next to the recycling container for
collection. Regardless of placement, however, mixed paper must always be
separated from newspaper, flattened out and bundled with twine in two (2)
directions. Mixed paper may be placed in Kraft bags, but such bags must also be
bundled with twine in two (2) directions. Recycling materials may also be
placed in Kraft paper bags and then placed in the recycling container.
   Yard and compostable kitchen waste may also be used in a compost pile.
Garbage (excluding compostable kitchen waste) and untreated animal excrement
are prohibited as compost ingredients. All compost piles shall be aerated on a
regular basis to avoid anaerobic conditions which are conducive to rodent and
insect infestation and the creation of noxious and offensive odors. Any compost
pile which is not created or tended in a manner consistent with these
provisions may be declared to be a public nuisance under the nuisance
provisions of this code for purposes of abatement and prosecution.
   Garbage shall be drained of moisture and wrapped in paper or plastic before
it is deposited in the container. Containers to which garbage is frozen for
failure to observe the above regulation, and garbage contained in receptacles
which also contain yard waste, or dog defecation or similar offensive matter,
will not be collected by the Village.
   Items such as toys, securely tied bundles of papers, crates, empty cartons,
and small items suitable for collection by packer type equipment shall be
neatly stacked next to approved containers for collection.
   No containers are necessary for items such as large and bulky appliances
(refrigerators, washing machines, stoves, dryers, etc.), large toys, furniture,
empty cartons, empty crates, newspapers and magazines when securely tied in
bundles convenient to handle, brush and branches, Christmas trees and other
large discarded household objects. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in
operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first
removing the doors.
   B.   Location And Time For Collection: Garbage, refuse, yard waste and
recyclable materials stored in accordance with subsection
20-7-2 A of this section and all bulk materials for special pickup shall be
placed for collection close to, but not encroaching upon, the public alley
abutting the property for which they are provided, and shall be no more than
three feet (3') from the alley and easily accessible to the collector or on the
alley of any rear yard fence or enclosure. The Director of Public Works may
approve the placing of containers in an alley in the least obtrusive manner
possible where the location of adjoining structures makes it impossible to
locate the containers on private property. This approval is limited to
specified containers in specified locations and may be withdrawn at any time
when, at the discretion of the Public Works Director, the container or
containers create an unreasonable obstruction of the public way. In areas where
there are no alleys, residents in such areas shall place garbage, refuse, yard
waste, recyclable materials and materials for collection close to, but not
encroaching upon, the street in the area between the street curbing and the
sidewalk. All garbage and refuse storage areas shall be maintained by owners,
occupants or responsible parties in a clean condition. All containers and
materials for collection shall be placed out prior to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
on the designated collection day. The regular collection day for garbage and
refuse, yard waste and recyclable material may be different. Where the
collection days coincide, however, recycling containers and materials and yard
waste bags and recyclable materials shall be placed next to garbage and refuse
containers for collection. Containers shall be retrieved by ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. after they have been emptied by the collector.
   During the annual fall leaf collection period, leaves shall be placed for
collection in yard waste bags with a weight less than fifty (50) pounds when
filled with leaves to be placed in the parkway as close to the curb as
possible. The Village shall give notice to the public of the beginning and the
length of the collection period by publication in a local newspaper, not less
than one week prior to the beginning of the period.
   C.   Bulk Material And Extra Trash Pickups: Occasional extra trash may be
disposed of in containers of not more than thirty two (32) gallon capacity.
Extra trash so disposed of will only be collected if there is affixed to the
container a refuse sticker. Bulk materials will only be collected if there is
affixed to the item two (2) refuse stickers. Refuse stickers may be purchased
at Village Hall or through local vendors. Information as to the location of
vendors shall be available through the Village's Director of Public Works or
his designee.
   D.   Collection Of Recyclable Materials; Prohibited Activities:
      1.   Prohibited Collections: It shall be unlawful for anyone other than
the Village or its authorized agent to collect, procure, remove or obtain any
recycling container or recyclable materials placed in recycling containers for
collection in the parkways in front of a home or in the alley adjacent to a
home participating in the Village's recycling program, unless such a collection
is through an organized aluminum can or paper drive authorized by the Village
Manager or his designee.
      2.   Use of Containers: Recycling containers shall only be used for the
storage of recyclable materials in accordance with the Village's recycling
program. Such recycling containers shall be considered Village property and
shall at all times remain at the property originally provided for.
      3.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this subsection
20-7-2 D shall be subject to the penalties provided for in section
1-1-5  of this code.
   E.   Rates For Collection Of Garbage, Refuse, Yard Waste And Recycling
Charges: The monthly/quarterly rates for collection of garbage, refuse, yard
waste and recycling commodities as set forth in this article shall be as
follows:
   FIGURE 1
   RESIDENTIAL FEE RATES FOR REFUSE
   COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL AND RECYCLING
 
Number Of Units 96 Gallon Cart Quarterly 64 Gallon Cart Monthly Quarterly
                Monthly
1 cart          $30.22         $90.66    $27.45                 $82.35
2 carts         $60.44         $181.32   $54.90                 $164.70
3 carts         $90.67         $271.98   $82.35                 $247.05
4 carts         $120.88 116.24 $362.64   $109.80                $329.40
5 carts         $151.10        $453.30   $137.25                $411.75
Shared cart     $26.55         $79.65    $24.59                 $73.63
 
   FIGURE 2
   STICKER PRICES
 
Yard waste stickers (see subsection  $3.25 each
20-7-2 A of this section)
Refuse stickers (see subsection      $3.25 each
20-7-2 C of this section)
 
   All owners of residential property within the Village containing from one to
five (5) dwelling units shall pay the garbage collection rates prescribed in
this article. For purposes of this section, "residential properties containing
from one to five (5) units" shall not include condominium buildings and
buildings containing mixed commercial and residential use.
   The above rates are inclusive of a $2.50 alley improvement fee per cart. A
one-time leaf collection program credit of twenty-nine dollars and four cents
($29.04) shall be applied for all residential refuse program customers on their
first bill for the 2025 calendar year.
   F.   Bulk Items: The rate for the pick-up of a bulk item shall be six
dollars and fifty cents ($6.50) (two (2) refuse stickers) and the bulk item
pickup shall be limited to one (1) bulk item per week.
   G.   Compost Cart: The rate for a compost cart as set forth in this article
shall be sixteen dollars and thirty-one cents ($16.31)per month/forty-eight
dollars and ninety-three cents ($48.93) per quarter. The winter rate during the
four (4) month period when service is limited to every other week the rate for
a compost cart shall be eight dollars and sixteen cents ($8.16) per month/
twenty-four dollars and forty-eight cents ($24.48) per quarter. Said rate shall
be charged on a pro rata basis for a shared compost cart between applicable
customers. New compost cart program participants who agree to twelve (12)
months of continuous compost cart service shall receive a green rate credit of
forty-eight dollars and ninety-three cents ($48.93) for the first three (3)
months of service.
   H.   Special Pickup: The rate for a special pickup shall be nineteen dollars
and forty-two cents for collection plus five dollars seventy-four cents ($5.74)
per cubic yard. The rate for a yard waste special pickup shall be twenty two
dollars and ninety-six cents ($22.96) per cubic yard.
   I.   Back Door Service: The rate for back door service shall be seventeen
dollars and eighty cents ($17.80) per month which shall be in addition to all
other applicable rates set forth in this article.
   J.   Bills For Garbage, Refuse And Recycling Collection: Bills for garbage,
refuse, and recycling collection, as fixed in this section for service
rendered, shall be due and payable in the manner prescribed in section
26-2-3  of this code.
   K.   Non-Payment Of Garbage, Refuse And Recycling Charges: Failure of the
owner of any residential property within the Village containing up to five (5)
dwelling units to pay the charges for garbage and refuse collection thereto
within thirty (30) days after such charges are due and payable, shall be
subject to the following remedies applied severally or cumulatively to enforce
collections of charges:
      1.   By shutting off, in whole or in part, the water supply to such
property; provided, water service shall only be shut off in accordance with the
notice and hearing procedures set forth in section
26-2-4  of this code.
      2.   By suits at law for the recovery of amounts due, and to enforce
judgments by levy and making the same a lien on real estate.
      3.   By recording a notice of declaration of lien on the specific
property with the recorder of deeds of Cook County, Illinois.
      4.   By foreclosure of the lien.
   L.   Exceptions: Charges for garbage, refuse and recycling service supplied
to residential properties within the Village containing up to five (5) dwelling
units during any quarter will be at the rates specified in subsection
20-7-2 E of this section except where the premises have been vacant,
unoccupied, and no water, sewage or garbage service was provided for a
preceding period of twelve (12) consecutive months, or the premises are vacant,
unoccupied, no water, sewage, or garbage service is provided and the property
is publicly advertised for sale, in which event there will be no charge for
such quarter.
   M.   Private Scavengers Prohibited: The employment of private scavengers by
an owner of any residential property within the Village containing up to five
(5) dwelling units for the collection of garbage, refuse and recyclables shall
not be allowed. All owners of residential properties within the Village
containing up to five (5) dwelling units shall pay the collection rates
prescribed in this article. The Village Board shall employ all necessary
persons and vehicles, or enter into contract for this service, to collect,
remove, dispose of, compost and/or recycle within the Village garbage, refuse,
and recyclable materials from residential properties within the Village
containing up to five (5) dwelling units.
   N.   Title To Waste: Title to municipal solid waste which is placed for
collection shall pass to the Village when it is collected by the Village or by
a contractor retained by the Village for the purpose of collecting municipal
solid waste.
   O.   Composting Standards: All composting operations shall promote proper
conditions for composting and shall operate under the following standards:
      1.   Nuisance: In no event shall any composting activities be conducted
in a manner which creates an odor, litter, dust or noise nuisance, or attracts
vectors or pests.
      2.   Proximity: Compost piles must be placed in the rear yard no closer
than three feet (3') to any adjacent property line.
      3.   Vermicomposting: No composting operation may be conducted within a
building with the exception of vermicomposting. No composting or
vermicomposting operation may be conducted within a building containing a food
service establishment.
      4.   Rat Or Other Vector Control: The presence of insects, rodents, birds
and other vectors or pests shall be controlled through specific measures. These
specific measures may include grinding the ingredients, providing screens or
wire mesh no larger than one-fourth inch (1/4"), or conducting the composting
operation in vessel.
      5.   Surface Water: The composting operation shall be located or designed
and constructed to prevent the composting material and compost from sitting in
ponded surface water.
      6.   Mixing: Composting material shall be mixed or turned at regular
intervals as conditions mandate to remix ingredients, distribute moisture,
rebuild porosity and aid in physical breakdown until composting is complete.
      7.   Ingredients: The composting operation composts only organic waste
that is generated on site.
      8.   Compost Use: All generated compost shall be used on site. (Ord. 18-
454, 11-19-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; amd. Ord. 19-119, 11-18-2019; Ord. 20-121, 11-
16-2020; Ord. 23-109, 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-118, 4-30-2024; Ord. 24-175, 11-21-
2024)
20-7-3: STORAGE AND COLLECTION OF GARBAGE FOR OTHER BUILDINGS:
It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant or responsible party of all
buildings, other than residential buildings containing five (5) or fewer
dwelling units and buildings owned and occupied by governmental bodies, to
store all garbage and litter in garbage containers pursuant to the same
requirements set forth in section
20-7-2 of this article, and section 6.6 of the Village of Oak Park zoning
ordinance, except for the following additional regulations:
   A.   Collection: Owners, occupants or responsible parties are required to
provide for the prompt, private collection of garbage and litter not less than
once each week.
   B.   Containers: Containers with a capacity of at least one cubic yard shall
be provided for each six (6) units in a multiple-family building.
   C.   Containers In Excess Of Thirty Two Gallons: Garbage containers with a
capacity in excess of thirty two (32) gallons may be permitted provided they
meet the remaining requirements of section
20-7-2 of this article and further provided the containers have adequate
outriggers and other safety equipment attached as well as a minimum bottom
width of at least thirty one inches (31") for one cubic yard containers, and be
proportionately wider at the bottom for larger sized containers, with four (4)
cubic yard containers having a height no greater than forty three inches (43")
and having no less than a four (4) piece lid opening.
   D.   Recycling: Owners, occupants or responsible parties shall be required
to institute an on site multi-family recycling program, with collection of
recyclable materials to be no less than one pick up per week.
      1.   Said program shall be instituted upon the expiration date of the
owner's current refuse collection contract in effect on November 1, 1995,
except that when the refuse collection contract expires prior to April 1, 1996,
the owner shall not be required to institute the recycling program prior to
April 1, 1996, and under no circumstances shall any owner and/or operator
institute the recycling program for their multiple- family structure later than
January 1, 1997.
      2.   Owners, occupants or responsible parties may contract for recycling
and refuse services with a private contractor, duly licensed by the Village of
Oak Park. Multi-family property owners shall be billed for recycling and refuse
services directly by the private contractor.
      3.   An on site recycling program shall include, but is not limited to,
the following components:
         a.   Siting and design of common area collection areas for recyclable
materials;
         b.   Recyclable materials collection;
         c.   Provision of common area recycling containers;
         d.   Data collection and reporting;
         e.   Educational campaign and materials; and
         f.   Recycling program administration and maintenance.
      4.   Owners, occupants or responsible parties shall be required to
operate the recycling program in accordance with the following specific
requirements:
         a.   Recycling collection areas for residents shall be conveniently
located and maintained within common areas in or near the buildings, and
consist of separate containers which are for the purposes of temporary storage
of recyclables. Recycling containers should be placed, whenever possible,
adjacent to common area solid waste collection containers.
         b.   Indoor common area collection/storage areas shall be established
in accordance with appropriate Village fire and/or safety codes.
         c.   Exterior recyclables storage areas shall be established in
accordance with Village requirements for solid waste enclosures.
         d.   The multi-family structure owner shall maintain all recycling
areas, including the containers, in a clean, sanitary, and litter free manner.
         e.   Owners and operators are required to offer collection of the same
recyclable materials collected through the Village residential recycling
program.
         f.   Recyclable materials must be source separated from other solid
waste prior to collection for the purpose of recycling such materials. Separate
collection containers and collection vehicles shall be employed.
         g.   The minimum gallon amount of recycling container capacity (total
weekly base recycling container capacity) an owner shall provide weekly for
each structure shall be based on the following formula:
            7     gallons x number of studio and 1 bedroom units, +
            8    gallons x number of 2 bedroom units, +
            9     gallons x number of 3 bedroom or more units
            = total base weekly recycling container capacity.
The weekly base recycling container capacity may be met by a combination of
container sizes and number of pick ups, such as containers totaling half the
base capacity picked up twice a week.
         h.   The licensed private contractor providing the on site recycling
collection service shall be responsible for furnishing, maintaining, and
replacing all common area recycling containers and separate collection
vehicles, used exclusively in the recycling program, which are necessary to the
operation of the recycling program. The private contractor shall be responsible
for the collection, intermediate storage or transfer, transportation, and sale
of recyclable materials to a processor, broker, or market desired for reuse of
materials.
         i.   Owners and/or operators and/or responsible parties shall notify
residents of the availability of recycling services through a formal and
ongoing educational campaign, and shall use their best efforts to gain and
maintain participation in the program.
         j.   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized persons to remove or
damage any recyclable materials placed in designated containers, or the
containers themselves. Title to recyclable material shall pass to the private
contractor when the materials are placed into the collection vehicle.
         k.   Failure to comply with the requirements set forth in this section
will result in a denial of application for, or renewal of, the owner's
multiple-family dwelling license. Said denial shall remain in effect until the
multi-family property owner demonstrates compliance with the requirements set
forth in this section.
   E.   Refrigerators: Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation
shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first removing
the doors. (Ord. 2012-0-68, 11-19-2012)
20-7-4: SCAVENGERS; LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of a scavenger by vehicle or otherwise,
or in any manner engage in or carry on the business of a scavenger to collect
solid waste, compostable material and/or recyclable material within the Village
without first having a license from the Clerk of the Village to do so, in
accordance with chapter 8 of this code and this article.
   A.   The licensed scavenger shall undertake to perform all disposal services
rendered in a sanitary, orderly and efficient manner; to use care and
diligence; and to provide neat, orderly and courteous personnel on its crews.
   B.   The licensed scavenger shall label all collection containers with the
customer name and address.
   C.   As a condition of receiving, renewing and maintaining a scavenger
license within Oak Park, each such licensee or applicant for such license
shall:
      1.   Obtain all permits and licenses required by federal, state and
county laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and maintain the same in full
force and effect.
      2.   Submit to the Village a list of the multi-family structures it
serves within the Village's jurisdiction.
      3.   Provide collection and recycling services for any multi- family
property owner that requests such services in accordance with this article.
      4.   Submit a written description of the recycling program which the
licensee or license applicant offers as an available service to all of its
customers within the Village and which provides for source separation and the
recycling of all of the same recyclable materials collected through the
Village's residential recycling program. Postcollection separation may only be
used as an adjunct to source separation to recover recyclable materials which
have not been properly separated from other solid waste at the source prior to
collection and to recover other recyclable materials in addition to the
required categories of recyclable materials separated at the source.
Postcollection separation shall not be in lieu of source separation. Any
licensee may subcontract with a recycling service provider to meet these
requirements.
      5.   Submit a completed license certification form to the Village Clerk.
         a.   The recycling coordinator for the Village shall review and
approve the license certification form(s), after verifying the license
certification form information by making one or more processing facility
inspections, as a prerequisite to the issuance of the license.
         b.   The information submitted on or as a part of the license
certification form shall be considered proprietary information and shall not be
made available to the general public.
      6.   Complete a recycling program form, provided by the Village Clerk,
for each location serviced by a recycling program. Such forms shall be kept on
file in the licensee's principal place of business and filed with the location
serviced. The recycling program form(s) shall be available for inspection by
the recycling coordinator or the recycling coordinator's designee upon request
during normal business hours.
      7.   Submit a written quarterly report form, provided by the Village
Clerk, to the recycling coordinator, and to multiple- family structure owners
or operators, when applicable, summarizing activities between January 1 and
March 31, on or before April 15 of each year; activities between April 1 and
June 30, on or before July 15 of each year; activities between July 1 and
September 30, on or before October 15 of each year; and activities between
October 1 and December 31, on or before January 15 of each year. The quarterly
report shall contain the following information:
         a.   Total weight or volume of refuse, yard waste and recyclable
materials collected from multi-family structures it serves within the Village.
         b.   A summary of recycling services provided to each multi- family
structure, to be submitted only on an annual basis with the fourth quarter
report.
         c.   Quarterly reports submitted to the multi-family structure owner
by the licensed private contractor shall only pertain to that structure's
activity.
         d.   Quarterly reports submitted to the Village shall contain
aggregate totals concerning the information listed above for all multi-family
structures the licensed private contractor serves within the Village's
jurisdiction.
         e.   Information submitted on or as a part of the quarterly report
shall be considered proprietary information and shall not be made available to
the general public. The Village or its designee shall only report general
statistical information, including volume totals for all multi-family
structures in the Village. No personal information, aside from the applicant's
name on the individual license application, shall be divulged.
         f.   The Village and/or its designee shall have the right to inspect
and examine the licensed private contractor's records pertaining to the
collection and disposal or processing of refuse and recyclables upon request
and with reasonable notice. The Village or its designee shall further have the
right to require the reporting of other data or information relative to the
recycling program from time to time.
         g.   All such reports, data, and information once received by the
Village or its designee shall become the property of the Village to be used as
it shall determine without obligation to any person, firm or corporation.
      8.   Failure to comply with the above provisions shall result in the
denial, revocation or suspension of a scavenger license until such time as the
applicant complies with all provisions set forth in this section. (Ord. 2012-0-
68, 11-19-2012)
20-7-5: SCAVENGERS; VEHICLE HAULING GARBAGE TO BE STRONG, TIGHT AND FLYPROOF:
All vehicles used for the carrying of garbage shall be strong and tight so that
no part of such contents or load shall fall, leak or spill therefrom and shall
be adequately and tightly covered so as to prevent the same from being
offensive, or give access to flies. (1981 Code)
20-7-6: SCAVENGER'S REPORT:
All licensed scavengers serving any commercial establishment and/or multi-
family buildings which contain six (6) or more units through private contract
within the Village limits shall on October 1 of each year file a written report
with the Director of the Public Works Department or his designee on forms
provided by the Director indicating that private arrangements for the
collection and disposal of garbage and rubbish have been made with the stated
premises, the nature of the service provided, as well as the number and type of
receptacles which are in use for this purpose and the days on which collection
is made. (Ord. 2012-0-68, 11-19-2012)
20-7-7: SCAVENGERS; DISPOSITION OF GARBAGE, REFUSE, YARD WASTE, RECYCLABLE
MATERIALS AND BULK MATERIALS:
All garbage, refuse and bulk items shall be disposed of and deposited in a
state licensed sanitary landfill, incinerator or transfer station for
subsequent disposal in accordance with law, unless placed in a compost pile as
otherwise permitted herein. (Ord. 2009-0-027, 4-20-2009; amd. Ord. 16-151, 11-
21-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
Yard waste shall be disposed of at a state licensed transfer station or at a
compost facility possessing a current Illinois environmental protection agency
permit, unless placed in a compost pile as otherwise permitted herein. (Ord.
2009-0-027, 4-20-2009)
Recyclable materials shall be disposed of at a recyclable material processing
center which, in turn, shall deliver such material to remanufacturing plants.
(Ord. 1990-0-17, 4-16-1990)
20-7-8: ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE; NUISANCE:
Except as provided in sections
20-7-2 and
20-7-3 of this article, it shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for the
owner, operator or occupant of any premises to permit garbage or litter to
accumulate thereon. (1981 Code)
20-7-9: REMOVAL:
In addition to the other remedies provided in this code, the Director may cause
the removal of garbage or litter from private premises where it has accumulated
in violation of this code, provided written notice of said removal is served
upon the owner, operator or occupant forty eight (48) hours prior to said
removal. For purposes of this section, the person who last paid the real estate
taxes on the premises shall be deemed the owner. If, after lapse of the
aforesaid forty eight (48) hour period, such owner, operator or occupant of
such property refuses or neglects to remove such garbage and/or debris, the
Director shall cause such garbage or litter to be removed from the premises and
shall cause the cost of such removal to be billed to owner, operator or
occupant of such property; which amount shall be paid over to the Treasurer of
the Village. (1981 Code)
20-7-10: LIEN:
If, upon receipt of such bill, such owner, operator or occupant refuses or
neglects to pay the cost of such removal, the Director on behalf of the
Village, shall file a notice of lien within sixty (60) days after such cost and
expense is incurred, which notice of lien shall be filed in the office of the
Cook County recorder of deeds, or in the office of the Cook County registrar of
titles where the real estate affected is registered under the torrens system.
   A.   This notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:
      1.   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
      2.   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service; and
      3.   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
Village.
   B.   Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons
interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall
be released by the Village or person, firm or corporation in whose name the
lien had been filed, and the release may be filed of record as in the case of
filing notice of lien.
   C.   The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in case of
mortgages or mechanics' liens.
      1.   Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced within two (2) years
after the date of filing notice of lien.
      2.   However, the lien of the Village shall not be valid as to any
purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to
removal of the garbage and/or debris and prior to the filing of such notice and
the lien of the Village shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment,
creditor or other lienor whose rights in and to such real estate arise prior to
the filing of such notice.
   D.   Nothing hereinabove shall preclude filing of a complaint with the court
of proper jurisdiction for violations of this article and/or other remedies at
law or in equity which may be available to the Village for the enforcement of
this Municipal Code. (1981 Code)
20-7-11: LITTERING; GENERALLY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit litter in any place
within the Village, except in authorized receptacles.
   B.   No person shall deposit in any gutter, street, alley or other public
places in the Village any accumulation of litter. Persons owning, operating or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk and parkway in front of their
premises free from litter. (1981 Code)
20-7-12: LITTER FROM VEHICLES:
No person, firm or corporation shall drive or cause to be driven any truck or
other vehicle within the Village upon any public street or way unless such
vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered as to prevent any load, contents
or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or public place.
Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the Village, the
wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other
public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any
kind. (1981 Code)
20-7-13: LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter. Provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in private receptacles for collection,
which receptacles shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be so constructed as to prevent the litter deposited therein from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other
place or upon any private property. (1981 Code)
20-7-14: ILLEGAL TO ALLOW GROWTH OF WEEDS:
It is hereby declared to be illegal for the owners of real estate to refuse or
neglect to cut weeds when such weeds shall have reached a height in excess of
eight inches (8"). For the purpose of this article only, the term weeds shall
include grass. (1981 Code)
20-7-15: REMOVAL OF WEEDS BY VILLAGE:
In the event the owner of property neglects or refuses to cut weeds so that
such weeds exceed eight inches (8") in height, the Village may cause such weeds
to be cut, and thereafter in order to reduce costs and the subsequent nuisance
of a further growth of weeds, may cause said lot to be sprayed with weedkiller
even though at the time of spraying there is no visible growth of weeds. Said
spraying may continue from year to year until such time as the owner causes
weeds to be removed and resumes maintenance of the lot and advises the Village
of that in writing. (1981 Code)
20-7-16: LIEN BY VILLAGE:
If weeds are cut or a lot sprayed with weedkiller by the Village, as herein
provided, or said work is performed by someone so directed on behalf of the
Village, a notice of lien of the cost and expense thereof incurred by the
Village shall be recorded in the same manner as provided in section 20-7-10 of
this article. (1981 Code)
20-7-17: CONSTRUCTION SITES:
The property owners and the prime contractor in charge of a construction site
shall be required to furnish containers for construction and workman litter and
shall be responsible for the disposal of construction materials by private
haulers. All litter from construction activities or any related activities
shall be contained, and all litter shall be picked up and placed in containers
at the end of each workday. (Ord. 1990-0-17, 4-16-1990)
20-7-18: JUNK DEALERS:
No junk dealers or other collector shall be permitted to gather or collect or
remove garbage from any street, alley or other public place in the Village, nor
to interfere with or disturb any of the receptacles for garbage provided for by
this article. (1981 Code)
20-7-19: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the following branches of the Village government to
issue citations to any person who violates the provisions of this article:
Police Department, Housing Division, Building and Zoning Division, Health
Department and the Public Works Department. (1981 Code)
20-7-20: PAYMENTS TO AVOID PROSECUTION, PENALTIES:
Any person may avoid prosecution for the violations of this article by paying
to the Village the sum of one hundred and twenty five dollars ($125.00) if paid
within ten (10) business days after receipt of the citation. The maximum
penalty for any violation of this article shall not exceed seven hundred and
fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 18-454, 11-19-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; amd. Ord. 19-
119, 11-18-2019)
ARTICLE 8
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC FOODWARE AND POLYSTYRENE FOAM PACKAGING
SECTION:
20-8-1: Purpose and Intent
20-8-2: Definitions
20-8-3: Single-Use Plastic Foodware Prohibited Except Upon Request
20-8-4: Polysterene Foam Packaging Prohibited
20-8-5: Conflict With State Law
20-8-6: Penalty
20-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Providing single-use plastic foodware without an affirmative request
from a customer, and the usage of polystyrene foam packaging for food and
beverage orders, is declared to be a nuisance in the Village and is detrimental
to the health, safety, and welfare of the Village.
   B.   The terms of this article shall be construed so as to promote:
      1.   The protection of environmental and public health by reducing the
amount of plastic and polystyrene foam in the waste stream;
      2.   The promotion of sustainable dining practices; and
      3.   Accommodations in support of food establishment customers who
require single-use plastic straws. (Ord. 23-8, 5-15-2023)
20-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases set forth below are hereby defined as follows for
purposes of this article:
 
                                   Serviceware designed for one-time use.
                                   "Disposable food service container"
                                   includes, but is not limited to, serviceware
                                   for take-out foods, bakery products, and
                                   leftovers from partially consumed meals.
DISPOSABLE FOOD SERVICE CONTAINER: "Disposable food service container" does not
                                   include polystyrene foam coolers or ice
                                   chests that are used for the processing or
                                   shipping of seafood or serviceware that is
                                   used to contain, transport, or otherwise
                                   package raw, uncooked, or butchered meat,
                                   poultry, fish or seafood.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT:                Any fixed location where food or drink is
                                   routinely prepared and served.
POLYSTYRENE FOAM:                  Blown polystyrene and expanded or extruded
                                   foams using a styrene monomer.
SELF-SERVICE STATION:              An area dedicated to customers taking away
                                   single-use plastic foodware and condiments.
                                   Any plastic eating utensil or other item to
                                   be used as part of food or beverage service
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC FOODWARE:       that is designed and intended by the
                                   manufacturer for only one usage before being
                                   discarded. (Ord. 23-8, 5-15-2023)
 
20-8-3: SINGLE-USE PLASTIC FOODWARE PROHIBITED EXCEPT UPON REQUEST:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, food establishments
may only provide single-use plastic foodware upon request from the customer or
at a self-service station, in connection with any delivery or take-out order of
food or beverage. Food establishments are required to display signage regarding
single-use plastic foodware and provide options for customers to affirmatively
request single-use plastic foodware when ordering food or beverages for
delivery or take-out on or after June 1, 2023.
   B.   Exceptions. The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply
in the following situations:
      1.   Single-use plastic foodware necessary to address safety concerns,
such as lids, drink stoppers, beverage trays, and cup sleeves for beverages
served at an average temperature great than 170 degrees Fahrenheit;
      2.   Drinking straws;
      3.   An automatic food vending machine;
      4.   Any single-use plastic foodware that is prepackaged with or attached
to any food or beverage products by the manufacturer prior to receipt by the
food dispensing establishment;
      5.   Any not-for-profit corporation;
      6.   A federal, state, or local governmental agency that provides food to
needy individuals a no or nominal charge; and
      7. Supplies and services provided in response to a public health or other
emergency that is declared by a governmental body with jurisdiction in the
Village. (Ord. 23-8, 5-15-2023)
20-8-4: POLYSTYRENE FOAM PACKAGING PROHIBITED:
   A.   Except as provided in subsections B and C of this section, food
establishments may not sell or distribute a disposable food service container
composed in part or in whole of polystyrene foam packaging on or after January
1, 2024.
   B.   A food establishment with an annual gross income under five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per location as stated on the food
establishment's income tax filing for the most recent tax year as provided to
the Village shall comply with this section on or after January 1, 2025.
   C.   Exceptions. The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply
in the following situations:
      1.   Supplies and services provided in response to a public health or
other emergency that is declared by a governmental body with jurisdiction in
the Village.
      2.   Any polystyrene foam that is prepackaged with or attached to any
food or beverage products by the manufacturer prior to receipt by the food
dispensing establishment;
      3.   Any not-for-profit corporation; or
      4.   A federal, state, or local governmental agency that provides food to
needy individuals a no or nominal charge.
   D.   Enforcement: The Village shall perform education and outreach efforts
regarding the prohibition contained in this section during the first four (4)
months of 2024 through April 30, 2024. No citations shall be brought against
food establishments for violations of this section during said time.
Thereafter, a food establishment in violation of this section shall be given
one (1) written warning beginning on May 1, 2024 prior to a citation being
issued against the food establishment. Citations may be issued against any food
establishments pursuant to subsections A and B above without a warning being
previously issued that violate this section beginning January 1, 2025 and
thereafter. (Ord. 23-8, 5-15-2023; amd. Ord. 23-50, 6-20-2023)
20-8-5: CONFLICT WITH STATE LAW:
If any provision of this article conflicts or is otherwise inconsistent with a
provision of state law, the more stringent or restrictive provision shall
prevail and shall be enforced by the Village. (Ord. 23-8, 5-15-2023)
20-8-6: PENALTY:
Any owner, entity or person in violation of any provision of this article shall
be fined in accordance with the provisions of section
1-1-5 of this Code except as set forth in this article. (Ord. 23-8, 5-15-2023;
amd. Ord. 23-50, 6-20-2023)
ARTICLE 9
VILLAGE INDOOR CLEAN AIR POLICY
SECTION:
20-9-1: Definitions
20-9-2: Smoking Prohibited In Public Places
20-9-3: Regulation Of Smoking In Places Of Employment
20-9-4: Smoking Prohibited At Entrances To Public Places And Places Of
Employment
20-9-5: Designation Of Other No Smoking Areas
20-9-6: Sign Requirements
20-9-7: Violations And Penalties
20-9-8: Nonretaliation
20-9-9: Severability
20-9-10: Effective Date
20-9-11: Other Applicable Laws
20-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words or combination of words
are defined as follows:
EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his
or her services for a non-profit entity.
EMPLOYER: Any person, partnership, corporation, including a municipal
corporation, or non-profit entity, who employs the services of one or more
individual persons or supervises volunteers.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all
sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or passage ways) which
extend from the floor to the ceiling, even though such space may be internally
divided by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid,
"office landscaping" or similar structures.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any enclosed area under the control of a public or private
employer which employees are normally required or permitted by the employer to
frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, common
work areas, private offices, employee lounges and restrooms, conference areas,
employee cafeterias, elevators, stairways and hallways.
A private dwelling unit is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a
daycare facility for children or adults; provided that rooms in nursing homes
or long term care facilities, occupied only by a person or persons who have
requested in writing a room where smoking is permitted, shall be considered
private dwelling units.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any enclosed area that is open to and used by the general public,
or any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is
permitted, including, without limitation:
   A.   Vehicles of public conveyance;
   B.   Common or public areas (including, without limitation, lobbies,
hallways, reception areas, public restrooms, and elevators) of apartment
buildings, condominiums, dormitory buildings, nursing home care facilities, and
other multiple-family residential structures;
   C.   Common or public areas (including, without limitation, lobbies,
hallways, reception areas, public restrooms, and elevators) of any building or
structure that is accessible to the public including, without limitation,
office, commercial, and industrial buildings, banks and financial institutions,
educational institutions, healthcare facilities such as hospitals, clinics and
doctors' offices, museums, libraries, bowling alleys, laundromats, sport
arenas, restaurants, polling places, government and Village owned buildings,
food stores, cafeterias, theaters, auditoriums, public transportation
facilities, hotels, motels, retail stores (except tobacco stores), service
establishments, service lines and waiting rooms; and
   D.   Rooms, chambers, halls or other locations within which meetings,
hearings or gatherings are held, to which the public is invited or in which the
public is permitted, including specifically, but without limitation, any
enclosed area under the control of the Village where there is in progress any
public meeting.
   "Public place" shall not include:
   A.   A private dwelling unit, unless said dwelling is also used as a daycare
facility for children or adults; provided that rooms in nursing homes or long
term care facilities, occupied only by a person or persons who have requested
in writing a room where smoking is permitted, shall be considered private
dwelling units;
   B.   Hotel or motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, provided that no more
than twenty percent (20%) of the available rooms for rent in any single
building shall be designated as smoking rooms; or
   C.   An established smoking area incidental to the sale of tobacco in a
retail tobacco store provided such smoking is in compliance with the
requirements of the Smoke Free Illinois Act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 82/
1 et seq., as amended.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES: Ticket, boarding and waiting areas of all
public transit depots.
RESTAURANT: Any eating establishment including, but not limited to, any coffee
shop, cafeteria, luncheonette, sandwich stand, soda fountain, private and
public school cafeteria or dining areas contained within any organization,
club, boarding house, bed and breakfast or guesthouse, which gives or offers
for sale food to the public, guests, patrons or employees as well as kitchens
in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including
catering facilities.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco
products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental and which does not possess and is not required to possess a
restaurant and/or liquor license.
SERVICE LINE: Any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or
receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the
exchange of money.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar,
cigarette, pipe, reed, plant or other lighted combustible substance in any
manner or in any form. "Smoking" does not include the burning or carrying of
incense in a religious ceremony or the use of matches or lighters for
nonsmoking purposes. "Smoke" shall also mean the byproduct of the burning of
any smoking materials and the release of secondhand emissions from e-cigarettes
as defined in section
8-6-1 of this code, as amended.
THEATER: Any building not open to the sky which is primarily designated for the
purpose of exhibiting any motion pictures, stage, drama, lecture, musical
recital or other similar performance. (Ord. 2014-0-27, 5-19-2014; amd. Ord. 19-
70, 9-3-2019) 
20-9-2: SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES:
Smoking shall be prohibited in any "public place" as defined in section
20-9-1  of this article. (Ord. 2006-0-35, 6-5-2006; amd. Ord. 19-70, 9-3-2019)
20-9-3: REGULATION OF SMOKING IN PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT:
Smoking shall be prohibited in any "place of employment" as defined in section
20-9-1 of this article. (Ord. 2006-0-35, 6-5-2006)
20-9-4: SMOKING PROHIBITED AT ENTRANCES TO PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF
EMPLOYMENT:
Except for persons seated at outdoor restaurant tables, smoking within fifteen
feet (15') of a public and/or employee entrance to a public place and/or to a
place of employment shall be prohibited. (Ord. 2006-0-35, 6-5-2006)
20-9-5: DESIGNATION OF OTHER NO SMOKING AREAS:
Any owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager or other person in control of a
public place or place of employment may designate the entire facility,
including outdoor areas where smoking might otherwise be permitted, as
nonsmoking areas provided the owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager or
other person in control of the areas conspicuously posts signs wherever smoking
is to be prohibited in accordance with section
20-9-6 of this article. The Village designates all Village facilities,
including the outdoor areas of such facilities, as no smoking areas pursuant to
this section. (Ord. 15-107, 6-15-2015, eff. 6-30-2015)
20-9-6: SIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Each owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager or person in charge of
a public place or place of employment shall post conspicuously "No Smoking"
signs in enclosed areas. All such signs shall be prominently displayed and
shall clearly recite the phrase "No Smoking" in red letters four inches (4") in
height with a one-half inch (1/2") face on a white field and/or use the
international no smoking symbol.
   B.   As an alternative to posting signs as required by subsection
20-9-6A of this section, any building or business which does not allow smoking
anywhere on its premises and which prominently displays that message at each
entrance to such building or business, need not display signs inside the
building or business. For purposes of this section, any hotel or motel which
prohibits smoking anywhere on its premises, except for authorized smoking
rooms, shall be considered to be a building which does not allow smoking
anywhere on its premises. The Village shall post signs pursuant to this
subsection to provide that its facilities, including the outdoor areas of such
facilities, are no smoking areas pursuant to section
20-9-5 of this article.
   C.   No person shall wilfully remove, obscure, mutilate, deface or destroy
any sign posted pursuant to this section.
   D.   Every theater, auditorium or assembly hall owner, manager or operator
shall conspicuously post signs in the lobby stating that smoking is prohibited
within such theater, auditorium or assembly hall. (Ord. 15-107, 6-15-2015, eff.
6-30-2015)
20-9-7: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   1. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, operates or otherwise
controls any premises or facility subject to regulation under this article to
fail to comply with any of the requirements of sections
20-9-1 through
20-9-6 of this article.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or lessee, as the case
may be, in control of a public place to knowingly permit smoking in any public
place.
      3.   The owner, operator or other person in control of such premises or
facility shall at all times be responsible for the actions of his or her
employees or agents within the facility as they relate to the requirements set
forth in sections
20-9-1 through
20-9-6 of this article.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area designated
pursuant to this article as a nonsmoking area or to otherwise fail to comply
with sections
20-9-1 through
20-9-6 of this article.
   C.   Any person who violates any provision of sections
20-9-1 through
20-9-8 of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2006-
0-35, 6-5-2006)
20-9-8: NONRETALIATION:
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner
retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment or customer because
that employee, applicant or customer reports a violation of this article. (Ord.
2006-0-35, 6-5-2006)
20-9-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this article or the
application thereof shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the
remaining provisions of this article which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of the article
are declared to be severable. (Ord. 2006-0-35, 6-5-2006)
20-9-10: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall be in full force and effect on and after July 1, 2006, with
regard to all public places and places of employment as defined herein, except
for multifloor restaurants which, on or before the adoption date hereof,
provided for and continue to provide for the service of smoking patrons on an
entire separate floor from all nonsmoking areas in the restaurant; provided
that such smoking area shall not comprise more than twenty five percent (25%)
of the total seating in the restaurant. All such multifloor restaurants in
existence as of the adoption date hereof shall have until March 1, 2007, to be
in full compliance with this article which shall be in full force and effect as
to such multifloor restaurants on March 1, 2007.
All premises affected by this article, which are established subsequent to the
approval date hereof, shall be required to comply with this article as a
condition to obtaining a valid business license. (Ord. 2006-0-35, 6-5-2006)
20-9-11: OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS:
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it
is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. (Ord. 2006-0-35, 6-5-2006)
ARTICLE 10
PESTICIDE APPLICATION LICENSE, NOTICE AND RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
20-10-1: Definitions
20-10-2: Commercial Pesticide Application License
20-10-3: Record Keeping
20-10-4: Marking Property
20-10-5: Education
20-10-6: Meeting Federal Requirements
20-10-7: Penalties
20-10-8: Mosquito Abatement District
20-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases have the
meanings set forth herein:
COMMERCIAL APPLICATOR: Any person or agent or employee of any person in the
business of pesticide application to property, including, but not limited to,
any applicator that is a commercial structural pest control business under the
structural pest control act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 235/3.11 and any
applicator that is a licensed commercial applicator under the Illinois
pesticide act, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 60/4.
NONCOMMERCIAL APPLICATOR: Any person who is not a commercial applicator and
applies pesticides to property owned or leased by the applicator or the
applicator's employer, except for property serving exclusively as the
applicator's place of residence. This category includes, but is not limited to,
applicators that are governmental entities such as school districts, park
districts and the Village government and owners of restaurants, apartment
buildings or other profit or not for profit businesses and their employees. It
also includes any applicator who is a noncommercial structural pest control
applicator under the structural pest control act, Illinois Revised Statutes,
chapter 1111/2, paragraph 2203.12 (1987), and any applicator who is a
commercial not-for-hire applicator or a licensed public applicator under the
Illinois Pesticide Act, Illinois Revised Statutes, chapter 5, paragraph 804
(1987).
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, joint
stock association or any group of persons, whether incorporated or not; and
includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative.
PESTICIDE: Any substance or mixture intended for use to destroy, repel,
mitigate or regulate any animal, plant or microorganism, which substance or
mixture is normally considered a pesticide under the Federal Insecticide,
Fungicide and Rodenticide Act, 7 U.S.C. section 136, et seq. The term pesticide
shall not include rodenticides placed beneath the surface of the ground in
rodent burrows or above the ground in tamper-proof containers by commercial or
noncommercial applicators.
PROPERTY: Land, vegetation on land, and any structural improvements to land.
20-10-2: COMMERCIAL PESTICIDE APPLICATION LICENSE:
No commercial applicator may apply pesticides to property in the Village
without a commercial pesticide application license issued by the Village Clerk.
License applicants shall submit a copy of their current State of Illinois
license or registration (where applicable), a list of the chemical names or
brand names of all pesticides (and concentrations of active ingredients
contained therein) that the applicator will use within the Village during the
term of the license, material safety data sheets on the pesticides to be used,
and a Village license fee in the amount set forth in Chapter 8 of the Village
Code pertaining to licensing. The Director of Public Health must verify that
the applicant has a current State license and must approve the list of
pesticides and the material safety data sheets presented by the applicant prior
to issuance of a license by the Village Clerk. The list of pesticides may only
contain pesticides approved for use under FIFRA, and the material safety data
sheets must provide all essential information about the pesticide, including a
list of all technical ingredients, the manner in which the pesticide may be
applied, the risks and side effects of each technical ingredient and the safety
measures which should be taken upon exposure to the pesticide. Commercial
applicators shall not apply pesticides not listed in its application for
license until a list of additional pesticides to be applied (including chemical
names and concentrations of active ingredients) and material safety data sheets
have been submitted to the Village Clerk and approved by the Director of Public
Health in the same manner set forth above for original application. All
licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance.
20-10-3: RECORD KEEPING:
   A.   Outdoor Applications: Commercial and noncommercial applicators applying
pesticides to outdoor lawns, shrubs and trees within the Village shall maintain
a current log of each application with the information required in subsection
20-10-3D.
   B.   Indoor Applications: Commercial and noncommercial applicators applying
pesticides indoors at residential buildings, food service operations or schools
in the Village shall maintain a current log of each application with
information required in subsection
20-10-3D.
   C.   Commercial applicators shall provide information in the log required by
subsections
20-10-3A or B to the customer with the current invoice or bill for services.
Commercial and noncommercial applicators shall make the logs required by
subsections
20-10-3A or B available for review by the Village Health Department and shall
provide copies of the log, or parts thereof, to the Village Health Department
upon request. Records which are provided to the Village in this manner shall
then become public records of the Village.
   D.   The logs required under this Section shall include the name and
telephone number of the applicator; the date of the pesticide application; the
location of the application, identifying the address and whether the
application was to indoor or outdoor property; and the chemical name or brand
name of the pesticide to be applied, including the concentration of active
ingredients.
20-10-4: MARKING PROPERTY:
   A.   Outdoor Application: Whenever pesticides are applied to outdoor lawns,
shrubs and trees in the Village by commercial or noncommercial applicators,
such applicators shall place warning markers that meet the requirements of
subsection
20-10-4C on a portion of the property to which pesticides are applied in such a
manner that the markers are easily observable from the public way. The warning
markers shall be placed on the property at the time of application of the
pesticide and shall be left in place for at least seventy two (72) hours after
the actual application. If pesticides are applied to an area that is
sufficiently fenced to prevent public access, marking is not required.
   B.   Indoor Application: Whenever pesticides are to be applied by a
commercial or noncommercial applicator indoors in a residential building
containing one or more residential rental or condominium units, the applicator
shall notify the occupants by placing markers or other notice on the front and
rear entrances to the residential portions of such building at least two (2)
days prior to the application. Whenever pesticides are to be applied in
individual rental or condominium dwelling units in a residential building,
commercial and noncommercial applicators shall provide notice to the occupant
by mail or by placing the notice under the door of such unit at least two days
prior to the application. The marker or notice for the front and rear entrances
and the individual units shall be the same and shall include the statement
"Warning--Pesticide Application" and shall state the date of the application
and a phone number, along with the words "For Further Information". Detailed
information on the pesticide application shall be available through the posted
phone number prior to the date of application.
   C.   The markers required by subsection
20-10-4A must:
      1.   Be yellow with black lettering;
      2.   Be at least 4" by 4" but no larger than 6" by 6" in size;
      3.   Include at least one marker for each 100' of frontage or portion
thereof. ("Frontage" shall mean any boundary of the property which is
contiguous with a street, sidewalk, alley or other public way.);
      4.   Protrude a minimum of 12", but no more than 18", above the top of
the grass line or grade line;
      5.   Be made of a material designed to be rain resistant for at least
three (3) days; and
      6.   Include the wording "PLEASE STAY OFF" in block lettering of 1" in
height, followed by the wording "PESTICIDES APPLIED" in block lettering of 3/4"
in height, or an equivalent design approved by the Health Department.
   D.   No person, including the owner or tenant of the affected property,
shall remove markers required by subsection
20-10-4A or B sooner than seventy two (72) hours after the pesticide is
applied.
20-10-5: EDUCATION:
The Village Health Department shall maintain a program to collect current
information concerning the risks and benefits of pesticides used under this
Article. This information shall be in the nature of the results of research
conducted by and/or reported on by the State of Illinois Department of Public
Health and the University of Illinois School of Public Health. Such information
shall be updated on a yearly basis, and a summary of same shall be prepared and
made available to any Village resident upon request for a minimal fee to cover
reproduction costs.
20-10-6: MEETING FEDERAL REQUIREMENTS:
No commercial or noncommercial applicator subject to this Article shall apply
pesticides in the Village unless such pesticides are approved for the intended
use under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act, as amended,
and are applied in compliance with safety provisions on the label.
20-10-7: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be fined up to five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. Repeated violation shall be grounds for
revocation of a commercial pesticide application license under Section
20-10-2.
20-10-8: MOSQUITO ABATEMENT DISTRICT:
The DesPlaines Valley Mosquito Abatement District is exempt from the provisions
of this Article in recognition of the specific controls on such pesticide
applicators by State statute. (Ord. 1989-0-19, 4-3-89)
ARTICLE 11
BEEKEEPING
SECTION:
20-11-1: Definitions
20-11-2: Beekeeping Permit
20-11-3: Hive Type
20-11-4: Maintenance
20-11-5: Hive Location
20-11-6: Fencing And Flyways
20-11-7: Notice
20-11-8: Bee Allergy Registration
20-11-9: Colony Densities
20-11-10: Violations; Penalty
20-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and/or phrases shall have
the meanings described below:
APIARY: The assembly of one or more hives or colonies of honeybees at a single
location.
BEEKEEPER: A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of
honeybees.
BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT: Anything used in the operation of an apiary, such as hive
bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors.
COLONY: The entire honeybee family or social unit living together.
HIVE: A frame or structure used or employed as a domicile for bees.
HONEYBEE: The common domestic honeybee, limited to the Apis mellifera species,
specifically excluding the African honeybee, Apis mellifera scutellata or
Africanized honeybees.
LANGSTROTH TYPE HIVE: A hive consisting of an outer frame with a solid top
cover, an inner cover, a bottom board, and a number of boxes and supers
containing tightly spaced movable frames.
LOT: A contiguous parcel of land under common ownership.
UNDERDEVELOPED PROPERTY: Any idle or vacant lot that is not improved or
actually in the process of being improved with structures or improvements
intended for human use or occupancy. (Ord. 2011-0-86, 12-5-2011)
20-11-2: BEEKEEPING PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: Persons wishing to establish a honeybee apiary in the
Village of Oak Park shall first obtain a beekeeping permit from the Village.
Applications shall be submitted to the Director of Public Health. Beekeepers,
who owned and operated a honeybee apiary within the Village prior to the
effective date hereof and who continue to do so after the effective date
hereof, shall have thirty (30) days after such effective date to apply for a
beekeeping permit. At the time of application for a Village beekeeping permit,
the applicant shall:
      1.   Demonstrate compliance with all requirements of this article; and
      2.   Pay a seventy five dollar ($75.00) nonrefundable permit fee for each
apiary location.
   B.   Permit Expiration And Renewal: Village beekeeping permits shall expire
on March 31 of each calendar year. Beekeepers must apply to renew their permit
annually. Renewal permits may be obtained by submitting a renewal application
to the Village of Oak Park Public Health Director. Renewal permits shall be
subject to the same requirements as original permits, including the payment of
the annual permit renewal fee.
   C.   Inspection; Right Of Entry: By applying for a beekeeping permit, the
applicant authorizes the Director of Public Health to enter onto that part of
the applicant's property which contains the apiary for the limited purpose of
inspecting the apiary for compliance with this article.
   D.   Nontransferability: No Village beekeeping permit shall be assigned or
transferred to any other person, or to any other location. No refund shall be
granted for any unexpired period of a Village beekeeping permit.
   E.   State Registration: All beekeepers must register their apiary with the
state of Illinois department of agriculture. (Ord. 2011-0-86, 12-5-2011)
20-11-3: HIVE TYPE:
All honeybee colonies shall be kept in Langstroth type hives which shall be
kept in sound and usable condition. (Ord. 2011-0-86, 12-5-2011)
20-11-4: MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Apiary Maintenance: Beekeepers shall keep all beekeeping equipment in
good condition and secure unused equipment from weather, potential theft,
vandalism or occupancy by migratory colonies. Beekeepers shall ensure that no
bee comb, wax or other materials are left upon the grounds of the apiary site.
Beekeepers shall promptly store or dispose of any bee comb, wax or other
materials which have been removed from the hive in a sealed container or within
a building or other beeproof enclosure.
   B.   Water: Beekeepers shall ensure that a convenient source of water is
available within the apiary to the bees at all times. A water supply is not
required during winter months and other inactive months. The water source must
be maintained so as to not create a breeding site for mosquitoes.
   C.   Colony Maintenance: Beekeepers shall monitor and maintain their colony
or colonies so as not to become a nuisance. Colonies must be monitored on a
minimum every other week from March 1 to November 30.
   D.   Maintenance Records: Beekeepers shall maintain records of colony
maintenance and monitoring. Beekeepers shall produce those records to the
Director of Public Health upon request. (Ord. 2011-0-86, 12-5-2011)
20-11-5: HIVE LOCATION:
   A.   Ownership Of Property: No apiary shall be located on underdeveloped
property or on property owned, occupied or under the legal control of another
person or entity.
   B.   Distance From Property Line: Beehives shall be kept a minimum of five
feet (5') from all property lines. (Ord. 2011-0-86, 12-5-2011)
20-11-6: FENCING AND FLYWAYS:
Beehives must have a flyway barrier located at least ten feet (10') in front of
the entrance to the hive. The flyway barrier shall consist of a solid wall,
fence or dense vegetation at least six feet (6') in height. The flyway barrier
shall extend ten feet (10') beyond the hive(s) so that the bees are forced to
fly up to an elevation of at least six feet (6') over the property line.
The apiary shall be enclosed on all sides by a fence, dense vegetation or a
combination thereof at least five feet (5') in height. The entrance to the
apiary shall have a latched gate which shall be closed at all times when the
beekeeper is not present. (Ord. 2011-0-86, 12-5-2011)
20-11-7: NOTICE:
Beekeepers shall conspicuously post a prominent weatherproof sign on the
outside of the latched gate with the statement "Warning - Beehives On
Property". (Ord. 2011-0-86, 12-5-2011)
20-11-8: BEE ALLERGY REGISTRATION:
The Department of Public Health shall maintain a bee allergy registration.
Residents who have a certified anaphylaxis to bee stings, documented by a
licensed physician, may notify the Department of Public Health to place their
name and address on the bee allergy registration. The Department of Public
Health will maintain a list of addresses of residents with certified
anaphylaxis in addition to the physician documentation and will not issue an
original beekeeping permit for an apiary within one hundred fifty feet (150')
of any address on the bee allergy registration.
The Department of Public Health will update the bee allergy registration list
on an as needed basis. (Ord. 2011-0-86, 12-5-2011)
20-11-9: COLONY DENSITIES:
Beekeepers shall not keep more than two (2) colonies on any property. (Ord.
2011-0-86, 12-5-2011)
20-11-10: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
No person may keep bees except as permitted in this article. Any person
violating any provision of this article shall be fined in accordance with
section
1-1-5 of this code. In addition to any penalty imposed, the Village may, in its
discretion, revoke any beekeeping permit, and refuse to issue a new permit to
any person found to be in violation of this code, or to any other person living
on the property where the violation occurred. (Ord. 2011-0-86, 12-5-2011)
ARTICLE 12
CONCEALED CARRY PROHIBITED AREAS
SECTION:
20-12-1: Definitions
20-12-2: Village Buildings And Portions Of Buildings Designated As Concealed
Carry Prohibited Areas
20-12-3: 123 Madison Street Parking Area Designated As A Concealed Carry
Prohibited Area
20-12-4: Village Permitted Gatherings And Special Events Designated As
Concealed Carry Prohibited Areas
20-12-5: Exception
20-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases whenever used in this article shall have the
meanings, and are hereby defined, as follows:
ACT: The Illinois firearm concealed carry act, 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes
66/1 et seq., as amended.
CONCEAL CARRY LICENSEE: Any person licensed to carry a concealed firearm
pursuant to the act.
CONCEALED FIREARM: A loaded or unloaded handgun carried on or about a person
completely or mostly concealed from view of the public or on or about a person
within a vehicle as defined in section 5 of the act, 430 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 66/5, as amended. (Ord. 2014-0-16, 3-17-2014)
20-12-2: VILLAGE BUILDINGS AND PORTIONS OF BUILDINGS DESIGNATED AS CONCEALED
CARRY PROHIBITED AREAS:
Any and all buildings and portions of buildings under the control of the
Village are designated as concealed carry prohibited areas pursuant to section
65(a)(5) of the act, 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 66/65(a)(5), as amended,
and no conceal carry licensee shall carry a concealed firearm in such areas
except as permitted under the act. (Ord. 2014-0-16, 3-17-2014)
20-12-3: 123 MADISON STREET PARKING AREA DESIGNATED AS A CONCEALED CARRY
PROHIBITED AREA:
The parking area at 123 Madison Street, Oak Park, Illinois, at which is located
a jail under the control of the Village's Police Department, is designated a
concealed carry prohibited area pursuant to section 65(a)(6) of the act, 430
Illinois Compiled Statutes 66/65(a)(6), as amended, and no conceal carry
licensee shall carry a concealed firearm in such area except as permitted under
the act. (Ord. 2014-0-16, 3-17-2014)
20-12-4: VILLAGE PERMITTED GATHERINGS AND SPECIAL EVENTS DESIGNATED AS
CONCEALED CARRY PROHIBITED AREAS:
   A.   Any and all public gatherings and special events on property open to
the public that require the issuance of a Village permit are designated as
concealed carry prohibited areas pursuant to section 65(a)(10) of the act, 430
Illinois Compiled Statutes 66/65(a)(10), as amended, and no conceal carry
licensee shall carry a concealed firearm at such gatherings and special events
except as permitted under the act, whether such gathering or special event is
conducted by the Village or any other person, entity or organization.
   B.   It shall be a condition of any permit issued by the Village for a
public gathering or special event on property open to the public that the
person, entity or organization issued such permit shall post applicable signage
pursuant to the act to provide notice that it is prohibited to carry a
concealed firearm at such gatherings or special events. (Ord. 2014-0-16, 3-17-
2014)
20-12-5: EXCEPTION:
The prohibitions against the carrying of a concealed firearm set forth in this
article shall not apply to individuals authorized to carry a firearm under
section 24-2 of the Illinois criminal code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/24-2, as amended. (Ord. 2014-0-16, 3-17-2014)
ARTICLE 13
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE HAULING AND RECYCLING
SECTION:
20-13-1: Definitions
20-13-2: Offer Of Collection Of Recyclable Materials
20-13-3: Procedures To Determine If A Commercial Franchise Can Be Considered By
The Village
20-13-4: Compliance Monitoring
20-13-5: Penalties
20-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases set forth below are hereby defined as follows for
purposes of this article:
CONTRACT FOR SERVICE: A written or verbal contract between a private hauling
contractor and nonresidential location, and includes the private hauling
contractor providing a collection container and service for collection of
commercial solid waste and/or recyclable materials.
NONRESIDENTIAL LOCATION: A commercial, industrial or institutional property
that has a private hauling contractor that provides collection or hauling
services for commercial solid waste or recyclable material, not including
"special waste" as that term is defined in the Illinois environmental
protection act, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., and that is
licensed by the Village as required by this code, and said private hauling
contractor provides individual properties with its own container(s) for
collecting Village waste and/or recyclable material.
PARTICIPATION RATE: The percentage of nonresidential locations that have a
private hauling contractor for separate collection of recyclable materials, and
is computed by setting as the denominator the total number of nonresidential
locations served by private hauling contractors in the Village with collection
services for commercial solid waste as reported by the private hauling
contractors, and setting as the numerator the total number of nonresidential
locations that contract with private hauling contractors in the Village with
collection services for recyclable materials. Such separate collection of
recyclable materials shall be on a periodic basis and if less frequent than
once every four (4) weeks, shall be reported on the Village form provided
pursuant to subsection
20-13-3B2 of this article. For purposes of computing the participation rate, if
nonresidential locations choose to share a container for collecting recyclable
materials, the sharing of a container must be documented as being acceptable to
those nonresidential locations and as having adequate capacity to meet the
recycling needs of the nonresidential locations sharing the container. Such
sharing of recyclable material containers shall be reported as recyclable
material customers on the Village's form provided pursuant to subsection
20-13-3B2 of this article.
PRIVATE HAULING CONTRACTOR: Any person or entity that engages in the business
of collecting or hauling garbage, municipal waste, recyclable material,
landscape waste, brush or other refuse on a continuous and regular basis, and
makes multiple scheduled collections per month with the Village for
nonresidential locations and that is licensed by the Village pursuant to the
requirements of this code. (Ord. 16-130, 11-7-2016)
20-13-2: OFFER OF COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
   A.   Each private hauling contractor operating in the Village shall offer,
either as part of basic service, or alternatively as an additional service, the
collection of source separated recyclable materials from any nonresidential
location within the Village as follows:
      1.   For those nonresidential locations that have collection services for
recyclable materials, the private hauling contractor shall provide information
on how and what materials to recycle at least once every other year beginning
on the effective date of this article. One sample copy of this information
shall be provided to the Village at least once every other year by each private
hauling contractor within thirty (30) days of it being provided to the
nonresidential locations.
      2.   For those nonresidential locations that do not have collection
services for recyclable materials, the private hauling contractor shall provide
a written offer to provide recycling services at least once every two (2) years
from the effective date of this article. The written offer shall also include a
request that the nonresidential location respond to the private hauling
contractor's request in writing. One sample copy of the written offer shall be
provided to the Village at least once every two (2) years by each private
hauling contractor within thirty (30) days of it being provided to the
nonresidential locations.
   B.   Recyclable materials collected by a private hauling contractor within
the Village shall not be deposited into a landfill or incinerator unless all
reasonable efforts have been made by the private hauling contractor to recycle
the materials. If source separated recyclable materials are landfilled or
incinerated, the private hauling contractor shall notify the Village on the
Village's form provided pursuant to subsection
20-13-3B2 of this article.
   C.   Ownership of recyclable materials set out for collection shall remain
with the nonresidential location that set out the material for collection until
the material is removed by the private hauling contractor. (Ord. 16-130, 11-7-
2016)
20-13-3: PROCEDURES TO DETERMINE IF A COMMERCIAL FRANCHISE CAN BE CONSIDERED BY
THE VILLAGE:
   A.   The Village shall provide written notice to all private hauling
contractors providing hauling services in the Village of its intent to issue a
request for proposals for a commercial franchise, and such written notice shall
include a copy of this article.
   B.   Beginning on July 1, 2023, each private hauling contractor, for a
period of thirty six (36) continuous months, shall report the number of
nonresidential locations served by the private hauling contractor in the
Village for collection of Village waste, and the number that contract for
recyclable materials collection service. The specific data required to be
reported for the thirty six (36) month period shall be provided and reported as
follows:
      1.   The thirty six (36) month continuous study shall commence beginning
on July 1, 2023.
      2.   Every six (6) months from the commencement date each private hauling
contractor shall report to the Village on a form to be provided by the Village
the number of nonresidential locations served by the private hauling contractor
for collection of Village waste, and the number of nonresidential locations
contracting for recyclable materials collection service. Each six (6) month
report shall be submitted to the Village within thirty (30) days following the
end of each six (6) month period.
      3.   The Village shall post on its website within fifteen (15) days of
receiving the reports required under subsection
20-13-3B2 of this section from all the private hauling contractors the
"participation rate" as defined in section
20-13-1 of this article for each six (6) month reporting period. When
determining the participation rate the Village shall use the information
provided by all private hauling contractors operating within the Village in
accordance with subsection
20-13-3B2 of this section. The information shall be reported by private hauling
contractors without identifying the private hauling contractor and, in
aggregate without naming individual private hauling contractors and the
nonresidential locations the private hauling contractors for which provide
collection services.
      4.   If the participation rate for the final six (6) month period of the
thirty six (36) month study establishes that the participation rate is less
than fifty percent (50%), the Village may proceed to issue a request for
proposals for a commercial franchise.
   C.   Beginning at the conclusion of the thirty six (36) month reporting
period, and upon written request of the Village, each private hauling
contractor shall report to the Village for every six (6) month period
thereafter for as long as the Village chooses to receive such data. The data
required under this section shall be provided and reported as follows:
      1.   The number of nonresidential locations the private hauling
contractor provides collection services to for Village waste;
      2.   The number of nonresidential locations the private hauling
contractor provides collection services to for recyclable materials;
      3.   An estimate of the amount in volume or tons of Village waste
collected from the nonresidential locations serviced by the private hauling
contractor;
      4.   An estimate of the amount in volume or tons of recyclable materials
collected from the nonresidential locations serviced by the private hauling
contractor;
      5.   The Village shall post on its website within fifteen (15) days of
receiving the reports required under this subsection
20-13-3C from all the private hauling contractors the "participation rate" as
defined in section
20-13-1 of this article for each six (6) month reporting period. When
determining the participation rate the Village shall use the information
provided by all private hauling contractors operating within the Village. The
information shall be reported by private hauling contractor, without
identifying the private hauling contractor; and, in aggregate without naming
individual private hauling contractors and the nonresidential locations for
which the private hauling contractors provide collection services; and
      6.   If the participation rate reported to the Village is determined to
be less than fifty percent (50%) of the nonresidential locations for two (2)
consecutive six (6) month reporting periods, the Village may proceed to issue a
request for proposals for a commercial franchise. (Ord. 16-130, 11-7-2016; amd.
Ord. 23-42, 6-5-2023)
20-13-4: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
   A.   A private hauling contractor reporting pursuant to this article is
required to maintain a current list of the nonresidential locations in the
Village served by the private hauling contractor for collection of commercial
solid waste and which contract with the private hauling contractor for
collection services for recyclable materials. Said list shall be made available
within ten (10) business days of written notice from the Village for review by
the Village after each six (6) month reporting period. The Village shall review
the list solely for the purpose of verifying compliance with this article. The
list must include the street address location of the nonresidential location
and the Village may inspect the location to determine if recycling services are
being provided in accordance with this article. (Ord. 16-130, 11-7-2016)
20-13-5: PENALTIES:
A private hauling contractor shall be subject to a five hundred dollar
($500.00) fine for each day a violation of this article occurs. A second
violation of this article by the same private hauling contractor shall result
in a fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day a violation
occurs. A third violation of this article by the same private hauling
contractor shall subject the private hauling contractor's license to suspension
or revocation in addition to the penalties set forth herein. Each day a
violation of this article occurs shall be a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 16-130, 11-7-2016)
ARTICLE 14
RETAIL SINGLE-USE BAG
SECTION:
20-14-1: Definitions
20-14-2: Carryout Single-Use Bag Fee
20-14-3: Remittance
20-14-4: Failure To Pay Fee
20-14-5: Reusable Bags
20-14-6: Permitted Bags
20-14-7: Prohibited Conduct
20-14-8: Books And Records
20-14-9: Penalties
20-14-10: Exemption
20-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases set forth below are hereby defined as follows for
purposes of this article:
CARRYOUT SINGLE-USE BAG: A. Any paper or plastic bag provided by a retail
establishment to a customer at the point of sale, pickup, or delivery to carry
purchased items. A carryout single-use bag does not include:
      1.    A bag provided by a pharmacist that contains a prescription drug;
      2.    Any newspaper bag or bag intended for initial use as a dry
cleaning, garbage, pet waste, or yard waste bag;
    3.    A bag provided at the point of sale at a seasonal event, such as a
farmers market, street fair, or yard sale, or by an occasional retailer;
    4.    A paper or plastic bag that a restaurant gives a customer to take
prepared or leftover food or drink from the restaurant; or
   5.    A bag used to package a bulk item or to contain or wrap a perishable
item.
CUSTOMER(S): Any person purchasing goods from a store.
DIRECTOR: The Village's Chief Financial Officer.
RESTAURANT: Any lunchroom, cafe, or other establishment located in a permanent
building for the accommodation of the public, equipped with a kitchen
containing facilities and utensils for preparing and serving meals to the
public, and outfitted with a public dining area. A restaurant does not include
any area of a supermarket, department store, or other retail establishment
beyond the kitchen and public dining area.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT: Any person engaged in the retail sale of goods with a
floor area whose square footage is five thousand feet (5,000') or greater which
sells perishable or non-perishable goods, including, but not limited to,
clothing, food and personal items, directly to customers. Retail establishment
includes any supermarket, convenience store, shop, or service station.
REUSABLE BAG: A bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured
for multiple re-use and is made of cloth, fiber, or other machine washable
fabric. (Ord. 17-239, 8-7-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
20-14-2: CARRYOUT SINGLE-USE BAG FEE:
   A.   A fee in the amount of ten cents ($0.10) is levied and imposed on each
customer for each carryout single-use bag that a retail establishment provides
to a customer.
   B.   Each retail establishment must collect the amount of the fee imposed
pursuant to this section when the customer makes any payment for goods in
person, through the internet, by telephone, by facsimile, or by any other
means. The retail establishment must hold the fees required to be collected
under this section in trust for the Village until remitted as required by this
article.
   C.   Each retail establishment may retain five cents ($0.05) from each ten
cent ($0.10) fee that the store collects to cover the administrative expense of
collecting and remitting the fee to the Village.
   D.   A retail establishment must indicate on the customer's transaction
receipt the number of carryout bags that the store provided to the customer and
the total amount of fee levied under this section. (Ord. 17-239, 8-7-2017, eff.
1-1-2018)
20-14-3: REMITTANCE:
   A.   On or before the 25th of each month, each retail establishment must
remit the full amount of the fee collected for all carryout bags provided to a
customer during the previous month to the Village, less the amount retained
under section
20-14-2 of this article.
   B.   Each remittance must be accompanied by a report of all transactions
subject to the fee. The report must be on a form supplied by the Director and
must contain the number of bags supplied or provided to customers, the amount
of fee required by this section to be collected and any other information the
Director requires to assure that the required fee has been remitted to the
Village.
   C.   If the retail establishment does not file a required report within the
time required by this section, the Director may estimate the amount of fee due.
The Director may base the estimate on a reasonable projection of bags supplied
or provided and may consider fees reported by other stores.
   D.   The Director may send a notice of the estimated fee due, including
penalties pursuant to section
20-14-4 of this article, to the retail establishment's last known address. The
retail establishment must pay the estimated fee, including any interest and
penalty assessed by the Director, within ten (10) days after the notice is
sent.
   E.   Funds received by the Village pursuant to this article shall be
deposited into the Village's Sustainability Fund. (Ord. 17-239, 8-7-2017, eff.
1-1-2018)
20-14-4: FAILURE TO PAY FEE:
If for any reason any fee is not paid when due by a retail establishment, a
penalty at the rate of two percent (2%) per month on the amount of tax which
remains unpaid shall be due and owing in addition to other penalties authorized
by this article. (Ord. 17-239, 8-7-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
20-14-5: REUSABLE BAGS:
A retail establishment may provide reusable bags to its customers for the
purpose of enabling the customer to carry away goods from the point of sale.
The fee imposed pursuant to section
20-14-2 of this article shall not apply to reusable bags. (Ord. 17-239, 8-7-
2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
20-14-6: PERMITTED BAGS:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit a customer from using
bags of any type that the customer brings to the store for the customer's own
use or from carrying away goods from the store that are not placed in a bag
provided by the store. (Ord. 17-239, 8-7-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
20-14-7: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
A retail establishment shall not:
   A.   Neglect or refuse to collect or remit the fee levied under this
article;
   B.   File an incomplete, false, or fraudulent report to the Director;
   C.   Neglect or refuse to keep complete and accurate records; or
   D.   Refuse to allow the Director to inspect and audit the retail
establishment's records. (Ord. 17-239, 8-7-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
20-14-8: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every retail establishment required to collect the fee imposed pursuant to this
article and shall keep accurate books and records of its business, including
original source documents and books of entry denoting the transaction that gave
rise, or may have given rise, to the fee being imposed. Each retail
establishment must preserve for three (3) years all records necessary to
determine the amount of the fee due under this section. All such books and
records shall be subject to and available for inspection by the Director during
regular business hours. (Ord. 17-239, 8-7-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
20-14-9: PENALTIES:
Any person or retail establishment that violates any provision of this article
shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. In addition, the Village Manager may revoke or
suspend a retail establishment's business license if the Village Manager
determines the retail establishment has failed to comply with the duties
imposed under this article after notice and hearing. The suspension or
revocation of a license shall not release or discharge the retail establishment
from its liability to pay the fee or from any other penalties authorized by
this article. (Ord. 17-239, 8-7-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
20-14-10: EXEMPTION:
The fee imposed pursuant to section
20-14-2 above is not applicable to a carryout single-use bag provided to a
customer who is a participant in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP), Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) Program or a similar governmental
food assistance program and provides evidence of such participation to the
retail establishment. (Ord. 23-39, 7-31-2023)
CHAPTER 21
SMOKE ABATEMENT AND AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
Generally   1
ARTICLE 1
GENERALLY
SECTION:
21-1-1: Purpose
21-1-2: Definitions
21-1-3: General Regulations
21-1-4: Administration
21-1-5: Notices of Violation
21-1-6: Installation Permit Required
21-1-7: Certificate of Operation to be Posted
21-1-8: Permit Fees
21-1-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter is adopted for the following purposes: to regulate the production
and emission of smoke and other matters of such character as to create air
pollution within the Village; to provide for the measurement and control of
such emissions; to provide for permits for alteration, installation,
construction, reconstruction, addition to, repair and use of incinerators and
air pollution control equipment; to provide for the issuance of permits and
certificates for operation and for fees thereof; to provide fines and penalties
for violations of the provisions of this Chapter; to establish the Director of
Community Development as enforcement officer.
21-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
AIR CONTAMINANT: Any dust, fumes, gas, mist, noxious acid, smoke, vapor, odor
or particulate matter or any combination thereof present in the atmosphere.
AIR POLLUTANTS: Anything that causes air pollution as hereinafter defined.
AIR POLLUTION: The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or more air
contaminants or any combination thereof in sufficient quantities and of such
characteristics and duration as is likely to be injurious to public welfare, to
the health of human, plant or animal life, or to property or which interferes
with the enjoyment of life and property, as specified in the smoke emission
maxima table in Section
21-1-3 of this Chapter.
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL EQUIPMENT: Fly-ash collector, electrostatic precipitator,
stack spray, smoke-arresting or smoke-preventing equipment, dust-separating
equipment and similar equipment.
ASHES: Cinders, fly-ash, unburned combustibles, or any other solid material
resulting from combustion.
ASME: The American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
ASTM: The American Society of Testing and Materials.
BREECHING: Any conduit for the transport of products of combustion or processes
to the atmosphere or to any intermediate device before being discharged into
the atmosphere. It does not include the chimney or stack.
BUILDING A NEW FIRE: The period during which a fresh fire is being started. It
does not mean the process of replenishing an existing fuel bed with additional
fuel.
CHIMNEY OR STACK: Any conduit, duct, vent, flue or opening of any kind
whatsoever arranged to conduct any products of combustion to the atmosphere. It
does not include breechings, as defined herein.
CLEANING FIRES: The act of removing ashes from the fuel bed or furnace.
COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE: Any combustible waste material containing carbon in a free
or combined state, other than liquids or gases.
COMBUSTION EQUIPMENT OR DEVICE: See FUEL BURNING, COMBUSTION or PROCESS
EQUIPMENT OR DEVICE.
CONSTRUCTION: The installation or erection of any fuel burning, combustion or
process equipment or device.
DIRECTOR: The Director of Community Development of the Village of Oak Park and
his authorized representatives.
DOMESTIC REFUSE BURNING EQUIPMENT: Any refuse burning equipment or incinerator
used in a single family or two (2) family residence.
DUST: Particulate matter released into the air by natural forces or by any fuel
burning, combustion or process equipment or device, or by construction work, or
by mechanical or industrial processes.
DUST-SEPARATING EQUIPMENT: Any device for separating dust from the air or gas
medium in which it is carried.
FLUE: An enclosed passageway in a chimney or smokestack used for the removal of
the products of combustion.
FLY-ASH: Particulate matter capable of being gasborne or airborne and
consisting essentially of fused ash and/or burned or unburned materials.
FUEL: Any form of combustible matter, solid, liquid, vapor or gas, except that
refuse shall not be considered a fuel.
FUEL BURNING, COMBUSTION OR PROCESS EQUIPMENT OR DEVICE: Any furnace,
incinerator, fuel burning equipment, refuse burning equipment, boiler,
apparatus, device, mechanism, air pollution control equipment, stack, chimney,
breeching or structure used for the burning of fuel or other combustible
material, or for the ignition of products of combustion.
FUEL OIL: Oil commonly used as fuel.
FUMES: Gases, vapors or particulate matters that are of such character as to
cause air pollution.
FURNACE: An enclosed space provided for the ignition and/or combustion of fuel.
GARBAGE: Animal and vegetable wastes originating in dwelling units, residences,
kitchens, restaurants, hotels and produce markets.
INCINERATOR: Any device intended for or used for the destruction of garbage or
other combustible refuse or waste materials by burning.
LOW VOLATILE SOLID FUEL: A solid fuel, the volatile content of which is twenty
three percent (23%) or less on an ash free and moisture free basis, or a solid
fuel approved as hereinafter stated.
MULTIPLE CHAMBER INCINERATOR: Any incinerator consisting of two (2) or more
refractory lined combustion furnaces in series, physically separated by
refractory walls, interconnected by gas passage ports or ducts and designed for
maximum combustion of the material to be burned. It shall not include a heating
plant.
NATIVE LANDSCAPING: The use of plants that are indigenous to Northeast Illinois
(see "Plants Of The Chicago Region", Swink and Wilhelm, 1994) and are
intentionally planted by a resident or property owner. An area may be
considered native landscaping if at least seventy five percent (75%) of the
plant species present in a given area are deemed native by Swink and Wilhelm,
1994.
NOXIOUS ACIDS: Anhydrous or hydrous acid forms in concentration high enough to
be toxic or to cause "air pollution" as defined in this chapter.
OPEN AIR: All spaces outside of buildings, stacks or exterior ducts.
OPEN FIRE: Any fire from which the products of combustion are emitted directly
into the open air without passing through a stack or chimney.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material other than water, which is or has been suspended
in or discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or
solid.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, state
agency, or any other legal entity, or any operator, user, owner, employee or
any representative thereof acting in any capacity.
PREMISES: Any real estate or real property.
PROCESSES OR PROCESS EQUIPMENT: Any action, operation or treatment embracing
any form of manufacturing or processing which may emit smoke, particulate
matter or other matter.
RECONSTRUCTION: Any material change or alteration of any existing fuel burning
combustion or process equipment or device from that physical or operating
condition for which approval was last obtained; or the addition, removal or
replacement of any appurtenances or devices which materially affect the method
or efficiency of preventing the discharge of pollutants into the atmosphere.
REFUSE: Garbage, rubbish or trade waste, or any combination thereof.
REFUSE BURNING EQUIPMENT OTHER THAN DOMESTIC: Any refuse burning equipment or
incinerator used in multiple dwelling units containing more than two (2)
apartments, hotels, rooming houses, boarding houses, garages, schools,
hospitals, churches, office buildings, stores, institutions and all commercial
and industrial establishments.
RINGELMANN CHART: The chart published and set forth from time to time by the
U.S. bureau of mines and on which are illustrated the graduated shades of gray
to black for use in estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke.
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number appearing on the Ringelmann chart ascribed by the
observer to the density or equivalent opacity of the smoke emission.
RUBBISH: Waste material including, but not limited to, rags, clothes, leather,
rubber, carpets, wood, excelsior, leaves, paper, ashes, tree branches, yard
trimmings, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry, and other similar
materials.
SHALL; MAY; TENSE; NUMBER; GENDER: The word shall is mandatory; the word may is
permissive. The present tense shall include the future tense; the singular
number, the plural; the plural number, the singular; the masculine gender, the
feminine and the neuter.
SMOKE: Small gasborne particles, other than water, in sufficient number to be
observable.
SMOKE UNIT: The number obtained by multiplying the density of smoke observed,
transcribed into a Ringelmann number, by the duration emission in minutes.
SOLID FUEL: Any material in its solid state, capable of being consumed by a
combustion process, except that refuse shall not be considered a fuel.
STACK SPRAY: A nozzle or series of nozzles installed in a stack above the
breaching, used to inject wetting agents at high pressure to suppress the
discharge of particulate matter from the stack.
TRADE WASTE: Solid or liquid materials including, but not limited to rubbish,
plastic products, chemicals and cinders which result from any construction
work, business, trade or industry.
VILLAGE: The Village of Oak Park.
VOLATILE MATTER: The gaseous constituents of solid fuels as determined by the
standard ASTM procedure, amended or revised to date. (1981 Code; amd. Ord.
2013-0-44, 6-17-2013)
21-1-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful within the Village for any person owning or
operating, whether as principal, agent or employee, any fuel burning combustion
or process equipment or device, or portable boiler, to cause, suffer or allow
the emission or discharge of any smoke or other air contaminant, from any
single such source into the atmosphere, except in conformity with the limits
set forth in the following table:
   SMOKE EMISSION MAXIMA
   OperatiRingelmann   Minutes Per
             Chart Number 60 Minutes
   Operation                                Ringelmann   Minutes Per
                                               Chart Number 60 Minutes
Continual                                      4-5          0
                                              3            0
                                              2            8
                                              1            60
Maximum smoke units per 60 minutes                          68
                                               4-5          0
Building new, banking and cleaning fires, soot 3            6
blowing and process purging                    2            12
                                               1            60
Maximum smoke units per 60 minutes                          84
Frequency
Building new fires                                          Once daily
Cleaning or banking fires, soot                             1 time per 6 hours
blowing or process purging
 
(During continual operation, smoke of densities 2 or 1 as read on the
Ringelmann scale is permitted. However, number 2 smoke is permitted only for 8
minutes per hour.
For the purpose of cleaning and banking fires, soot blowing or process purging,
number 3 smoke as read on the Ringelmann scale is allowed for 6 minutes, and
number 2 smoke for 12 minutes every 6 hours.
For the purpose of building new fires, number 3 smoke is permitted for 6
minutes and number 2 smoke for 12 minutes every 24 hours.
Smoke of number 4 or 5 density is never permitted. Smoke of number 1 density is
permitted at all times.)
      1.   The Ringelmann chart shall be the standard for determining the
appearance, density or shade of smoke. The scale should be held at arm's length
at which distance the dots in the scale will blend into uniform shades.
Observer's line of observation should be at right angles to the direction of
smoke travel. Observer should not be less than one hundred feet (100') nor more
than one-fourth (1/4) mile from the stack. Observer should avoid looking toward
bright sunlight. The background immediately beyond the top of the stack should
be free of buildings or other dark objects. Where the density of the smoke as
observed falls between two (2) consecutive Ringelmann numbers, the lower
Ringelmann number shall be considered the density of smoke observed. For the
purpose of calculating smoke units, a Ringelmann density reading shall be made
at least once every minute during the period of observation; and each reading
shall be multiplied by the time in minutes during which it is observed. The
various products thus obtained shall be added together to give the total number
of "smoke units" observed during the total period under observation.
The Ringelmann chart as published by the United States bureau of mines is
adopted by reference and three (3) copies of said chart are on file in the
office of the Village Clerk and available for public use, inspection and
examination.
      2.   Air contaminants exceeding the limits set forth in the preceding
table may be summarily abated by the Director of Community Development. Such
abatement may be in addition to the fine hereinafter provided.
   B.   It shall also be unlawful for any person owning or operating, whether
as principal, agent or employee, any fuel burning, combustion, or process
equipment or device or portable boiler or open fire to cause, suffer or allow
the operation thereof, with any solid fuel, other than low volatile solid fuel.
The Director shall maintain and upon request furnish a list of brands or trade
names of fuels which have been tested for conformity with the provisions of
this chapter and which, as a result of such tests, have been approved. Adequate
supplies of such fuel shall be made available to the Director to conduct such
reasonable tests as he shall deem necessary to determine that such fuel meets
the standards hereinbefore established. The reasonable expense of any such
tests shall be borne by the person seeking the approval of such fuel.
   C.   It shall also be unlawful for any person owning or operating, whether
as principal, agent or employee any fuel burning, combustion, process equipment
or device or portable boiler to cause, suffer or allow the burning of any
combustible refuse except in a multiple chamber incinerator equipped with
auxiliary automatic gas firing equipment with adjustable operation cycle timers
and pilot and flame failure protective devices. Such multiple chamber
incinerators shall not be of the flue fed type. This provision shall not apply
to domestic refuse burning equipment.
Incinerators shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable standards
as set forth in the publication "Incinerator Standards", published from time to
time by the Incinerator Institute Of America, and they shall be of the
requisite capacity as shown in the incinerator capacity chart therein.
"Incinerator Standards" published by Incinerator Institute Of America is
adopted by reference and three (3) copies of said publication are on file in
the office of the Village Clerk and available for public use, inspection and
examination.
Where only the combustion of type I waste, as defined in the publication
"Incinerator Standards" published from time to time by the Incinerator
Institute Of America, is to take place in a multiple chamber incinerator, the
Director may, at his discretion, waive the requirement for auxiliary automatic
gas firing equipment with adjustable operation cycle timers. This waiver may be
rescinded upon a finding by the Director that the actual use of the incinerator
is in violation of the requirements of this section.
Existing flue fed class II incinerators as defined in the publication
"Incinerator Standards" published from time to time by the Incinerator
Institute Of America, may continue to be used provided that they meet or are
modified to meet the following requirements:
      1.   These incinerators shall be served by a separate flue to which only
the incinerator will be connected.
      2.   Flue door openings shall be designed so that the clear opening of
the door shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the cross sectional area of the
flue.
      3.   Flue doors and frames shall be approved and labeled by the
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
      4.   Flue doors shall be self-closing.
      5.   These incinerators shall be equipped with auxiliary automatic gas
firing equipment with adjustable operation cycle timers.
      6.   The auxiliary gas firing equipment shall be equipped with pilot and
flame failure protective devices.
      7.   These incinerators shall have a roof mounted settling chamber
proportioned to reduce gas velocity to one-fourth (1/4) of the velocity in the
flue.
      8.   These incinerators shall have a chimney height of five feet (5')
above the highest point of the building or above any obstruction within fifty
feet (50') of the chimney.
      9.   These incinerators shall have a minimum grate area of fifteen-
hundredths (0.15) square feet per sleeping room or efficiency unit.
      10.   These incinerators shall have a minimum volume of three (3) cubic
feet for each square foot of grate area.
      11.   These incinerators shall have secondary or overfire air provided
through adjustable openings equivalent in area to two (2) square inches per
square foot of grate area. (1981 Code)
   D.   No open fires are allowed. No person shall burn leaves or other refuse
in an open fire.
Exceptions:
      1.   Open fires which are used for cooking food at public and private
gatherings are permitted. However, they shall meet the smoke requirements of
this chapter and applicable nuisance provisions of this code.
      2.   Open fires used for the management of native landscaping provided
the property owner first obtains a permit from the Oak Park Fire Department
prior to the open fire. Such permit shall be issued without charge. If the fire
is to occur on public property such as the parkway, the property owner must
apply at least ten (10) days prior to the fire. The permit shall be conditioned
on the property owner complying with the following restrictions:
         a.   The property owner shall provide proof of required permits from
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the Cook County Department of
Environmental Control to the Fire Department and the Public Works Department.
         b.   If the burn is to occur on Village property or on the public
right of way, the property owner must protect Village property such as trees,
utility poles and other Village property in the public right of way from damage
in accordance with the direction of the Public Works Department and the Fire
Chief.
         c.   An adult shall be present at all times during the open fire.
         d.   The property owner must have means available to extinguish the
fire such as a charged garden hose or water buckets at all times during the
fire.
         e.   No additional yard waste shall be added to the open fire.
         f.   The fire is not permitted on any day when wind speeds are in
excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour.
         g.   No fire shall be allowed within fifteen feet (15') of any
structure.
         h.   Burns may only occur between December 1 and April 30.
         i.   No accelerant shall be used except drip torch fuel from a drip
torch. (Ord. 2013-0-44, 6-17-2013)
21-1-4: ADMINISTRATION:
The administration and enforcement of the local air pollution control effort
shall be by and under the direction and control of the Director of Community
Development whose duties shall be as follows:
   A.   To supervise the enforcement of all laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations pertaining to air pollution control as provided in this chapter.
   B.   To investigate complaints of violations of this chapter and to make
inspections and observations of air pollution conditions.
   C.   To examine, approve the plans of and make inspections of newly
installed, constructed, reconstructed, repaired or altered incinerators and
smoke prevention and air pollution control devices within the Village and to
make periodic inspections thereof as herein provided, to determine whether such
equipment is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
The Director is hereby authorized to make inspections of all buildings,
structures and premises located within the Village to determine their
compliance with the provisions of this code. For the purpose of making such
inspections, the Director is hereby authorized to examine and survey all
buildings, structures and premises within the Village. Such inspections shall
be made at reasonable hours, subject to the following standards and conditions:
      1.   Such inspection may take place only in connection with a complaint,
which in the opinion of the Director, provides reasonable grounds for belief
that a violation exists or if the inspection is part of a regular inspection
program.
      2.   Any person inspecting a premises shall furnish to the owner,
occupant or operator concerned sufficient identification and information to
enable the owner, operator or occupant to determine both the inspector's
identity as a representative of the Village and the purpose of the inspection.
The Director or the Village Manager may apply to any court of competent
jurisdiction for a search warrant or other legal process for the purpose of
securing entry to any premises if the owner shall refuse to grant entry.
   D.   To issue all permits, certificates, notices or other matters required
under the provisions of this chapter, and to notify all persons concerned of
any decision he may render.
   E.   To prepare and deliver notices of violation as hereinafter described.
   F.   To institute necessary proceedings to prosecute violations of this
chapter and to compel the prevention and abatement of air pollution, or
nuisances arising therefrom.
   G.   To investigate and make recommendations from time to time to the
Village Board of Trustees with respect to needed additions or revisions to this
chapter, or any other ordinance pertaining to air pollution control.
   H.   To make further written rules, consistent with this chapter. These
rules shall be available to the public at the Director's or Village Clerk's
office.
   I.   To do any and all acts which may be necessary for the successful
prosecution of the purposes of this chapter and such other acts as may be
specifically enumerated herein as his duties.
   J.   The Village shall provide such instruments, books, papers, equipment
and personnel as shall be necessary for the proper performance of the duties of
the Director. (1981 Code)
21-1-5: NOTICES OF VIOLATION:
It shall be the duty of owners or agents of any fuel burning, combustion or
process equipment or device to instruct, or cause to be instructed, the
operators, operating crews, enginemen, firemen, janitors, or any other person
operating such equipment or device about the proper operation of such equipment
or device.
The Director is hereby authorized to issue notices of violation for the purpose
of giving notice to persons allegedly violating any of the provisions of this
chapter or other ordinances relating to air pollution. If at the time of any
original or other inspection, it is found that any fuel burning, combustion or
process equipment or device or premises is being operated or managed in
violation or is in such a condition or so installed as to cause a violation of
any requirements provided in this chapter, the Director shall give notice in
writing within ten (10) days after the inspection to any or all persons known
by him to operate or have control of such equipment or device or premises, of
the defective equipment or device, condition, operation or violation. Such
notice may be given by the Director by personal service to any person owning,
occupying, operating, or in charge of the equipment or device or premises
involved, or by mailing a copy thereof directed by registered mail to the last
known address of the person to be notified, or by posting a copy of said notice
in a conspicuous place in or about the premises containing the alleged
violation. Such notice may include more than one alleged violation and may
specify a period of time for compliance, which shall be such time as, in the
opinion of the Director, is reasonably required to effect changes necessary for
compliance. Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action, which if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. The giving of notices is not a
prerequisite to an abatement or prosecution. (1981 Code)
21-1-6: INSTALLATION PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, erect, construct,
reconstruct, alter or add to, or cause to be installed, erected, constructed,
reconstructed or altered or added to any incinerator or air pollution control
equipment within the Village, except domestic refuse burning equipment, or to
make or cause to be made major repairs thereon in the Village until an
application for installation and operating permits on forms supplied by the
Department of Community Development, including suitable plans and
specifications therefor and an identification of the structures or buildings
used in connection therewith, has been filed in duplicate by the owner,
contractor, installer or other person or his agent, in the office of the
Director. In order for any application so filed to be approved by the Director
he must agree that the equipment is so designed that the same can be managed
and operated to conform to the provisions of this chapter. After this approval
the Director will authorize the issuance of an installation permit for such
installation, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or addition.
   B.   The plans and specifications submitted, pursuant to the foregoing
paragraph, shall be prepared under the direction of, or approved by, a
registered professional engineer, registered in the state of Illinois; and bear
his seal. (1981 Code)
21-1-7: CERTIFICATE OF OPERATION TO BE POSTED:
   A.   Upon finding that any incinerator or air pollution control equipment
inspected complies with the provisions of this chapter and after payment of the
prescribed fee, the Director shall issue a certificate of operation which shall
be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the equipment. Upon any subsequent
inspection, if the Director finds that any such equipment fails to comply with
the provisions of this code, he shall issue a revocation of the certificate of
operation.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person or his agent to use or operate any
equipment which is subject to inspections as hereinafter set forth, without
having an effective certificate of operation therefor. (1981 Code)
21-1-8: PERMIT FEES:
Fees shall be paid in the office of the Village Clerk. Fees for the inspection
of plans and issuance or installation permits for the installation, erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration of or addition to incinerators or air
pollution control equipment except domestic refuse burning equipment, shall be
as follows:
   A.   Inspection Of Plans: For inspection of plans for new equipment and
equipment about to be reconstructed or repairs or alterations: Five dollars
($5.00) per installation.
   B.   Original Inspection Fees: For the examination or inspection of any new
or reconstructed incinerator or air pollution control equipment after its
erection or reconstruction and before its operation and maintenance, except
domestic refuse burning equipment: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per
installation.
   C.   Periodic Inspection Fees: For the periodic inspection of incinerators
or air pollution control equipment except domestic refuse burning equipment:
Fifteen dollars ($15.00) per installation. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 22
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
General Provisions   1
Sidewalk And Driveway Construction      2
Excavations   3
Obstruction Of And Encroachments Upon Public Ways   4
Private Driveways   5
Underground Construction And Use   6
Outdoor Benches   7
Street Names And House Numbers   8
House Movers      9
Commercial Use Of Sidewalk Space   10
Vacation Of Streets And Alleys   11
Telecommunications Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee   12
Public Art   13
Small Wireless Facilities   14
System Of Numbering For Dwelling Units And Commercial/Office Units In
Buildings   15
Parkway Maintenance    16
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
22-1-1: Hauling of Certain Materials Through Streets, Etc.
22-1-2: Injuring Pavement or Other Public Ground; Hindering Repair of Public
Improvements
22-1-3: Leaving Openings in Streets and Sidewalks
22-1-4: Curb Line Grade; Determined by Grade of Improved Street
22-1-5: Curb Line Grade; Intersecting Streets to Determine
22-1-6: Sidewalk Slope
22-1-7: Grades to Reference Datum Bench Mark
22-1-1: HAULING OF CERTAIN MATERIALS THROUGH STREETS, ETC.:
Any person who shall engage in hauling stone, dirt, mortar, cinders, rubbish or
other matter that may be likely to fall from the vehicle, shall see that the
vehicle box shall be tight so that none of such matter shall sift through such
box. Any articles falling from a vehicle shall be promptly removed from the
street by the driver.
Any person neglecting or refusing to remove such dirt, sand, cinders, rubbish
or other material from the street promptly shall be fined as provided in
Section
1-1-5 of this Code for obstruction of a public way without a permit. In
addition thereto the Director of Public Works shall cause such substance to be
removed at the expense of the party so neglecting or refusing, who shall be
liable to repay and refund to the Village the cost of removal, which cost shall
be collected and paid into the Village treasury.
22-1-2: INJURING PAVEMENT OR OTHER PUBLIC GROUND; HINDERING REPAIR OF PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS:
No person shall injure or tear up any pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk or any
part thereof, dig any hole, ditch or drain in, or remove any sod, stone, earth,
sand or gravel from any street, alley or public ground in the Village without
having first obtained written permission from the Director of Public Works. Nor
shall any person hinder or obstruct the making or repairing of any public
improvement or work ordered by the Board of Trustees or being done under lawful
authority for the Village. Such injury, digging or tearing up referred to above
shall be done only under the supervision of the Director of Public Works.
22-1-3: LEAVING OPENINGS IN STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
No person shall keep or leave open any cellar door or grating of any vault on
any street or sidewalk or suffer the same to be left or kept open.
22-1-4: CURB LINE GRADE; DETERMINED BY GRADE OF IMPROVED STREET:
In all cases where the grade of any street or alley has not been established by
general ordinance, the grade of the curb of such improved street as established
by a local improvement ordinance for the paving of such street, shall be the
established grade of such street for all purposes. All grades will be
determined by the Director of Public Works.
22-1-5: CURB LINE GRADE; INTERSECTING STREETS TO DETERMINE:
In all cases of unimproved streets where grades have not been established by
general ordinance or by local improvement ordinance, the established grade of
the improved streets intersecting therewith shall be and are hereby declared to
be the established grades for such unimproved streets. All grades will be
determined by the Director of Public Works.
22-1-6: SIDEWALK SLOPE:
The upper edge of the sidewalk nearest the lot line shall be above the
established grade of the street measured on a slope of one-fourth of an inch to
the foot from the established grade at the top of the curb. The surface of the
sidewalk shall slope toward the curb at the rate of one-quarter of an inch to
the foot, except where pre-existing conditions require otherwise; provided that
in no case shall such elevation exceed six inches (6").
22-1-7: GRADES TO REFERENCE DATUM BENCH MARK:
All grades now or hereafter fixed shall have reference to all base or datum
plane and bench marks as established by the Department of Public Works. The
Department of Public Works shall keep a record of all bench marks.
ARTICLE 2
SIDEWALK AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
Division A. Generally
22-2-1: Specifications; Exemption
22-2-2: Construction Permit Required
22-2-3: Permit Fees
22-2-4: Director Of Public Works To Supervise Work
22-2-5: Procedure When Work Is Done Improperly
22-2-6: Encroaching On Sidewalk Space
Division B. Contractors
22-2-7: License Required; Exception
22-2-8: Bond Or Insurance Certificate Required
DIVISION A. GENERALLY
22-2-1: SPECIFICATIONS; EXEMPTION:
All sidewalks and driveways which shall be constructed in the Village on public
property shall be of concrete and shall be constructed in all respects
according to the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction"
adopted by the department of transportation of the state of Illinois on January
1, 2012; copies to be maintained in the Department of Public Works.
It is further provided, however, that a different type of construction for
sidewalks and driveways shall be approved by the Director of Public Works
provided:
   A.   A plan of the sidewalk and/or driveway indicating the type of
construction is submitted to the Department of Public Works.
   B.   In the case of public sidewalk construction, at least two hundred feet
(200') of frontage is to be paved, except that this requirement may be waived
by the Board of Trustees where the Board finds it is in the public interest to
do so.
   C.   The owner indemnifies the Village against liability in connection with
the pavement, either by bond or insurance coverage with the Village named as a
party insured, said bond or insurance to be approved by the Law Department.
   D.   The owner agrees to assume any additional costs of maintenance,
including any costs to restore the material following public improvements made
along the public right of way.
   E.   Brick sidewalks shall be installed on an aggregate base of six inches
(6") together with a sand cushion of one inch (1"). An optional four inch (4")
concrete base may be substituted for the six inches (6") of aggregate base.
   F.   Brick driveways shall be constructed on an aggregate base of eight
inches (8") in thickness together with a sand cushion of one inch (1"). An
optional six inch (6") concrete base may be substituted for the eight inches
(8") of aggregate base.
   G.   A plan for permeable pavements for sidewalk and/or driveway
construction shall be submitted to the Department of Public Works and shall be
approved by the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 15-047, 2-2-2015)
22-2-2: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person desiring to lay down any sidewalk, curbing or driveway shall proceed
with such work until he has applied for and received a permit from the Director
of Public Works setting forth the necessary lines and grades. (1981 Code)
22-2-3: PERMIT FEES:
The terms and fees which shall be charged for the permit required by this
article and demanded in advance for the benefit of the Village from the owners
of property ordering the work to be performed, or against whom the work is
properly chargeable are as follows:
For locating and furnishing street, alley, sidewalk or curb line or grade for
any frontage, a one hundred dollar ($100.00) cash deposit or certified check
shall be deposited with the Village Clerk's office to ensure proper
restoration. (1981 Code)
22-2-4: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS TO SUPERVISE WORK:
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works, to superintend the
construction of sidewalks, so far as may be necessary to compel their
construction on the grade and line established and furnished by the Public
Works Department, and of the materials and in the manner prescribed in this
article or the particular ordinances and orders concerning such sidewalks and
of the material prescribed therefor. (1981 Code)
22-2-5: PROCEDURE WHEN WORK IS DONE IMPROPERLY:
If any person shall build, or attempt to build, any sidewalk or portion thereof
and fail, neglect or refuse in so doing, to comply with the provisions of this
article or the particular ordinance concerning such sidewalk, the Director of
Public Works shall direct such sidewalk, or portion thereof, as the case may
be, to be relaid. In case of the failure, neglect or refusal of the person so
directed to immediately comply with such direction, the Director shall require
the property owner, if any portion of such sidewalk has been laid, to remove
the same and to relay the same as provided by this article and in conformity
with any special requirement as in this division provided. Such persons may
also be punished as provided in section 1-1-5 of this code. (1981 Code)
22-2-6: ENCROACHING ON SIDEWALK SPACE:
No person shall erect or place any structure, in whole or in part, upon any
street, alley or sidewalk within the Village nor shall part of any sidewalk be
taken for private use, by lowering or cutting down the same next to the
structure or railing off the same by any wooden or iron railing or by shutting
off the public from passing along and over the same and such sidewalks shall
not be raised up next to the building by constructing a platform or platforms
on the same, of either wood, iron or stone, but such sidewalks shall be built
flush up to the building on a uniform grade, as herein provided. (1981 Code)
Where it is necessary to construct access ramps for the handicapped into a
building, said access ramp may extend onto the public sidewalk, provided said
ramp is protected by a sufficient wall, is adequately illuminated and provided
that the remaining portion of the walk not affected by the ramp is not less
than six feet (6') in width. Before a permit shall issue, the property owner
requesting such a ramp shall furnish the Village a covenant to indemnify the
Village from any claims arising from said encroachment and further covenanting
to maintain the ramp, the protective wall and illumination at the expense of
the property owner. The covenant shall be recorded and shall run with the land.
(Ord. 1980-0-26, 5-5-1980)
DIVISION B. CONTRACTORS
22-2-7: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
No person shall engage in the business of constructing or repairing sidewalks
in any public street or place in the Village without first having obtained a
license therefor and furnishing a bond or insurance certificate as hereinafter
provided. (1981 Code)
22-2-8: BOND OR INSURANCE CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
Every person licensed under the provisions of this article shall, before
commencing construction on any public way, deposit with the Village Clerk a
bond in the penal sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) with surety to be
approved by the Village Clerk and conditioned to indemnify, save and keep
harmless the Village from any and all loss, cost, expense or liability of any
kind whatsoever which the Village may suffer or be put to or which may be
recovered from it by reason of such construction license or by reason of any
act or thing done or neglected to be done under or by virtue of the authority
given in such license; or the contractor may include the Village as a party
insured under the contractor's general liability insurance policy in an amount
not less than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). (1981 Code)
ARTICLE 3
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
22-3-1: Permit Required, Application
22-3-2: Permit Fee, Deposit
22-3-3: Bond or Insurance Policy Required
22-3-4: Restoration
22-3-5: Barricades Required
22-3-6: Failure to Restore
22-3-7: Return of Surplus Deposit, Deficiencies
22-3-8: Pavement Openings Moratorium And Restrictions
22-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
No person shall interfere with or affect a change in any public way or public
property in the Village without having first obtained a permit from the
Director of Public Works given in accordance with the provision of this Code or
other ordinances of the Village.
All applications for permits under this Article shall be accompanied by a plat
or pencil tracing or sketch showing the location, character and dimensions of
the proposed opening for the installation of new work or the location and
character of the alterations involving changes in the location of pipes,
conduits, wire or conductors. The application shall state the time, place and
character of such opening and the purpose thereof.
22-3-2: PERMIT FEE, DEPOSIT:
For each and every permit issued for an opening in any street there shall be
collected a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00).
Before a permit shall be granted to any person for interfering with or
affecting a change in any public way or public property in the Village a cash
deposit or certified check for one hundred dollars ($100.00) for restoration
purposes must be deposited with the Village Clerk.
If special circumstances exist, it is within the discretion of the Director of
Public Works to require a larger deposit to meet potential restoration costs.
22-3-3: BOND OR INSURANCE POLICY REQUIRED:
No permit shall be issued to any person permitting or allowing any interference
with or affecting any change in any public way or public property in the
Village, until the person making application for such permit shall first have
executed to the Village a good and sufficient bond in the amount of fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00), with sureties to be approved by the Corporation
Counsel, conditioned:
To indemnify, save and keep harmless the Village from any and all loss, cost,
damage, expense or liability of any kind whatsoever which the Village may
suffer or which may be recovered against the Village from or on account of the
issuance of the permit to obstruct, tear up, remove or repair any sidewalk,
parkway, street, alley or part thereof and from or on account of any act or
thing done by the permittee or permitted by the permittee in the obstruction,
tearing up, removing or repairing of any sidewalk, parkway, street alley or
part thereof.
In the event any proposed work may appear to subject the Village to the
possibility of any greater liability than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00),
the Corporation Counsel may require the amount of the bond to be increased to
an amount sufficient to protect the Village against any such loss, cost, damage
or expense.
The bond aforesaid shall not be required if an insurance policy in the minimum
amount of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) covering public liability
and including the Village as a party insured is furnished.
22-3-4: RESTORATION:
   A.   Paved Roadways. The person interfering with or causing a change in any
public way or public property is responsible for restoration. If restoration is
not completed by such person within a reasonable time, the restoration
(including backfill, concrete replacement and asphalt patching) of any street
or paved alley shall be performed by the Village, the cost of such restoration
to be deducted from the deposit provided for in Section
22-3-2.
The restoration of the roadway of any street or paved alley will conform to the
following standards:
      1.   No excavated material shall be used for backfill except by the
written consent of the Director of Public Works or his authorized agent.
      2.   Backfill material shall consist of sand or stone screenings and
shall be deposited in six inch (6") layers, each layer to be suitably rammed or
tamped. Puddling of backfill material may be substituted for tamping.
      3.   All trenches or excavations made in any improved street or alley,
shall be refilled to a point on a level with the subgrade immediately below the
pavement with such care and in such a manner that there will be no further
settlement of the filling material. The replaced pavement above the subgrade
shall be identical with and correspond in every way to the original
improvement, except that in all cases where concrete is required Portland
cement shall be used.
      4.   All concrete used for this work shall be delivered from ready mix
trucks and shall conform to State highway specifications. The concrete shall
contain no more water than is required for a four inch (4") slump. After the
concrete has been laid, as above described, the same shall be protected from
traffic for one week and until the concrete is thoroughly set.
      5.   Before final restoration is made to concrete patches, the perimeter
of the concrete shall be cut back neatly and squarely at least twelve inches
(12") beyond the limits of the original excavation.
   B.   Parkways. All trenches or other excavations in any parkway shall be
refilled and the sod removed in making such trenches and excavations shall be
replaced or, after refilling the same, the surface shall be sowed with grass
seed or resodded as determined by the Director of Public Works and shall be
cared for until the same is restored to as good condition in every way as
before the excavations were made.
   C.   Sidewalks and Curbs. All damaged or removed sidewalks shall be replaced
with new five inch (5") thick squares equal in width of adjoining squares.
Where sidewalk replacements are required, only full squares may be placed.
Where curb and gutter sections are to be replaced, the repair must include all
the curb and gutter between joints, unless sawed joints are provided.
Any underground improvements of any kind which may be encountered in making
street excavations shall not be molested or disturbed in any way and if injured
shall be at once repaired and restored to their original condition without cost
to the owners thereof.
All the work herein before referred to shall be done in a good and workmanlike
manner and shall be maintained and kept in good order and repair until the
deposit aforesaid is refunded, but not to exceed one year. Each person shall
from time to time during such year repair or refill any such ditch, trench or
other excavation, if called upon so to do by the Director of Public Works or
other proper officer of the Village and all such work shall be done and
performed to the full and complete satisfaction of the Director of Public Works
or of such officer as may hereafter be appointed to perform the same or similar
duties as are now performed by such Director and to the full satisfaction of
and without expense to the Village.
22-3-5: BARRICADES REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every person engaged in digging into any street, in
paving any street, building any sewer or drain or trench for water pipes in any
of the public streets or avenues under contract with the Village, or by virtue
of any permission which may have been granted to them by the Board of Trustees,
or any Village department, where such work, if left exposed, would be
dangerous, to erect a fence, railing or barricade, and to place a suitable
covering where necessary as determined by the Director of Public Works, around
such excavations or work in such a manner as to prevent danger to persons who
may be traveling such streets, roads or avenues and to continue and uphold such
fence, railing or barricade until the work shall be completed or the
obstruction or danger removed. It shall also be the duty of such persons to
place upon such fence, railing or barricade at twilight in the evening suitable
and sufficient warning lights and keep them burning through the night during
the performance of such work, under the penalty as provided in Section
1-1-5 of this Code for every neglect. Flares, lanterns, "bombs" or other
devices using a flame shall not be permitted as suitable lights.
No person shall remove any barricade or light or other danger signal erected in
front of or about any defective sidewalk or street within the Village, or in
front of or about any sidewalk or street under repair or undergoing
reconstruction within the Village, or in any way interfere with, change or
destroy such barricade, light or other danger signal until such sidewalk or
street is repaired or rebuilt.
The provisions of the preceding section shall apply to every person who shall
place building materials in any of the public streets, avenues or public places
or be engaged in building any vault or constructing any lateral drain from any
cellar to any public sewer, or who shall do or perform any work causing
obstructions in the public streets by virtue of any permit from any executive
department and also to all public or Village officers engaged in performing any
work in behalf of the Village whereby obstructions or excavations shall be made
in the public streets.
The extent to which the railing or fence, or barricade referred to herein shall
be built is hereby defined in the following situations:
   A.   In digging into any street or road, by placing the same along the upper
bank of such excavation or by extending the fence so far across the street or
road as to prevent persons from traveling on such portions as would be
dangerous.
   B.   In paving any street or avenue, by extending the same across the
roadway of such street or avenue, or if but a portion of the width of such
roadway be obstructed, across such portion; in which case the obstruction shall
be so arranged as to leave a passageway through, as nearly as may be of uniform
width.
   C.   In the building of a sewer, by placing the same across the roadway at
the ends of such excavations as shall be made.
   D.   In building vaults, by enclosing the ground taken for the vaults.
   E.   In placing building material in the streets, by placing the same across
so much of the street as shall be occupied by such materials and the materials
shall be so placed as to occupy a space of uniform width.
   F.   In the construction or repair of any building, by placing the same
around so much of the public way as the Director of Public Works shall deem
necessary for the safety of the public.
22-3-6: FAILURE TO RESTORE:
In the event that any person opening any street, alley or public way, fails to
restore such street, alley or public way in the manner provided in this Article
within ten (10) days after written notice so to do has been mailed or served
upon such person, then and in such event the Director of Public Works shall
have such work done and the cost thereof shall be charged to the person to whom
the permit was issued, and shall be deducted from the amount deposited by such
person as required in Section 22-3-2.
22-3-7: RETURN OF SURPLUS DEPOSIT, DEFICIENCIES:
After completion of the work, under the provisions of this article, to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, he shall certify to the Director
of Finance the amount of any surplus remaining from the amount deposited in
such case, and such surplus shall thereupon be paid over to the proper claimant
upon presentation to the Village Clerk of the deposit receipt; but if for any
reason the amount of such deposit shall have been insufficient to cover the
cost of such work, or if any damage shall have been done to any underground
work or connections, or otherwise, not contemplated in the original estimate,
which shall have caused increased expenditure, the amount of such deficiency or
damage shall be certified to the Director of Finance who shall collect the same
from the person to whom the permit was issued. (1981 Code)
22-3-8: PAVEMENT OPENINGS MORATORIUM AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Unless the Director of Public Works determines that circumstances
warrant the opening of pavement, no permit shall be issued for:
      1.   Opening any pavement that has been newly constructed or
reconstructed after January 1, 2020, for a period of five (5) years after the
completion of the construction or reconstruction of the pavement;
      2.   Opening any pavement that has been resurfaced after January 1, 2021,
within three (3) years after the completion date of the resurfaced pavement; or
      3.   Opening any pavement located in the DT Downtown Zoning District as
defined said district is defined in the Oak Park Zoning Ordinance, as amended,
between the Thanksgiving holiday in any given year and January 1 of the
following year.
   B.   When determining whether circumstances warrant the opening of pavement
pursuant to this section, the Director of Public Works shall consider whether
the proposed work for the opening constitutes an emergency and will provide a
public benefit. In addition, the Director shall consider whether there is no
other reasonable access to perform the opening and other reasonable factors in
the Director's discretion. (Ord. 21-27, 2-22-2021)
ARTICLE 4
OBSTRUCTION OF AND ENCROACHMENTS UPON PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
22-4-1: Public Ways To Be Kept Clear; Exception; Regulation Of Public
Assemblies In Streets
22-4-2: Games, Exhibitions, Assemblies Prohibited; Roller Skates, Skateboards,
Bicycles Regulated
22-4-3: Owner To Remove Street Obstructions; Procedure For Failure To Remove
22-4-4: Encumbering Public Ways Without Permission
22-4-5: Procedure For Selling Articles Removed From Streets
22-4-6: Storage On Public Ways
22-4-7: Leaving Goods On Sidewalks During Delivery
22-4-8: Persons Required To Remove Snow And Ice From Public Sidewalks Fronting
Or Abutting Parcels Or Lots Owned, Occupied, Leased Or Otherwise Controlled By
Them Within The Village
22-4-1: PUBLIC WAYS TO BE KEPT CLEAR; EXCEPTION; REGULATION OF PUBLIC
ASSEMBLIES IN STREETS:
The streets, avenues, alleys and sidewalks in the Village shall be kept free
and clear at all times of all encumbrances and encroachments except as may be
herein or by ordinance or resolution of the Village otherwise specially
provided. No person shall, at any time, congregate or assemble in or upon any
of the public streets, avenues, alleys or sidewalks of the Village in such a
manner as to obstruct or interfere with the passage of vehicles in and along
such streets, avenues or alleys or the passage of persons along the streets and
sidewalks or in such a manner as to disturb or threaten the public peace. Any
person in such assembly who fails or refuses, upon the order of any police
officer of the Village to move on or away from such assembly, shall be punished
as provided in section
1-1-5 of this Code. (1981 Code)
22-4-2: GAMES, EXHIBITIONS, ASSEMBLIES PROHIBITED; ROLLER SKATES, SKATEBOARDS,
BICYCLES REGULATED:
No person shall engage in any game, sport, amusement or business, or exhibit
any machine, show or animal, or indulge in any acrobatic feats or anything else
in the streets or upon the sidewalks which shall collect any crowd of persons
so as to interfere with the passage of vehicles or persons passing along the
streets and sidewalks.
Nor shall any person by means of any sport, game, amusement or exhibition, or
by exhortation or otherwise, induce or attempt to induce the congregating or
assembling of persons in or upon any of the public streets, avenues, alleys or
sidewalks of the Village, whereby the passage of vehicles in and along such
streets or the passage of persons along such streets or sidewalks is obstructed
or interfered with or whereby the public peace is threatened or disturbed.
   A.   Roller Skates, Skateboards And Bicycles Regulated: No person shall
rollerskate or ride a skateboard or bicycle anywhere in the Village without
complying with the terms and provisions of this section.
      1.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
   BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL DISTRICT: Any areas of the Village in which business
or commercial activities are conducted and which are zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, B-
4 or C as set forth on the Zoning Map of the Village. A map of the Village
designating the business and commercial districts is shown in Exhibit 22-4-2A1
of this article.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3320.gif]
   ROLLERSKATE: To skate on any type of roller skates or street skates.
   SKATEBOARD: A board of any material to which roller skate wheels or similar
wheels are attached.
   STREET: Every way or place which is open to the use of the public as a
matter of right for purposes of general vehicular traffic circulation.
      2.   Streets: No person shall rollerskate, or use or ride a skateboard on
any street except for the purpose of crossing the street. All laws and
regulations relating to pedestrians crossing streets shall apply to persons
crossing a street on roller skates or a skateboard.
      3.   Sidewalks: No person shall rollerskate or ride a skateboard in a
reckless manner on any public sidewalk. Persons riding a skateboard or
rollerskating on a public sidewalk shall exercise due care for the safety of
other persons using the sidewalk and shall yield the right of way to
pedestrians using such sidewalks at all times.
      4.   Village Property And Business And Commercial Districts: No person
shall use or ride a skateboard, rollerskate or ride a bicycle in any Village
public parking garage or lot, in the Village Hall inner courtyard or upon any
sidewalk, alley or other pedestrian public way in any business or commercial
district within the Village.
      5.   Sales And Rentals: Any commercial establishment selling or renting
skateboards or roller skates of any kind shall post a copy of this section, or
a summary of the rules set out in this section in a conspicuous place where
persons buying or renting skates or skateboards will see it. (Ord. 1990-0-5, 2-
20-90)
22-4-3: OWNER TO REMOVE STREET OBSTRUCTIONS; PROCEDURE FOR FAILURE TO REMOVE:
The owner of any building, fence, porch, steps, gallery or other obstruction
now standing or which may hereafter be erected or placed upon any street, alley
or sidewalk or public ground within the Village, or which may be left standing
upon any new street that has been or may hereafter be opened, shall remove the
same within such reasonable time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, as he shall
be required so to do by a notice signed by the Director of Public Works.
Whenever the owner of any such building, fence or other obstruction shall
refuse or neglect to remove the same after notice, or if the owner cannot be
readily found for the purpose of such notice, the same shall be deemed a
nuisance, and it shall be lawful for the Director of Public Works to cause the
same to be removed or taken down in his discretion, and the expense thereof
shall be recoverable from the owner. Every person who shall oppose or resist
the execution of the orders of the Director in the premises shall be punished
as provided in section
1-1-5 of this code. (1981 Code)
22-4-4: ENCUMBERING PUBLIC WAYS WITHOUT PERMISSION:
No person shall encumber or obstruct or cause to be encumbered or obstructed,
any street, alley or other public place in the Village, by placing therein or
thereon any building material or any article or thing whatsoever, without
having first obtained written permission for the Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works or any officer of the Village is authorized to
cause any obstruction, encroachment or other thing, which may be in violation
of the provisions of this article to be removed within a reasonable time after
notice served upon the owner, agent or person in possession of the premises
where such violation occurs; or in case the owner, agent or person in
possession cannot be found, then summarily to remove the same, and the owner,
agent or party causing such violation, shall pay all expenses and costs of such
removal. Any person who shall wrongfully interfere with such removal shall be
punished as provided in section
1-1-5 of this code. (1981 Code)
22-4-5: PROCEDURE FOR SELLING ARTICLES REMOVED FROM STREETS:
Any article or thing which may be removed in accordance with the preceding
section, if of sufficient value to more than pay the expense thereof, shall be
advertised in any newspaper circulated in the Village for ten (10) days and
sold by the Director of Public Works unless the same shall be sooner reclaimed
and the penalty and costs paid by the owners thereof. The proceeds of such sale
shall be paid into the Village treasury and the balance, if any after deducting
penalty and costs, shall be paid to any person furnishing satisfactory proof of
ownership. (1981 Code)
22-4-6: STORAGE ON PUBLIC WAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or store on any public way or
public property, building materials or any fuels or any goods, wares, supplies
or merchandise, or sign of any kind or description whatever. (1981 Code)
22-4-7: LEAVING GOODS ON SIDEWALKS DURING DELIVERY:
No person shall, while receiving or delivering goods, wares or merchandise,
permit the same to remain on any sidewalk or in any street longer than two (2)
hours, and for this purpose he shall occupy only so much of the outer edge of
the sidewalk in front of his store or building as will leave an unoccupied
space of four feet (4') in width of such sidewalk free from skids and
obstructions of every character for the use of pedestrians. (1981 Code)
22-4-8: PERSONS REQUIRED TO REMOVE SNOW AND ICE FROM PUBLIC SIDEWALKS FRONTING
OR ABUTTING PARCELS OR LOTS OWNED, OCCUPIED, LEASED OR OTHERWISE CONTROLLED BY
THEM WITHIN THE VILLAGE:
   A.   The owner, occupant, lessee or person otherwise legally in possession
and/or control of any lot or parcel in the Village shall remove and clear away,
or cause to be removed or cleared away, all snow and ice on the public sidewalk
fronting or abutting any such lot or parcel.
   B.   Snow and ice shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours after the
cessation of any fall of snow, sleet, or freezing rain; provided, however, in
the event snow and ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it cannot
reasonably be removed without damaging the sidewalk, the person or entity
charged with its removal, herein, shall, within the twenty four (24) hour time
period, cause a reasonable amount of sand, salt or other abrasive material to
be placed upon the entire sidewalk in order to make pedestrian travel thereon
reasonably safe; and as soon thereafter as weather permits, said person or
entity shall effect the removal of snow and ice as provided herein.
   C.   The fine for the violation of the requirements set forth in this
section shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) if paid within fourteen (14) days
after the date of the notice of the violation. If the fine is not paid within
fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice of violation, an additional
penalty of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be imposed. (Ord. 2010-0-93, 11-22-
2010)
ARTICLE 5
PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS
SECTION:
22-5-1: Permit - Prerequisite to Construction; Nonassignable
22-5-2: Permit - Application
22-5-3: Permit - Fees
22-5-4: Permit - Revocation
22-5-5: Bond Required
22-5-6: Deposit Prerequisite to Commencing Construction; Duty to Restore
Street; Restoration After Default
22-5-7: Use of Driveway Without Permit
22-5-8: Driveways in Certain Residential Zoned Districts
22-5-9: Driveway and Sidewalk to be Kept Clear
22-5-10: Parking Space, Paving
22-5-1: PERMIT - PREREQUISITE TO CONSTRUCTION; NONASSIGNABLE:
No person shall hereafter build, construct, maintain or use any driveway
leading from a public street into abutting property or disturb the sidewalk or
make an opening in any street or other public property for the purpose of
constructing or maintaining a driveway without first obtaining a permit so to
do from the Director of Public Works.
No such permit shall be issued except as hereinafter provided, and no such
permit shall be transferred or assigned, nor shall any right or privilege
thereunder be transferred or assigned except as hereinafter provided.
22-5-2: PERMIT - APPLICATION:
Application for a permit for a driveway shall be made to the Director of Public
Works and shall contain the name and address of the person by whom such
driveway is to be used or maintained and the proposed location and dimensions
of such driveway. Plans and specifications of such driveway shall be filed with
the Director of Public Works. All plans and specifications shall conform to the
standard plan and specifications and requirements for a driveway leading from a
public street into abutting property on file in the office of the Director of
Public Works.
22-5-3: PERMIT - FEES:
The permit fee to be charged for the construction of each driveway entrance
shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). Where a driveway is constructed or
maintained leading from a public street into abutting property within a
business, commercial or light industrial district as described and included in
the Zoning Ordinance, or any of the amendments thereof, and wherever the width
of the driveway entrance or entrances shall exceed twenty five feet (25'),
there shall be paid to the Village an annual permit fee of three dollars
($3.00) per lineal foot of width of driveway in excess of twenty five feet
(25'). The width on which the permit fee shall be charged shall be the width of
the driveway at the property line.
22-5-4: PERMIT - REVOCATION:
Permits issued under this Article shall contain conditions providing as
follows: The same may be revoked by the Board of Trustees at any time without
the consent of the grantee, in which case the authority and privileges granted
shall thereupon cease and terminate. Upon the termination by revocation,
expiration or otherwise of the authority, rights and privileges granted by such
permit, the driveway therein authorized shall be removed and the street space
where the same shall have been located shall be restored to its proper
condition to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works so that the
portion of the street space used for such driveway shall be safe for public use
and in the same condition as the remaining portion of such street and such
sidewalk space, at the sole expense of the grantee therein, without cost or
expense of any kind whatsoever to the Village; provided, that in the event of
the failure, neglect or refusal on the part of such grantee to remove and
restore such driveway when directed so to do, the Village may proceed to remove
and restore the same and charge the expense thereof to such grantee.
The issuance of the driveway permit is conditioned upon the continued
maintenance of the driveway in good condition and repair. If this condition is
not adhered to the driveway permit may be revoked.
22-5-5: BOND REQUIRED:
All applicants for a permit for a driveway leading from a public street into
abutting property within any commercial district or industrial district, shall
give a bond in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with sureties
to be approved by the Director of Public Works. Such bond shall be conditioned
among other things, that such permission and authority to construct such
driveway shall be subject to modifications or revocation by the Director of
Public Works without the consent of the applicant; that the applicant shall
indemnify and save harmless the Village from all liability for damages or
expense resulting from or by reason of the granting of such permission or by
reason of any act or thing done by the applicant by virtue of the permission
herein provided for and further conditioned for the prompt vacation of such
driveway upon thirty (30) days' notice from the Director of Public Works,
whenever in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, it shall be necessary
or advisable to have such driveway space or any portion thereof, vacated in
order to provide for the use of such driveway space or any portion thereof for
a public purpose; and conditioned further that upon termination by revocation,
expiration or otherwise of the authority, rights and privileges granted by such
permit, the driveway therein authorized shall be removed and the street
pavement, curbing, parkway and sidewalk space, where the same shall have been
located, shall be restored to its proper condition to the satisfaction of the
Director of Public Works, so that the portion of the street used for such
driveway shall be safe for public use and in the same condition as the
remaining portion of such street at the sole expense of the grantee therein
without cost or expense of any kind whatsoever to the Village.
22-5-6: DEPOSIT PREREQUISITE TO COMMENCING CONSTRUCTION; DUTY TO RESTORE
STREET; RESTORATION AFTER DEFAULT:
No person shall construct a driveway unless the applicant therefor has
deposited with the Village Clerk's office a sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00) in cash or by a certified check or a larger sum of money sufficient
in the judgment of the Director of Public Works to defray the cost and expense
of restoration once work is completed. Every such applicant disturbing any
street for the purpose of constructing a driveway shall, within ten (10) days
after so disturbing it, restore the same to such a condition as will meet the
approval of the Director of Public Works. When such street is so restored by
such applicant, the sum so paid shall be refunded after approval of the
Director of Public Works to such applicant. If such applicant shall fail to so
restore the premises including but not limited to street pavement or sidewalk
or any sewer, water pipe, street lighting cable or conduit to the proper
condition within ten (10) days after the same is disturbed by him, then the
Director of Public Works shall cause the same to be restored in a manner to
meet his approval and the cost thereof shall be paid out of such deposited sum.
22-5-7: USE OF DRIVEWAY WITHOUT PERMIT:
If any person now using or maintaining a driveway leading from a public street
into abutting property shall fail to take out a permit for such use as herein
provided, then the Director of Public Works shall proceed to remove such
driveway and close the opening in connection therewith at the owner's expense.
22-5-8: DRIVEWAYS IN CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL ZONED DISTRICTS:
No driveway shall be installed leading from a public street to any private
property in a single or two (2) family zoned district unless such driveway
serves as an ingress leading to a legal parking space (as defined in the
Village Zoning Ordinance) located on such private property. (1981 Code)
22-5-9: DRIVEWAY AND SIDEWALK TO BE KEPT CLEAR:
No vehicle parked on a parkway crossing driveway shall be parked in such a
manner so as to extend beyond the curb line of the street or block public
sidewalk.
Where a driveway is permitted at or near street intersections, where such
streets have been established as through streets, boulevards or stop
intersections, no driveway shall be used by vehicles as a means to avoid
observance of the regulations that all vehicles must come to a complete stop
before entering a through street, boulevard or stop intersection.
No use shall be made of any driveway except in connection with the use of the
abutting property. (Ord. 1993-0-28, 4-19-93)
22-5-10: PARKING SPACE; PAVING:
No motor vehicle shall be parked on any unenclosed parking space having a
capacity of four (4) automobiles or less established on any lot where the
principal building is constructed after October 29, 1969 unless such space
shall meet the following structural minimal requirements:
   A.   Flexible Pavement: An eight inch (8") macadam base course or other
materials of the required thickness to obtain the same structural equivalents
and a two inch (2") surface course consisting of bituminous brand mix
materials, or;
   B.   Rigid Pavement: Six inch (6") Portland cement concrete pavement
constructed in accordance with recommendations published by the Portland Cement
Association.
All materials and construction procedures shall be in conformance with the
specifications provided in the standard specifications for road and bridge
construction adopted by the Department of Public Works and Buildings, Division
of Highways, State of Illinois, for pavements constructed in accordance with
subsection A of this Section.
Three (3) copies of the specifications adopted herein by reference are on file
in the office of the Village Clerk in accordance with provisions of the
Illinois Municipal Code.
ARTICLE 6
UNDERGROUND CONSTRUCTION AND USE
SECTION:
22-6-1: Permit - Required; Exception
22-6-2: Permit - Application
22-6-3: Permit - Bond Required
22-6-4: Permit - Fees
22-6-5: Permit - Agreement to Accompany Application
22-6-6: Permit - Issuance; Refusal
22-6-7: Permit - Cancellation of Permits Issued Under Terms of Prior Ordinances
22-6-8: Limitations on Use of Subspace - Generally
22-6-9: Limitations on Use of Subspace - Uses Prohibited
22-6-10: Limitations on Use of Subspace - Special Consent Required; Restoration
Deposit Required
22-6-11: Rights Reserved by Village
22-6-12: Failure to Procure Permit
22-6-13: Construction Specifications
22-6-14: Time Limit for Completing Work
22-6-15: Notice to Public Utility Companies
22-6-16: Protection of Openings - Generally
22-6-17: Protection of Openings - During Construction
22-6-18: Police Reports of Unsafe Openings
22-6-19: Unsafe Opening
22-6-20: Records and Inspection
22-6-21: Notice by Code Enforcement Director of Subsurface Areas in Use or
Intended to be Used; Notification to Users of Provisions of this Article
22-6-22: Certificate of Survey of Subsurface Area, Etc.
22-6-1: PERMIT - REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any space under the surface of any
street, alley or other public place, or to cause or require any vault or other
structure to be constructed or made in any street, alley or other public place
except in that portion of the street, alley or other public place abutting the
property owned or occupied by him and except in connection with the use of such
property, without first having obtained and paid for and having in full force
and effect a permit therefor as hereinafter provided. The provisions of this
Article shall apply to any space underneath the surface of any street or other
public ground that may heretofore have been or may hereafter be used and to any
structures that have heretofore been or may hereafter be constructed.
22-6-2: PERMIT - APPLICATION:
Any person desiring to procure a permit for the use of any space underneath the
surface of any street or other public ground shall make and sign a written
application to the Director of Public Works upon forms provided by the Village
at least one week before starting the excavation. Such application shall give
the name and address of the applicant, the location of the existing or proposed
vault or the existing or proposed space underneath the surface of the street or
other public ground or any structure therein, the use made or intended to be
made thereof, the nature of all fixtures, machinery and appliances therein or
to be placed therein, and such other information as the Director of Public
Works may require. The application shall be accompanied by plans showing the
locations and dimensions of the existing or proposed vault or the existing or
proposed space underneath the surface of the street or other public ground or
any structure therein, the number, size and location of all existing or
proposed openings therein from the street, the method or proposed method for
protecting such openings, the character of the existing or proposed
construction, and the existing or proposed method of draining the space
underneath the surface of the street or other public ground.
The Director of Public Works shall immediately upon receipt thereof refer such
application and plans to the Building and Zoning Director for his action.
22-6-3: PERMIT - BOND REQUIRED:
The application required by the preceding section shall be accompanied by a
bond in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), approved as to
sufficiency by the Director of Public Works and as to form by the Corporation
Counsel and conditioned that the person to whom such permit shall be issued,
his heirs, successors or assigns, will save and keep harmless from any and all
losses or damages or claims of damages arising from or out of the use of the
space or structure therein mentioned and for the maintenance of the street,
alley or other public place or the sidewalk over such space, as the case may
be, in such condition that such street, alley or other public place or the
sidewalk shall be at all times after such structure is completed, or such space
is covered, safe for public use and for the full and complete protection of the
Village against any and all litigation growing out of the granting of such
permit or anything done under such permit and for the prompt and full payment
of all compensation or permit fees hereunder required, during his ownership or
possession of such property, so long as such permit shall be in force and for
the faithful performance and observance of all of the terms and conditions of
this Article. Whenever the Director of Public Works shall be of the opinion
that the sureties on any bond have become insufficient a new bond for such
permit shall thereupon be filed with sureties to be approved by the Director of
Public Works and the Corporation Counsel. Any person to whom a permit shall
have been granted, who shall convey the property to which such permit applies,
in fee, may notify the Director of Public Works, in writing, of the conveyance
in fee of such property and furnish the Director of Public Works, in writing,
the name and address of the purchaser thereof. Upon the giving of such notice,
in writing, and furnishing the name and address of such purchaser, such person
may procure from the Director of Public Works a permit to close up the space
being used underneath the surface of the street or other public ground in a
manner similar to the balance of the street, sidewalk or other public ground in
front of such premises and upon completion of such work to the satisfaction of
the Director of Public Works, all liability under the bond theretofore given by
such owner shall cease and determine, except as to the acts happening or causes
of action accruing prior to the completion of the work of closing such space to
the satisfaction of such Director. If, however, such purchaser shall pay a
transfer fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) and shall execute a new bond
conditioned as aforesaid and sign an agreement as provided herein, a renewal
permit shall be issued to such purchaser covering and applying to the same
vault or space specified in the original permit and it shall not be necessary
for the person to whom the original permit was issued to close up such opening,
but the filing of the bond and agreement and securing of a new permit by the
purchaser shall act as a release of liability under the bond originally given,
except as to causes of action accruing prior to the filing of such new bond.
The bond required in this Section shall be renewed and maintained, until such
time as the use of the space beneath the streets has terminated and the area is
restored to its original condition.
The permittee in lieu of the bond aforesaid, may furnish the Village a
certificate of insurance showing the Village included as a party insured in an
amount of not less than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), insuring
the Village from all losses, damages or claims arising out of the use of the
space designated, and a covenant running with the land agreeing to restore the
street or area when use of the vault is terminated.
22-6-4: PERMIT - FEES:
The fee to be charged for permits issued under this Article, by the Director of
Public Works, shall be based upon the number of square feet occupied by the
vault, space or structure under the surface of the sidewalk street or other
public ground, for which such permits are given. A fee of seven dollars fifty
cents ($7.50) will be charged for any space not exceeding one hundred (100)
square feet in area and an additional fifteen cents ($.15) per square foot will
be charged for each square foot in excess of one hundred (100) square feet or
fraction thereof.
Where the party to whom the original permit has been issued has transferred his
interest to another party, as hereinabove provided, the purchaser or transferee
of such interest shall pay the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) as the fee for
the issuance of a renewal permit.
All payments hereunder shall be due on the first day of January of each year
and shall expire on the thirty first day of December following the date of
issuance and when issued for a period of less than one year the fee to be paid
shall be a proportionate part of the fee fixed by this Section; provided, that
no fee shall be less than one-third (1/3) of the annual fee.
22-6-5: PERMIT - AGREEMENT TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION:
The application referred to in Section
22-6-2 of this Code shall be accompanied by a written agreement upon a blank
form provided by the Village and signed by the owner of the abutting property,
that he, his heirs, successors and assigns shall permit the use of such space
underneath the surface of the street or other public ground as set forth in
this Article, hold the Village harmless from any claims for damages to himself
or the occupants of such estate resulting from gas, sewage or water leaking
into such excavation, release, relinquish, vacate and remove without cost to
the Village all machinery, fixtures and structural parts of or in such vault or
space underneath the surface of the street or other public ground within thirty
(30) days after having been ordered in writing to do so by the Director of
Public Works or after the revocation of the permit notwithstanding payment of
rent or fee, that in case of failure to comply with the written order of the
Director of Public Works within the time specified the Director of Public Works
may cause the same to be done and all expenses incurred or damages paid by the
Village on account thereof shall be paid by the person to whom the permit is
granted to the Village upon demand, that the Village may at any time enter upon
the premises for inspection and proper maintenance of anything therein, and
that the permit is granted with the understanding that the occupancy and use of
such space underneath the sidewalk by the applicant, his heirs, successors and
assigns is merely an accommodation and no right, title or interest of the
public is in any way waived or abridged thereby.
22-6-6: PERMIT - ISSUANCE; REFUSAL:
Upon the filing of the application, bond and agreement as required in this
Article, and upon the review of the application and plans by the Building and
Zoning Director, the Director of Public Works may, upon his approval of the
application and agreement and the payment to the Village of the fee required by
Section
22-6-4 of this Code, issue to the applicant a permit for one year. All permits
shall state clearly the location and size of the space underneath the surface
of the street or other public ground, the dates of issuance and expiration of
the permit, the fee paid and the name and address of the person to whom the
permit is issued. Permits shall be consecutively numbered, nontransferable and
nonassignable and revocable by the Director of Public Works upon thirty (30)
days' notice at any time he shall deem revocation advisable for the protection
of the Village's interest or the safety of the public or for a violation of the
provisions of this Article or any order issued pursuant thereto.
A refusal of a permit by the Director of Public Works shall be reviewed by the
Board of Trustees at the request of the applicant.
22-6-7: PERMIT - CANCELLATION OF PERMITS ISSUED UNDER TERMS OF PRIOR
ORDINANCES:
Whenever any person holding a permit for the construction or maintenance or use
of any vault or space underneath the surface of the street or other public
ground, which shall have been issued or made under the terms of any ordinance
or legal order heretofore in force, the conditions of which have been and are
now being fully complied with, shall apply for a permit under the provisions of
this Article and shall desire to have the permit or contract heretofore entered
into cancelled, the Director of Public Works shall cancel the same as regards
any liability thereunder arising after the date of the issuance of the new
permit hereunder, but such contract or permit and the bond given therewith
shall remain in full force and effect as to all rights and liabilities accruing
under the same, including all amounts due the Village for fees or compensation
under the same, up to the time of such cancellation.
22-6-8: LIMITATIONS ON USE OF SUBSPACE - GENERALLY:
No person shall hereafter erect or build or cause or permit any vault or space
to be made under an alley or entrance to an alley from the street or which
shall extend further than the line of the sidewalk or curbstone of any street.
22-6-9: LIMITATIONS ON USE OF SUBSPACE - USES PROHIBITED:
Boilers or other heating appliances, gasoline, gas or steam engines, pumps and
plumbing fixtures, gasoline, petroleum or gas storage tanks, flammable or
combustible materials or any pipe or fixture generating or emitting gas, steam
or offensive odors shall not be located or permitted in any space underneath
the surface of the street or other public ground. No fans or pipes ejecting
vitiated or superheated air from the adjoining building or exhaust pipe causing
disagreeable noise shall be located in or open into a space underneath the
surface of the street or other public ground.
22-6-10: LIMITATIONS ON USE OF SUBSPACE - SPECIAL CONSENT REQUIRED; RESTORATION
DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
No vault or space underneath the surface of any street or other public ground
shall be constructed so as to interfere with any sewer or water pipe, fire
hydrant, manhole, gas pipe, trees, lampost, street lighting cable or conduit,
or other public work or improvements nor with any electrical conduit carrying
fire alarm or police wires, unless by the written consent of the Director of
Public Works specially granted therefor, and no such consent shall be granted
until the applicant therefor has paid to the Director of Public Works a sum of
money sufficient in his judgment to defray the cost and expense of removing,
rebuilding, relaying or replacing such existing underground facility or
appurtenance. Every such applicant disturbing any such public work or
improvement enumerated above shall, within ten (10) days after so disturbing
it, restore the same to such a condition as will meet the approval of the
Director of Public Works. When such public work or improvement is so restored
by such applicant, the sum so paid to the Director of Public Works shall be
refunded by him to such applicant. If the applicant shall fail to restore such
public work or improvement within the time prescribed, the Director of Public
Works shall cause the work to be done and the cost thereof shall be paid out of
the sum deposited by the applicant and the balance, if any, refunded.
22-6-11: RIGHTS RESERVED BY VILLAGE:
The Village in granting a permit for a vault or space underneath the surface of
the street or other public ground reserves the right at any time to construct
and maintain under, over or through such vault or space, water or gas pipes,
drains, conduits for electric heat or power, sewers or other pipes, street
lighting cables or conduits or underground work needed for the public service
that the Director of Public Works may deem necessary to be placed in, below,
over or through the space occupied by the vault or space underneath the surface
of the street or other public ground, without compensation.
22-6-12: FAILURE TO PROCURE PERMIT:
Any person now using space underneath any sidewalk or other public place or any
person constructing or commencing the construction of a vault or the use of
space underneath the surface of the street or other public ground, who fails to
procure a permit as herein provided, shall, in addition to the other penalties
imposed by this Article, be required by the Director of Public Works to remove
every such structure and restore the ground to its original condition within
thirty (30) days after the service upon him of a written notice so to do. In
default, thereof, the Director of Public Works shall perform the work and the
costs shall constitute a debt of such owner to the Village, the same to be
recovered in a civil action.
22-6-13: CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
All vaults or space underneath the surface of any street or other public place
or any structure therein and their coverings, sidewalk lifts and openings in
sidewalks, shall be constructed in accordance with the plans, prepared, signed
and sealed by a registered structural engineer and approved by the Director of
Public Works.
   A.   All vaults or space underneath the surface of any street or other
public ground shall be enclosed with a sufficient concrete, stone or brick wall
or brick arches between iron or steel beams to retain the roadway of the
street, and the side, end or party walls of any building which shall extend
under the sidewalk, shall be of sufficient thickness to sustain such enclosing
walls or arch.
   B.   All vaults or space underneath the surface of any street or other
public ground shall be covered with a safe and substantial noncombustible
cover, and such covering shall be flush and level and kept flush and level with
the sidewalk. When a vault or space underneath the surface of any street or
other public place is covered with glass in iron or concrete frames, such glass
shall not be more than four inches (4") square each and the top surface of the
same shall be rough and graded in such a manner as to be entirely safe for
pedestrians. Such glass shall be kept in good repair at all times. Floor lights
when used in sidewalks shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the width of the
sidewalk perpendicular to the curb.
   C.   The aperture or opening in the sidewalk over a vault or space shall be
covered with a strong glass or substantial iron or steel plate and frame with a
second top surface and rabbeted flush with the sidewalk. The dimensions of the
door in any direction shall not exceed the dimensions of the opening by more
than six inches (6"). All covers shall be subject to the approval of the
Director of Public Works. When any such cover is placed in any sidewalk, it
shall be placed as near as practicable to the outside line of the curb and
shall not exceed in area one-half (1/2) the width of the sidewalk. There shall
not be more than one opening for each twenty five feet (25') of street frontage
of any building and such openings shall not be closer than fifteen feet (15')
to each other.
   D.   All vaults or space underneath the surface of any street or other
public ground shall be thoroughly ventilated, properly drained and paved.
   E.   No open gratings or openings of a similar kind shall hereafter be
installed in the sidewalk for the purpose of obtaining light or ventilation or
for any other purpose.
   F.   When a hydrant bend exists in connection with a vault or space
underneath the surface of any street or other public ground, it shall be
protected by a brick wall not less than eight inches (8") in thickness, built
from the bottom of the basement to the underside of the sidewalk, which shall
be covered on both sides with plaster so as to be watertight or shall have
other protection of equal value.
   G.   The sidewalk over a vault or space shall be laid according to the
sidewalk specifications as provided in this Code for sidewalks on solid ground.
Where an open space is to be covered by a sidewalk, the Director of Public
Works shall require proper protection and reinforcement of such sidewalk.
Whenever the grade is changed, the top surface of any vault or space underneath
the surface of the street or other public ground must be changed and repaved at
the expense of the owner of the abutting property.
22-6-14: TIME LIMIT FOR COMPLETING WORK:
All vaults or space underneath the surface of the street or other public ground
shall be completed and the ground closed over them within thirty (30) days
after their construction has been commenced, unless an extension of time shall
be granted by the Director of Public Works.
22-6-15: NOTICE TO PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANIES:
Owners of abutting property shall notify the public utility companies concerned
at the time of construction when the removal or relocation of any underground
construction is made necessary by the construction of a vault or space
underneath the surface of the street or other public ground.
22-6-16: PROTECTION OF OPENINGS - GENERALLY:
No person shall remove or insecurely fix, or cause, procure, suffer or permit
to be removed or insecurely fixed, so that the same can be moved in its bed,
any covering over any such space, but nothing contained in this Article shall
prevent the owner or occupant of the building with which such space shall be
connected from removing the covering for the purpose of using such space;
provided, that he encloses such opening or aperture in a reasonably safe
manner, subject to approval by the Director of Public Works, and keeps the same
enclosed while such covering shall be removed; provided further, that he shall
not remove such covering until after sunrise of any day and shall replace it
before one-half (1/2) hour after sunset. Such space openings shall be kept
closed when not in use.
22-6-17: PROTECTION OF OPENINGS - DURING CONSTRUCTION:
During construction the owner of any building before which a vault or space
under the surface is being constructed or provided and every person having
charge of such work during the whole of the time such vault or space is opened
during the construction period shall cause the same to be guarded and enclosed
in a reasonably safe manner, subject to approval by the Director of Public
Works, and at night he shall cause a lighted lamp to be placed and kept thereon
in such a manner as to cast a light upon such vault or steps during the whole
of every night.
22-6-18: POLICE REPORTS OF UNSAFE OPENINGS:
The Police Department shall report to the Director of Public Works the name and
address of the owner or occupant of any property having a space under the
sidewalk thereof, the cover of which is broken or has a slippery surface.
Thereupon the Director of Public Works shall forthwith notify the owner or
occupant to repair or remove such covering within a specified time and
substitute another that will provide secure footing for pedestrians.
22-6-19: UNSAFE OPENING:
Whenever any vault or space is not covered or secured as provided in this
Article or in the opinion of the Director of Public Works is unsafe or
inconvenient for public travel, such Director may order the same to be placed
in a safe condition satisfactory to him and if the same shall not be done
within ten (10) days after service of written notice on the owner or person in
possession of the premises, the Director may make such change and the expense
thereof shall be paid by such owner in possession of the premises.
22-6-20: RECORDS AND INSPECTION:
The office of the Village Clerk shall keep a complete record of all spaces
underneath the surface of the street or other public ground and from time to
time the Director of Public Works shall make or cause to be made such
inspection of all spaces as may be necessary to determine if the provisions of
this Article are being complied with.
22-6-21: NOTICE BY CODE ENFORCEMENT DIRECTOR OF SUBSURFACE AREAS IN USE OR
INTENDED TO BE USED; NOTIFICATION TO USERS OF PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE:
It shall be the duty of the Director of Code Enforcement to report to the
Director of Public Works the spaces underneath the portions of the sidewalks or
other public places that are being or are intended to be used by any abutting
property owner and each of such property owners shall there after be notified
by the Director of Public Works, of the provisions of this Article.
22-6-22: CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY OF SUBSURFACE AREA, ETC.:
It shall be the duty of every person for whom a space underneath the surface of
the street or public ground may be in process of construction to procure the
same to be measured by a competent surveyor and to deliver to the Director of
Public Works a certificate of such measurement signed by the surveyor before
the arching of such space or cover shall be constructed. The enlargement or
increase in size of any such space shall be construed to be an original new,
independent and separate construction and shall be governed by the provisions
of this Article as in the case of original, new, independent and separate
construction thereof.
ARTICLE 7
OUTDOOR BENCHES
SECTION:
22-7-1: Definitions
22-7-2: Where Prohibited
22-7-3: Permit - Required
22-7-4: Permit - Application
22-7-5: Permit - Liability Insurance Requirements
22-7-6: Permit - Expiration; Fee; Removal
22-7-7: Permit - Grounds for Denial; Cancellation
22-7-8: Permit - Revocation of Permit
22-7-9: Specifications
22-7-10: Display of Permittee's Name and Permit Number
22-7-11: Duties of Permittee
22-7-12: Advertising Prohibited
22-7-13: Installation and Maintenance Supervision
22-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
BENCH: A seat located upon public property along any public way for the
accommodation of pedestrians.
STREET: Any public thoroughfare or way including the sidewalk, the parkway and
any other public property bordering upon a public way.
22-7-2: WHERE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect a bench within the Village at any
of the following locations:
   A.   In any alley.
   B.   At any location where the distance from the face of the curb to the
property line is less than eight feet (8').
   C.   At a point less than thirty inches (30") from the face of the curb to
the front of the bench; each bench must be kept parallel with the curb.
22-7-3: PERMIT - REQUIRED:
No person shall install or maintain any bench on any street without a permit. A
separate permit must be obtained for each bench, which permit shall be valid
only for the particular location specified thereon. Each permit shall bear a
separate number and not more than two (2) permits shall be issued for any one
location. All said permits shall be issued by the Village Clerk.
22-7-4: PERMIT - APPLICATION:
No bench permit shall be issued except upon written application, made upon a
form prescribed by the Village Clerk, showing the proposed location of each
bench, and such other information as the Director of Public Works may require.
Detailed plans and specifications of each bench shall be supplied by the
applicant.
22-7-5: PERMIT - LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
No permit required by this Article shall be issued unless the applicant shall
post and maintain with the Village Clerk, public liability insurance as
hereinafter provided:
   A.   The policy of insurance shall be conditioned that the permittee will
indemnify and save harmless the Village, its officers and employees from any
and all losses, costs, damages, expenses or liabilities which may result from
or arise out of the granting of the permit, to the installation or maintenance
of the bench for which the permit is issued and that the permittee will pay any
and all loss or damage that may be sustained by any person as a result of, or
which may be caused by or arise out of such installation or maintenance. The
policy of insurance shall be maintained in its original amount by the permittee
at his expense at all times during the period for which the permit is in
effect. In the event that two (2) or more permits are issued to one permittee,
one such policy of insurance may be furnished to cover two (2) or more benches
and each policy shall be of such a type that its coverage shall be
automatically restored immediately from and after the time of the reporting of
any accident from which liability may thereafter accrue. The Village shall be
named as a party insured in said policy.
   B.   The limit of liability upon any policy of insurance posted pursuant to
the requirements of this Article shall in no case be less than one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries to one person and two hundred
thousand ($200,000.00) for injuries to more than one person.
22-7-6: PERMIT - EXPIRATION; FEE; REMOVAL:
Each permit issued under this Article shall expire on May 1 next following the
date of issuance unless renewed. A fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each bench
shall be charged annually. Application for renewal must be made prior to the
expiration date, and must be accompanied by the renewal fee.
22-7-7: PERMIT - GROUNDS FOR DENIAL; CANCELLATION:
The application for a permit under the provisions of this Article shall be
denied if the Director of Public Works shall find that the maintenance of the
bench would tend to obstruct passage along any public way or to create a hazard
or would otherwise be detrimental to the public safety, welfare or convenience.
The application for a permit shall be canceled and denied if the applicant
fails to deposit the annual fee and accept the permit within ten (10) days
after notice of the approval of the application by the Director of Public
Works. (1981 Code)
22-7-8: PERMIT; REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The Director of Public Works may revoke or deny any permit issued under the
provisions of this Article for any violation of any of the provisions of this
Article for any fraud or misrepresentation in the application, or for any
reason which would have been grounds for denial of the application.
Any permit shall be canceled and revoked if the permittee fails to install the
bench within sixty (60) days after the date of the issuance of the permit.
(1981 Code)
22-7-9: SPECIFICATIONS:
No bench installed under the provisions of this Article shall be more than
forty two inches (42") high nor more than two feet six inches (2'6") wide, nor
more than seven feet (7') long overall. The backrest and seat of the bench
shall each be constructed of a minimum of three (3) boards or strips or slats
made from two inch (2") stock and shall each be limited to a maximum width of
seven inches (7") and shall be of equal width in the back and in equal width in
the seat. There shall be a minimum open space between slats of one and one-half
inches (11/2") on the back and one-half inch (1/2") on the seat. (1981 Code)
22-7-10: DISPLAY OF PERMITTEE'S NAME AND PERMIT NUMBER:
Each bench installed under the provisions of this Article must have displayed
thereon, in a conspicuous place, the name of the permittee number. (1981 Code)
22-7-11: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
It shall be the duty of any person holding a permit under the provisions of
this Article to maintain each bench at all times in a safe condition and at its
proper and lawful location, and to inspect each bench periodically. (1981 Code)
22-7-12: ADVERTISING PROHIBITED:
No advertising matter or sign whatever shall be displayed upon any bench
installed under the provisions of this Article. (1981 Code)
22-7-13: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE SUPERVISION:
The Director of Public Works shall supervise the erection and maintenance of
all benches installed under the provisions of this Article. (1981 Code)
ARTICLE 8
STREET NAMES AND HOUSE NUMBERS
SECTION:
22-8-1: Continuation Of Street Names
22-8-2: North-South Base Or Dividing Lines
22-8-3: System Of Numbering
22-8-4: Lot Number Atlas
22-8-1: CONTINUATION OF STREET NAMES:
The names of the streets and avenues within the Village shall be and remain as
follows unless they or any of them are changed by ordinance or resolution
subsequent thereto:
      Adams Street
      Alexander Lane1
      Augusta Street
      Austin Boulevard
      Baldwin Lane
      Belleforte Avenue
      Berkshire Street
      Bishop Quarter Lane1
      Carpenter Avenue
      Cedar Court
      Chestnut Lane
      Chicago Avenue
      Clarence Avenue
      Clinton Avenue
      Columbian Avenue
      Cuyler Avenue
      Division Street
      East Avenue
      Edmer Avenue
      Elizabeth Court
      Elizabeth Trail1
      Elmwood Avenue
      Erie Court1
      Erie Street
      Euclid Avenue
      Fair Oaks Avenue
      Fillmore Street
      Flournoy Street
      Forest Avenue
      Forest Place1
      Francisco Terrace1
      Frank Lloyd Wright Lane1
      Garfield Street
      Greenfield Street
      Grove Avenue
      Gunderson Avenue
      Harlem Avenue
      Harlem Court
      Harrison Street
      Harvard Street
      Harvey Avenue
      Hayes Avenue
      Hemingway Lane1
      Highland Avenue
      Holley Court
      Home Avenue
      Humphrey Avenue
      Hunter Court
      Iowa Street
      Jackson Boulevard
      Kenilworth Avenue
      Lake Street
      LeMoyne Parkway
      Lenox Street
      Lexington Street
      Lincoln Trail
      Linden Avenue
      Lombard Avenue
      Lyman Avenue
      Madison Street
      Maple Avenue
      Mapleton Avenue
      Marion Court
      Marion Street
      Miller Avenue
      Monroe Street
      North Avenue
      North Boulevard
      Oak Park Avenue
      Ontario Court
      Ontario Street
      Paulina Street
      Pennsylvania Way
      Percy Julian Square1
      Pleasant Place
      Pleasant Street
      Prairie Way
      Randolph Street
      Ridgeland Avenue
      Roosevelt Road
      Rossell Avenue
      Schneider Avenue
      Scoville Avenue
      South Boulevard
      Superior Street
      Susan Collins Lane1
      Taylor Avenue
      Thomas Street
      Van Buren Street
      Walnut Way
      Washington Boulevard
      Wenonah Avenue
      Wesley Avenue
      Westgate Street
      Wisconsin Avenue
      Woodbine Avenue
      Note:
1.   Indicates a privately owned street recognized by the Village of Oak Park
for the purposes of the delivery of mail and emergency services.
(Ord. 15-041, 1-20-2015)
22-8-2: NORTH-SOUTH BASE OR DIVIDING LINES:
That part of each north and south street lying south of the right of way of the
Galena division of the Chicago And Northwestern Railway Company, shall bear
prefix "South" and that part lying north of such line shall bear prefix
"North"; except, however, that on the west side of Austin Boulevard and on the
east side of Harlem Avenue, the base line shall be Madison Street, and that
part of Austin Boulevard and Harlem Avenue lying north of Madison Street shall
bear the prefix "North" and that part of these streets lying south of Madison
Street shall bear the prefix "South". (1981 Code)
22-8-3: SYSTEM OF NUMBERING:
   A.   On all of the east and west streets of the Village the method of
numbering houses and lots thereon is established as follows: Each twenty five
feet (25') of frontage shall be given a separate number and numbered
consecutively from the eastern limits of the Village west to the western limits
of the Village. The odd numbers shall be on the south and the even numbers on
the north sides. The first numbers beginning at Austin Boulevard, except on
Roosevelt Road and on North Avenue, shall be 1 and 2 respectively. The first
number on Roosevelt Road shall be 6000 and the first number on North Avenue
shall be 6001, thence westerly to Harlem Avenue. The numbers shall be graduated
upon the basis of eight (8) blocks in each mile (i.e., there shall be assigned
to each mile eight hundred (800) numbers, or one hundred (100) numbers to each
1/8 of a mile; such numbers shall change from 100 to the succeeding hundred at
the intersecting street nearest to such 1/8 mile line).
   B.   On all of the north and south streets of the Village, except on Austin
Boulevard and Harlem Avenue, as hereinafter specified, the right of way of the
Galena division of the Chicago And Northwestern Railway Company shall be taken
as the dividing line and each twenty five feet (25') of frontage shall be given
a separate number, extending north to the northern limits and south to the
southern limits of the Village, the first numbers north or south of such
baseline being numbered 100 and 101, respectively. The odd numbers shall be on
the west side of such streets and the even numbers on the east side of such
streets. There shall be assigned to each mile eight hundred (800) numbers, or
one hundred (100) numbers to each one-eighth (1/8) of a mile, with the
following exceptions:
      1.   In the territory north of such baseline and west of and including
both sides of Oak Park Avenue: All numbers south of Ontario Street shall be
from 100 to 200; between Ontario Street and Erie Street, from 200 to 300;
between Erie Street and Superior Street (and Superior Street extended from Oak
Park Avenue to Forest Avenue) from 300 to 400; and between Superior Street and
Chicago Avenue, from 400 to 500.
      2.   In the district south of such baseline bounded by Madison Street,
Harrison Street, Grove Avenue and Harlem Avenue, the numbers between Madison
Street and Monroe Street shall be from 500 to 600; between Monroe Street and
Adams Street, from 600 to 700; between Adams Street and Jackson Boulevard, from
700 to 800; and between Jackson Boulevard and Harrison Street, from 800 to 900.
      3.   In the district south of Harvard Street, entirely across the
Village, the numbers between Harvard Street and 12th Street (Roosevelt Road)
shall be from 1100 to 1200.
      4.   The method of numbering the houses and lots fronting on Austin
Boulevard and on Harlem Avenue in the Village is hereby established as follows:
Each twenty five feet (25') of frontage in the Village shall be numbered from
Madison Street as a baseline, beginning with number 2 on Austin Boulevard and
with number 1 on Harlem Avenue at the north line of Madison Street and
increasing toward the north, and beginning with number 2 on Austin Boulevard
and with number 1 on Harlem Avenue at the south line of Madison Street and
increasing toward the south, using the same numerical basis or system, as
nearly as practicable, as that now adopted by the city of Chicago and
applicable to the east side of Austin Boulevard. (1981 Code)
22-8-4: LOT NUMBER ATLAS:
The Director of Public Works is hereby directed to prepare proper plats or maps
showing each lot in the Village with the proper number thereon, in accordance
with and as provided by section
22-8-3 of this article, which plats or maps when made and approved by the Board
of Trustees shall become a part of the records of the Village and such plats
constituting a lot number atlas shall be open to inspection during the office
hours of such Director. (1981 Code)
ARTICLE 9
HOUSE MOVERS
SECTION:
22-9-1: License to Engage in Business - Required
22-9-2: License to Engage in Business - Bond Required
22-9-3: Permit and Payment of Fee Required
22-9-4: Safety Precautions; Preservation of Streets
22-9-5: Penalty for Failure to Observe Time Limit in Streets and Alleys
22-9-1: LICENSE TO ENGAGE IN BUSINESS - REQUIRED:
No person, except a licensed house mover, shall move any house or other
building over, across or along any street or alley within the limits of the
Village. Before engaging in such occupation, every person shall annually obtain
a license therefor from the Clerk of the Village upon payment of the license
fee as provided in Chapter 8 of this Code.
22-9-2: LICENSE TO ENGAGE IN BUSINESS - BOND REQUIRED:
No license required by the preceding section shall be granted until the party
applying therefor shall have given a bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the Village
Clerk, conditioned, among other things, that such party will pay any and all
damages which may happen to any tree, pavement or sidewalk or any other
property belonging to the Village, whether such damage shall be inflicted by
such party or his agents, employees or workmen; conditioned, also, that such
party will immediately pay any judgment that may be obtained against the
Village as well as any costs the Village may incur in consequence of the
granting of such license and all the acts done thereunder, and will, in all
things, strictly comply with the conditions of his permit.
22-9-3: PERMIT AND PAYMENT OF FEE REQUIRED:
Each licensed house mover shall, in each and every instance, before moving any
building, obtain a written permit to do so from the Village Clerk and shall pay
the requisite fee of thirty cents ($.30) per one thousand (1,000) cubic feet of
building to be moved with a minimum fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). Thereupon
the Village Clerk (after consultation with the Director of Public Works) shall
issue a permit stating specifically the conditions, prescribing the route to be
taken and limiting the time for the removal; provided, however, that no permit
shall be issued for the removal of any buildings in the Village, except under
the requirements of the provisions of this Code.
22-9-4: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS; PRESERVATION OF STREETS:
Every house mover, while using any portion of the street or sidewalk, shall
cause an adequate number of warning lights to be placed in a conspicuous place
in front and one in the rear of any building, or any other obstruction placed
in the street by him, from sunset to sunrise of each night. He shall also leave
all streets and alleys over which he has moved any building in as good
condition as they were before being so used by him and shall strictly comply
with the terms of his permit.
22-9-5: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO OBSERVE TIME LIMIT IN STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The owner of any building or the contractor for its removal, either or both,
who shall suffer the same to be or remain in any of the streets or alleys or
upon any of the public grounds of the Village for any time longer than may be
specified in the permit, shall forfeit a penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) and a
like penalty for every twenty four (24) hours the same shall be continued and
unless such building is removed within such reasonable time as the Board of
Trustees may determine, the Board of Trustees may declare the same to be a
nuisance and cause its removal.
ARTICLE 10
COMMERCIAL USE OF SIDEWALK SPACE
SECTION:
22-10-1: Definitions
22-10-2: Use Of Sidewalks For Restaurant Tables And Floral Displays
22-10-3: Use Of Sidewalks For Canopy Supports
22-10-4: Use Of Sidewalk Space For Public Outdoor Furniture
22-10-5: Insurance
22-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
BENCH: A seat located upon public property along any public way for the
accommodation of pedestrians.
CANOPY(IES): A "canopy" shall be as defined in section
7-7-3 of this code, as amended.
FLORAL DISPLAY: A display of flowers, shrubs, trees, ornamental plants, bridal
bouquets, funeral floral designs or growing plants.
FLORAL SHOP: A business that sells at wholesale or retail flowers, shrubs,
trees, ornamental plants, bridal bouquets, funeral floral designs or growing
plants.
SIDEWALK: Shall be as defined in section
1-1-2 of this code, as amended.
STREET: Any public thoroughfare or way including the sidewalk, the parkway and
any other public property bordering upon a public way.
VILLAGE MANAGER: The Village Manager or the Village Manager's designee. (Ord.
15-074, 3-16-2015)
22-10-2: USE OF SIDEWALKS FOR RESTAURANT TABLES AND FLORAL DISPLAYS:
The Village Manager is authorized to issue permits for the use of public
sidewalks for restaurant tables and for floral displays subject to the
following conditions:
   A.   The use of sidewalks for restaurant tables shall only be permitted
incidental to the operation of a restaurant on contiguous property, and the use
of sidewalks for floral displays shall only be permitted where incidental to
the operation of a floral shop on private contiguous property, except that
restaurant tables may be placed along the noncontiguous street side of the
public sidewalk both within and beyond the side property lines of the
restaurant applicant under the following conditions:
      1.   There is no parking permitted on the side of the street adjacent to
the public sidewalk area proposed for the restaurant tables ("the street");
      2.   The traffic count for the street upon which the restaurant is
located does not exceed ten thousand (10,000) vehicles per day;
      3.   The restaurant tables shall not be located within two feet (2') of
the curb line of the street;
      4.   Dining patio fencing shall be installed to ensure incidental
repositioning does not occur;
      5.   Bollards or other protective devices shall be strategically located
at either end, and along the street edge, of the outdoor restaurant seating
area;
      6.   The placement of restaurant tables on the street side of the public
sidewalk shall only be permitted to extend beyond the restaurant frontage on
either side if the potentially affected adjacent business or property owner
does not object to such placement;
      7.   The restaurant applicant is able to meet all other existing
requirements for the issuance of a permit to place restaurant tables on the
public sidewalk; and
      8.   Cabling over the public way during nonoperational hours is not
permitted.
   B.   A permit shall not be issued if the proposed use will unreasonably
interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. All food operations shall be in
accordance with applicable food service sanitation regulations.
   C.   In no event shall the uses permitted by this article reduce the open
portion of any sidewalk or other surface compliant with the Americans with
disabilities act, 42 USC section 12101 et seq., as amended, to less than five
feet (5'). Additionally, to the greatest extent possible, public access shall
be maintained in a straight, continuous pathway.
   D.   No permit shall be issued pursuant to this section unless the applicant
shall furnish, post and maintain the insurance required by section
22-10-5 of this article.
   E.   Persons issued permits pursuant to this article shall maintain the
sidewalk area in a clean and safe condition and shall remove all debris on the
sidewalk on a daily basis.
   F.   The annual permit fee for any use pursuant to this article shall be
fifty dollars ($50.00) plus fifty cents ($0.50) per square foot of sidewalk
space used.
   G.   The permit may be revoked at any time on thirty (30) days' notice and
refund pro rata of any fee.
   H.   The placement of restaurant tables and seating shall not interfere with
existing hydrant ports. (Ord. 15-074, 3-16-2015)
22-10-3: USE OF SIDEWALKS FOR CANOPY SUPPORTS:
The Village Manager is authorized to issue permits for the use of public
sidewalks for the support of canopies subject to the following conditions:
   A.   The use of sidewalks for support of canopies shall only be permitted
incidental to the operation of a club, hotel, motel, restaurant, apartment or
condominium development on private contiguous property;
   B.   In no event shall the uses permitted by this article reduce the open
portion of any sidewalk or other surface compliant with the Americans with
disabilities act, 42 USC section 12101 et seq., as amended, to less than five
feet (5'). Additionally, to the greatest extent possible, public access shall
be maintained in a straight, continuous pathway;
   C.   The proposed canopy shall be compatible with surrounding properties.
   D.   No permit shall be issued pursuant to this section unless the applicant
shall furnish, post and maintain the insurance required by section
22-10-5 of this article.
   E.   Persons issued permits pursuant to this article shall maintain the
sidewalk area in a clean and safe condition;
   F.   The annual permit fee for any use pursuant to this article shall be
twenty dollars ($20.00);
   G.   In the event that any canopy herein must be removed to accommodate the
repair or installation of underground utilities, persons issued permits
pursuant to this article hereby authorize the Village or utility company to
remove and replace the canopy at the applicant's expense. In the event that
street improvements change the grade of existing sidewalks, the applicant shall
bear the costs associated with removing and replacing the canopy;
   H.   The permit may be revoked at any time on sixty (60) days' notice and
refund pro rata of any fee. Any costs for removal of the canopy and supporting
members shall be borne solely by the applicant. (Ord. 15-074, 3-16-2015)
22-10-4: USE OF SIDEWALK SPACE FOR PUBLIC OUTDOOR FURNITURE:
There is hereby established a public outdoor furniture program for the seasonal
placement of outdoor furniture on the public way by restaurants and carryout
food establishments for the use and benefit of the general public.
Participation in this program shall require the issuance of a permit through
the permit process set forth in this section and compliance with the
regulations and requirements set forth in this section.
   A.   Permit; Required: No person shall place or maintain any public outdoor
furniture on any street without a permit. A separate permit must be obtained
for each location, which permit shall be valid only for the particular
furniture specified thereon. Each permit shall bear a separate number, and all
said permits shall be issued by the Village Manager.
   B.   Annual Permit; Application: No public outdoor furniture permit shall be
issued except upon written application of a licensed restaurant or carryout
food establishment within the Village, made upon a form prescribed by the
Village Manager, and said form shall state the location and duration of such
use, including a site plan accurately showing the surrounding building site,
the actual sidewalk widths, all existing encroachments into the sidewalk, the
location and dimensions of the proposed furniture to be used, the placement and
quantity of furniture compliant with the Americans with disabilities act, 42
USC section 12101 et seq., as amended, and such other information as may be
required by the Village Manager. Site plans, photographs and drawings submitted
hereunder shall clearly indicate compliance with the specifications and
requirements set forth herein.
A restaurant operator shall have the option to apply for either an outdoor
restaurant table permit under section
22-10-2 of this article or an outdoor public furniture permit under this
section, but shall not be permitted to participate in both programs
simultaneously.
The application shall contain a statement which must be signed by the applicant
that the applicant has fully read, understands and agrees to abide by the
public outdoor furniture permit requirements and specifications and
acknowledges that the applicant further understands that a failure to comply
with same may result in the revocation of the permit.
   C.   Public Outdoor Furniture; Specifications:
      1.   Size: The furniture must be of a size which permits it to be placed
in the public way without extending beyond the excess sidewalk right of way, or
reducing the unobstructed clear passage area of any sidewalk to less than five
feet (5') in width.
      2.   Height: The height of five percent (5%) of the public tables or at
least one table, whichever is the greater number of tables, shall not be lower
than a minimum of thirty inches (30"), with a clear knee space of at least
twenty seven inches (27"). The tables which meet this minimum height
requirement must also be identified with a handicap accessible sticker.
      3.   Material/Workmanship: The furniture must be sturdy and safe and must
be constructed from quality materials with good workmanship.
      4.   Color: Furniture color must aesthetically complement the permittee's
property and must not be out of character with the business district where the
furniture will be located.
      5.   Umbrellas: Table umbrellas shall be permitted under the following
conditions:
         a.   No umbrella shall exceed seven feet (7') in diameter.
         b.   No umbrella shall obstruct any street signs.
         c.   No umbrella shall contain or display any type of message, symbol,
logo or signage unless otherwise authorized by this code.
         d.   No umbrella or umbrella part lower than seven feet (7') from the
sidewalk surface shall encroach into the five foot (5') unobstructed clear
pedestrian passage area, nor closer than two feet (2') from curb line.
      6.   Assistance Available: Applicants with unique circumstances, or
applicants who request assistance, will be referred to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for advice and guidance.
   D.   Public Outdoor Furniture; Placement Requirements:
      1.   The furniture shall be placed only on excess public way that is
constructed of concrete or some other similar hard and durable material.
      2.   Outdoor furniture for public use shall only be placed in the
sidewalk right of way in front of the permit holder's business establishment.
"Excess sidewalk right of way" is defined as that portion of sidewalk right of
way located on the curbside of the required five feet (5') of unobstructed
clear passage area for pedestrians, which does not interfere with the
pedestrian right of way, curb parking or other public improvements which exist
in the public way.
      3.   No outdoor furniture for public use permitted on the excess sidewalk
right of way shall be allowed to encroach beyond the side property lines of the
permittee's business, including the extension of such side property lines from
the building frontage to the curb line, unless the public way being proposed
for use by the permittee contains an excess sidewalk right of way of fifteen
feet (15') or more in width.
      4.   Only excess sidewalk right of way of fifteen feet (15') or more in
width that is constructed of concrete, or some other similar hard and durable
material, may be used for permitted public outdoor furniture, and such
permitted use may encroach beyond either or both side property lines of the
permittee's business, including the extension of such lines from the building
frontage to the curb line, by no more than ten feet (10'), provided such
extension will not negatively impact the business(es) with the frontage into
which the permittee proposes to extend the permittee's public furniture.
      5.   Placement of public outdoor furniture shall at all times comply with
the fire prevention code and all other applicable state and local laws relating
to fire prevention and fire safety.
      6.   The standards and requirements set forth herein shall apply to all
public outdoor furniture permits issued for encroachments on public rights of
way in all Oak Park business districts, as described in the summary of ROW
widths, streets, sidewalks and parkways, and map at the end of this section and
by this reference incorporated herein as exhibit A.
   E.   Permit; Liability Insurance Requirements: No permit required by this
section shall be issued unless the applicant shall post and maintain the
insurance required by section
22-10-5 of this article.
   F.   Permit; Expiration; Fee; Removal: Each permit issued under this section
shall expire on November 30 next following the date of issuance, unless
renewed. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), plus fifty cents ($0.50) per square
foot of sidewalk space used for each outdoor public furniture location shall be
charged annually. Application for renewal must be made prior to the expiration
date and must be accompanied by the renewal fee. All outdoor public furniture
shall be removed from the public right of way on or before the expiration of
the permit on November 30 of each year.
The application for a permit shall be canceled and denied if the applicant
fails to deposit the annual fee and accept the permit within ten (10) days
after notice of the approval of the application by the Director of Public
Works.
   G.   Permit; Denial: Should an applicant not be granted a public outdoor
furniture permit, any fees previously paid with the application shall be
refunded, less reasonable costs to process the application which shall not
exceed twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   H.   Duties Of Permittee: It shall be the duty of any person holding a
permit under the provisions of this section to maintain each outdoor public
furniture location at all times in a safe condition and at its proper and
lawful location, to inspect each piece of furniture periodically and to also
comply with the following:
      1.   The permittee shall make the outdoor public furniture available for
use by the general public without regard to whether members of the public have
patronized the permittee's business establishment.
      2.   The permittee shall be responsible for preserving the five feet (5')
of clear passage area at all times, including, but not limited to, taking
necessary actions to prevent patrons and/or employees or members of the public
from encroaching into the five foot (5') clear passage area.
      3.   The permittee shall maintain all areas adjacent to and including
areas where the furniture is located in a clean and sanitary manner, including,
but not limited to, maintaining appropriate trash receptacles, as well as
sweeping on a daily basis the full right of way where the furniture is located
and immediately cleaning and washing any liquid, food, debris, broken glass and
other trash from the right of way.
      4.   No food or beverages may be sold or served on the sidewalk right of
way outside of any permitted area by the permittee, permittee's agent, or
employees or ordered by the patrons or members of the general public.
      5.   No alcoholic beverages may be sold or served on the sidewalk,
including in any permitted area, by the permittee, permittee's agent or
employees or ordered or consumed by patrons or members of the general public.
      6.   No advertising, signage or indices of ownership shall be placed in
any way on the public furniture, except that of a handicap accessible sticker
which shall be affixed on the center of the table top of the permittee's tables
which are required to be accessible to the disabled.
      7.   No object of any kind shall be placed/stored/maintained on any
outdoor public furniture permitted hereunder by the permittee, permittee's
agent, employee or the general public.
      8.   No signboards shall be permitted as part of any public outdoor
furniture permit.
      9.   The permittee shall not create or permit noise to emanate from the
permittee's outdoor public furniture location at such levels as to create a
public nuisance.
      10.   All outdoor furniture must be removed from the public right of way
no later than the close of the permittee's business each day, unless otherwise
authorized by the Village Manager that said furniture:
         a.   Will not create a hazard or in any way obstruct the public way if
allowed to remain in the public way during nonbusiness hours;
         b.   Will be secured at the permitted location in such a manner that
it cannot be moved and does not damage or deface the public way or any
improvements thereon; and
         c.   Does not negatively impact the appearance of the public way
during nonbusiness hours.
      11.   At all times, the permittee shall comply with all other local,
state or federal laws, ordinances and regulations, including, but not limited
to, health rules, laws and regulations.
   I.   Permit; Revocation Of Permit: The Village Manager may revoke or deny
any permit issued under the provisions of this section for any violation of any
of the provisions of this section, for any fraud or misrepresentation in the
application, or for any reason which would have been grounds for denial of the
application.
   J.   Removal Of Furniture: The Village shall retain the right to remove
public furniture from the public way at any time when, in its sole discretion,
it determines that the placement of the public furniture violates the standards
set forth herein, obstructs or creates a hazard on the public way or otherwise
threatens the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 15-074, 3-16-2015)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3322.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3324.gif]
(Ord. 1997-0-10, 3-17-1997; amd. Ord. 25-112, 3-4-2025)
22-10-5: INSURANCE:
No permit required by this article shall be issued unless the applicant shall
post and maintain public liability insurance as follows:
   A.   The policy of insurance shall be conditioned that the permittee will
indemnify and save harmless the Village, its officers and employees from any
and all losses, costs, damages, expenses or liabilities which may result from
or arise out of the granting of the permit, to the installation or maintenance
of the public furniture for which the permit is issued and that the permittee
will pay any and all loss or damage that may be sustained by any person as a
result of, or which may be caused by or arise out of such installation or
maintenance. The policy of insurance shall be maintained in its original amount
by the permittee at the permittee's expense at all times during the period for
which the permit is in effect. In the event that two (2) or more permits are
issued to one permittee, one such policy of insurance may be furnished to cover
two (2) or more locations and each policy shall be of such a type that its
coverage shall be automatically restored immediately from and after the time of
the reporting of any accident from which liability may thereafter accrue. The
Village shall be named as a party insured in said policy. The applicant shall
furnish the Village a certificate of insurance which must be in a form
acceptable to the Village Attorney. The certificate of insurance shall be for
at least the term of the permit and shall not be subject to cancellation
without thirty (30) days' actual notice to the Village.
   B.   The limit of liability upon any policy of insurance posted pursuant to
the requirements of this section shall in no case be less than five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limit or five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence and per aggregate. (Ord. 15-074, 3-16-
2015)
ARTICLE 11
VACATION OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
SECTION:
22-11-1: Vacation Of Streets And Alleys
22-11-1: VACATION OF STREETS AND ALLEYS:
Streets and alleys may be vacated by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
provisions and procedures set forth in division 91 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/11-91-1 and 5/11-91-2), provided however, pursuant to the home
rule powers of the Village as set forth in article VII, section 6 of the
Illinois Constitution, an ordinance vacating a street or alley shall be
effective upon being passed by the affirmative vote of a majority of the Board
of Trustees. (1981 Code)
ARTICLE 12
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
SECTION:
22-12-1: Definitions
22-12-2: Registration Of Telecommunications Providers
22-12-3: Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
22-12-4: Collection, Enforcement, And Administration Of Telecommunications
Infrastructure Maintenance Fees
22-12-5: Compliance With Other Laws
22-12-6: Existing Franchises And Licenses
22-12-7: Penalties
22-12-8: Enforcement
22-12-9: Conflict
22-12-10: Waiver And Fee Implementation
22-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the Village,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended,
the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the Village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within
the Village, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel
provided within the Village. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
   A.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made under:
1) the fee imposed by this Section, 2) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, 3)
amounts collected under section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 4) the
tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, 5) 911 surcharges, or 6)
the tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
   B.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
Village;
   C.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data
or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information
intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not
limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment,
tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of
computers under a time- sharing agreement;
   D.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   E.   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the
Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the Village;
   F.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
   G.   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable Federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   H.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin- operated telecommunications
devices; or
   I.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
to the Village.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any Municipal street, alley, water or public right of way
dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements
wherein the Village has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit
the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Public right of way" shall not include any real or personal Village property
that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not
include Village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right of way.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this State.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to- ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the
customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications
as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added
services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form,
content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village
through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: a) Any telecommunications retailer; and b) any
person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates
or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or designed to be
used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail
as defined in this Section. The Village may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction
of the Village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of
the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the
fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the Village.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)
(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services, and paging services. (Ord. 1997-0-40, 9-15-97)
22-12-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS:
   A.   Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this Article shall
register with the Village within thirty (30) days after the effective date of
this Article or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on
a form to be provided by the Village, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to subsection
22-12-4C of this Article shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with
this Section.
   B.   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the Village
pursuant to subsection
22-12-2A of this Section has an affirmative duty to submit an amended
registration form or current return as required by subsection
22-12-4C of this Article, as the case may be to the Village within thirty (30)
days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided
by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent
return on file with the Village. (Ord. 1997-0-40, 9-15-97)
22-12-3: MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
   A.   Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent (1%)
of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service
addresses within the Village for telecommunications originating or received in
the Village.
   B.   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this Article, the Village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights of way within the Village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this Article
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
   C.   The Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this Section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in Section
22-12-4 of this Article. (Ord. 1997-0-40, 9-15-97)
22-12-4: COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEES:
   A.   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the Village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address. (Ord. 1997-0-
40, 9-15-97)
   B.   Unless otherwise approved by the Village Manager the infrastructure
maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the
Village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in
which a bill is issued to the customer except if such a retailer collects less
than nine hundred sixty dollars ($960.00) in the preceding calendar year, then
the retailer shall file with the Department a remittance return and remit all
applicable tax for the preceding calendar year on or before January 31 of the
subsequent year. The telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to
exceed two percent (2%) of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee collected
by it to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting
the fee. (Ord. 1999-0-73, 12-6-99, eff. 1-1-00)
   C.   Remittance of the Municipal infrastructure fee to the Village shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Village Manager,
which shall contain such information as the Village Manager may reasonably
require.
   D.   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to
this Article and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the Village. The charge imposed under subsection
22-12-4A of this Section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this
Article shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications
retailer who provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable
at law in the same manner as the original charge for such services.
   E.   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has
been paid that was not due under the provisions of this Article, whether as a
result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this Article, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the Village Manager may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such
credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three (3) years
after the date of the erroneous payment unless: 1) the credit is used only to
offset a claim of underpayment made by the Village within the applicable
statutory period of limitations, and 2) the credit derives from an overpayment
made by the same telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory
period of limitations.
   F.   Amounts paid under this Article by telecommunications retailers shall
not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described
immediately below:
      1.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act;
      2.   "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
      3.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax
as prescribed in section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
      4.   "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
   G.   The Village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books
and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this Article to
determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the
Village for the Village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the
amount of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee due to the Village by the
telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the Village plus five percent (5%)
of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs
incurred by the Village in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed
five percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an
audit. Said sum shall be paid to the Village within twenty one (21) days after
the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
   H.   The Village Manager, or his or her designee, may promulgate such
further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement
of this Article, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time
to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered
pursuant to Section
22-12-2 of this Article of such regulations. (Ord. 1997-0-40, 9-15-97)
22-12-5: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this Article shall excuse any person or entity from obligations
imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Generally applicable taxes; and
   B.   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair
of the public rights of way, including standards relating to freestanding
towers and other structures upon the public rights of way, as provided; and
   C.   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights of way; and
   D.   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning uses
or structures not located on, over, or within the right of way. (Ord. 1997-0-
40, 9-15-97)
22-12-6: EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES:
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the Village entered into before the effective date of this
Article regarding the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according
to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other
compensation to the extent waived. (Ord. 1997-0-40, 9-15-97)
22-12-7: PENALTIES:
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject
to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of this Code. (Ord.
1997-0-40, 9-15-97)
22-12-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this Article shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this Article.
(Ord. 1997-0-40, 9-15-97)
22-12-9: CONFLICT:
This Article supersedes all provisions, articles or chapters of this Code or
parts of such provisions, articles or chapters adopted prior hereto which are
in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. (Ord. 1997-0-40, 9-15-97)
22-12-10: WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION:
   A.   The Village hereby waives all fees, charges, and other compensation
that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the Village by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing Village franchise,
license, or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the
time the Village imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee.
This waiver shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure
maintenance fee provided for in this Article is subject to being lawfully
imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by the
telecommunications retailer from the customer.
   B.   The Village Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail/
return receipt requested to each telecommunications retailer with whom the
Village has a franchise.
   C.   The Village infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this Article
shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not less than
ninety (90) days after the Village provides written notice by certified mail to
each telecommunications retailer with whom the Village has an existing
franchise, license, or similar agreement that the Village waives all
compensation under such existing franchise, license, or similar agreement
during such time as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected
by the retailer and remitted to the Village. The infrastructure maintenance fee
shall apply to gross charges billed on or after the effective date as
established in the preceding sentence. (Ord. 1997-0-40, 9-15-97)
ARTICLE 13
PUBLIC ART
SECTION:
22-13-1: Purpose
22-13-2: Definitions
22-13-3: Application To Place Acquired And/Or Privately Owned Artwork On
Village Property
22-13-4: Notice And Meeting To Review Application
22-13-5: Factors For Purchase, Acceptance, Placement And Maintenance Of Public
Artwork
22-13-6: Guidelines For Site Location Of Public Artwork On Village Property
22-13-7: Additional Requirements For Acquisition Of Public Artwork
22-13-8: Guidelines For Privately Owned Artwork Temporarily Placed On Village
Property (Including Loaned Artwork)
22-13-9: P.A.A.C. Recommendation To The President And Board Of Trustees
22-13-10: Final Action By The President And Board Of Trustees
22-13-11: Public Artwork Plaque
22-13-12: Relocation Or Removal Of Public Artwork
22-13-13: Acquisition And Maintenance Fund
22-13-14: Severability
22-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Public Art Ordinance is to integrate a wide range of public
art into and throughout the Village, reflecting the Village's diversity of
people, artistic disciplines and points of view, thereby enhancing the visual
environment and contributing to the quality of life throughout the Village and
further stimulating economic growth and investment throughout the Village.
(Ord. 2001-0-75, 9-4-01)
22-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them hereinbelow. All other words and phrases shall have
the meanings which are normally ascribed to them.
ACQUISITION (ACQUIRED PUBLIC ART): The process of the Village obtaining
ownership of or a temporary interest in public artworks by purchase, rental or
acceptance of a gift.
ACQUISITION AND MAINTENANCE FUND: A dedicated fund established by the Village
of Oak Park to hold monies contributed by individuals or organizations
(including the Village) for the purpose of acquiring and maintaining public
artwork and, in some cases, maintaining public artwork lent to the Village.
ART PROFESSIONAL: Any person, who is not necessarily an artist, but by virtue
of his or her training and/or profession possesses expertise with regard to
art. Such persons may include, but are not limited to, museum curators or
directors, academicians, patrons, collectors and critics.
ARTIST: Any person who by virtue of professional training, exhibition history,
and/or critical review is recognized as skilled in creating works of art.
ARTIST STATEMENT: Written statement by artists describing their background and
inspiration for or meaning of the artwork.
ARTWORK: Tangible art forms that may include, but are not limited to, drawings,
prints, photographs, collages, paintings, mosaics, murals, fiber artworks,
stained glass, relief or freestanding sculptures, fountains, arches, mobiles,
and environments. Artworks, except with regard to art related activities
authorized under subsection 2-22-2G of this Code, shall not include objects
that are mass produced of standard design, reproductions of works of art, nor
landscaping or signage except when designed by an artist as an integral part of
a project.
COLLECTION: All artworks owned or rented by or loaned to the Village of Oak
Park.
EDUCATION: Instruction relating to the importance or meaning of a particular
artwork.
GIFT OR GIFTED: Artwork donated to the Village of Oak Park.
INVENTORY: Record of object transactions, including acquisition, loan,
movement, care, shipment, deaccession, etc.
MAINTENANCE: The act of keeping public artworks and their supporting
documentation in good and complete condition for purposes of exhibit, study and
preservation which may entail the movement of such public artworks.
NEIGHBORHOOD: A specific district or area within Oak Park.
OAK PARK AREA ARTS COUNCIL: A partner agency to the Village of Oak Park whose
representatives serve on the Public Art Advisory Commission. The Council also
works to initiate public art projects.
PERMANENT: Artwork not expected to change in status, condition or place.
PRIVATELY OWNED PUBLIC ART: Privately owned objects of art temporarily located
on the public way normally under the authority of a License Agreement between
the Village and owner. Loaned art shall also normally require a License
Agreement for placement on the public way.
PUBLIC ART ADVISORY COMMISSION ("P.A.A.C."): Commission established by the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village as set forth in Chapter 2,
Article 22 of this Code to further the interests of public art for the Village
and to administer the provisions of this Article.
PUBLIC ARTWORKS: Artwork located on public property.
SITE: The place where an artwork is located.
TEMPORARY: Artwork that is placed on a site for a limited time.
VILLAGE PROPERTY: Buildings, roadways and public ways and areas owned by the
Village of Oak Park.
WAIVER: A written instrument executed by the artist specifically and expressly
setting forth and waiving the artist's rights under the Visual Artists' Rights
Act of 1990 with regard to an identified work of art created by the artist.
(Ord. 2001-0-75, 9-4-01; amd. Ord. 25-112, 3-4-2025)
22-13-3: APPLICATION TO PLACE ACQUIRED AND/OR PRIVATELY OWNED ARTWORK ON
VILLAGE PROPERTY:
Any person(s) or entity who wishes to accomplish any of the following actions
shall complete and file, at the office of the Village Clerk, an application to
the Public Art Advisory Commission (P.A.A.C.), which application shall be in
substantially the same form as the application set forth in Appendix 1 attached
to ordinance 2001-0-75 on file, and made a part hereof:
   A.   Sell, rent or donate artwork to the Village;
   B.   Sell, rent or donate artwork to the Village on the condition that the
artwork be placed at a specific site on Village property;
   C.   Obtain permission from the Village to temporarily place privately owned
artwork on Village property without specifying the location of the site (loans
of artwork which do not specify a site shall fall within this category); and/or
   D.   Obtain permission from the Village to temporarily place privately owned
artwork at a specific site on Village property (loans of artwork which are
conditioned upon the placement of the loaned artwork at a specific site on
Village property shall fall within this category).
The application shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs and/or models of
the proposed artwork; site plans and a written "artist's statement" of no more
than two hundred fifty (250) words.
The Clerk shall immediately forward the full application to the chairperson of
P.A.A.C., with a copy to the Director of Public Works. Application forms may
also be obtained at the office of the Village Clerk. A copy of the full
application shall be maintained at the office of the Village Clerk and shall be
available for review by members of the public. The P.A.A.C. may conduct a
preliminary conference or conferences with the applicant to discuss the details
of the application. The application may be amended by the applicant following
the preliminary conference or conferences. (Ord. 2001-0-75, 9-4-01)
22-13-4: NOTICE AND MEETING TO REVIEW APPLICATION:
Upon receipt of the application, and after the preliminary conference or
conferences, the chairperson of the P.A.A.C. shall schedule a meeting at which
P.A.A.C. shall consider the application. The applicant shall be afforded the
opportunity to make a presentation at the meeting and any interested persons in
attendance at the meeting will be given an opportunity to comment on the
application.
The P.A.A.C. shall send notice of the meeting to consider the application by
regular mail to the applicant, all property owners and business owners within
two hundred fifty feet (250') of the proposed public site ("subject area") for
the placement of the artwork at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the
meeting. Notice shall also be sent to the office of any association which
represents businesses within the subject area at least ten (10) days prior to
the meeting. For purposes of this Article, the delivery of notice to property
owners shall be satisfied by mailing said notice to persons listed in the
Village's water billing records as the person responsible for paying the water
bill for each property within the subject area.
The notice shall contain the date, time and location for the P.A.A.C. meeting
and a brief but accurate description of the proposed artwork and site which
will be considered by the P.A.A.C. at the meeting. The notice shall also
indicate that a copy of the full application is available for review upon
request in the office of the Village Clerk. The notice shall also indicate that
all interested parties in attendance at the meeting shall be given an
opportunity to comment on the application.
When P.A.A.C. provides the applicant with notice of the date, time and location
of the public meeting, it may at that time request any other supporting
documentation from the applicant which it deems to be appropriate.
In the event that the application does not specify a site for the artwork, the
P.A.A.C. or subcommittee of the P.A.A.C. shall, as a preliminary matter,
identify the available site or sites which are most appropriate for the artwork
in question. Once the site or sites have been identified, proper notice of the
meeting shall be mailed to all property owners and business owners, including
business associations representing such owners, within two hundred fifty feet
(250') of any such proposed site.
The Director of Public Works or the Director's designee, upon receipt of a copy
of the application, shall, within fifteen (15) working days, provide P.A.A.C.
with a statement accompanied by a drawing containing adequate information to
inform P.A.A.C. of the specific site parameters within which the work of art
may be placed and any additional positioning requirements the Director may have
for purposes of public access, public safety and maintenance of the public way.
If the application does not specify a site, P.A.A.C. shall forward site
information to the Public Works Director as soon as it is available, and the
Director or the Director's designee shall, within fifteen (15) working days of
receipt of same, provide P.A.A.C. with the statement and drawing required
hereinabove. (Ord. 2001-0-75, 9-4-01)
22-13-5: FACTORS FOR PURCHASE, ACCEPTANCE, PLACEMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC
ARTWORK:
Factors to be considered by P.A.A.C. in recommending acquisition, placement and
maintenance of acquired art and/or acceptance, placement and maintenance of
temporarily placed, privately owned (including loaned) artwork on Village
property shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Artistic Quality: The artist's concept, vision and craftsmanship for
the artwork are of strong artistic quality.
   B.   Site: The artwork and site are appropriate in scale, materials, form
and content for the immediate, general, social and physical environments with
which they are to relate.
   C.   Permanence: Due consideration shall be given to the structural and
surface soundness and to inherent resistance to theft, vandalism, weathering
and excessive maintenance or repair costs.
   D.   Public Safety: Each work shall be evaluated to ensure that it does not
present a hazard to public safety.
   E.   Diversity: P.A.A.C., when soliciting artwork, shall seek artwork from
artists of diverse racial, sexual and cultural identities. The program shall
also strive for diversity in style, scale, media and numbers of artists
represented. There shall be encouragement of exploratory types of work as well
as established art forms.
   F.   Feasibility: Proposals shall be evaluated relative to their feasibility
and convincing evidence of the artist's ability to successfully complete the
work as proposed. Factors to be considered include, but are not limited to:
project, budget, time line, artist's experience, soundness of materials,
zoning/construction/design guidelines.
   G.   Duplication: Artists are required to warrant that artwork is unique and
an edition of one or part of a limited edition.
   H.   Maintenance And Preservation: The P.A.A.C. shall consider the costs for
installation, site preparation, insurance and maintenance, and evaluate whether
there are sufficient funds in the Acquisition and Maintenance Fund or from
other sources to pay these costs. Where feasible, donors and sellers shall
provide a report on future maintenance, including a plan for routine care, with
itemized estimated costs including the number of persons and special equipment
or vehicles necessary to site move the work. Where feasible or appropriate, the
P.A.A.C. shall also consider the ability of the seller, donor or artist to
provide the Village with an artist's "waiver" (as defined herein) or written
permission for maintenance work by a qualified conservator.
   I.   Purchase: In the case of public artwork to be acquired by purchase, the
reasonableness of the purchase price or rent amount in relation to the
appraised value of such public art and the sources available for such
acquisition.
   J.   Additional Conditions: Additional conditions of the applicant, if any.
(Ord. 2001-0-75, 9-4-01)
22-13-6: GUIDELINES FOR SITE LOCATION OF PUBLIC ARTWORK ON VILLAGE PROPERTY:
P.A.A.C. shall consider the following guidelines when choosing the site
locations on Village property of public artwork:
   A.   P.A.A.C. is only authorized to recommend site placement and positioning
of the artwork on Village property to the Village Board within the parameters
established by the Director of Public Works or the Director's designee.
   B.   Public artwork shall, whenever possible, be distributed throughout the
Village.
   C.   Public artwork shall, whenever possible, be located in sites that are
generally accessible and visible to the public.
P.A.A.C. may recommend to the applicant, during a preliminary conference,
appropriate alternative sites to the site set forth in the application. If the
applicant agrees to the alternate site or sites during these preliminary
discussions, the notice and P.A.A.C. meeting process set forth in Section 22-
13-4 of this Article shall proceed based upon an amended application containing
the agreed upon alternative site location. (Ord. 2001-0-75, 9-4-01)
22-13-7: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ACQUISITION OF PUBLIC ARTWORK:
In addition to the general factors set forth above, P.A.A.C. should consider
the following factors in relation to the acceptance, placement and maintenance
of permanent gifts of public artwork:
   A.   Under extraordinary circumstances, such as the high cost of maintenance
for a given artwork, P.A.A.C. may recommend conditions of accepting a gift of
such artwork, including establishment by the donor of a maintenance endowment
to ensure adequate care for the artwork.
   B.   Acquisitions shall be accepted only when accompanied by a legal
instrument of conveyance of title, listing any conditions of the acquisition
that the Village has agreed to accept and the appropriate warranty of
originality. In general, acquisitions shall be accepted without restrictions as
to the future use or disposition. P.A.A.C. shall forward copies of the
conveyance of title and the appraisal for donated artworks to the Village Risk
Manager. P.A.A.C. shall forward copies of the conveyance of title and the
stated insurance value for acquired artworks to the Village Risk Manager. (Ord.
2001-0-75, 9-4-01)
22-13-8: GUIDELINES FOR PRIVATELY OWNED ARTWORK TEMPORARILY PLACED ON VILLAGE
PROPERTY (INCLUDING LOANED ARTWORK):
In considering the temporary acceptance, placement, and maintenance of
privately owned (including loaned artwork), in addition to the general factors
set forth in Section
22-13-5 of this Article, P.A.A.C. shall also consider the following guidelines:
   A.   The owner of the artwork be required to affix the artwork to the
Village property and maintain same at the owner's expense and in accordance
with the direction and approval of the Director of Public Works or the
Director's designee.
   B.   The owner submit such construction detail plans as the Director of
Public Works may require prior to construction detailing that the artwork shall
be affixed to the public way in such a manner as to assure that the artwork
cannot be moved or removed by passersby and to assure that when it is removed
by the owner, the public way can be easily restored by the owner to its
original condition.
   C.   The owner shall save and hold harmless the Village from any and all
liability or loss for any personal injury or damage to property which may
result from the installation and maintenance of said temporary artwork on
Village property and release the Village from any and all liability for damage
to or loss of the temporary artwork which may result from the placement of the
temporary artwork on Village property. The owner shall provide the Village
with: 1) a certificate of insurance for liability insurance in the amount of
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, naming the Village as an
additional insured, which shall remain in full force and effect for the full
term of this agreement, and 2) a one hundred dollar ($100.00) restoration
deposit which shall be refunded to the owner after the owner's public artwork
has been removed and the Village property restored to its original condition by
the owner.
   D.   The Village shall provide the owner with temporary access to Village
property for display of the owner's artwork through the execution of a License
Agreement with the owner, granting the owner a license to use the public way
for the placement of the owner's artwork for a term of one year, subject to the
terms and conditions set forth hereinabove. After one hundred twenty (120) days
have elapsed, either party shall have the right to terminate such License
Agreement and remove said artwork upon giving sixty (60) days' written notice
to the other party of its intention to terminate the Agreement. Any notice
required therein shall be delivered by certified mail to the Village at 123
Madison Street, Oak Park, Illinois 60302-4272, and to the owner at the owner's
given mailing address. In the event of termination, the owner shall be
responsible for removing the artwork from the public way and restoring the
public way to the condition in which it existed prior to the installation of
the artwork. The Village may, however, remove the artwork at any time if it
determines, in its sole discretion, that the artwork represents a hazard to
public health and safety. In the event of such a removal, the Village shall
return the artwork to the owner as soon after the removal as is practicable.
Due to the fact that the Village deems the display of the artwork by the owner
to be primarily a public benefit enhancing the aesthetic appearance of Village
property, the Village shall waive any fee it would otherwise charge for the use
of Village property.
The owner may renew such License Agreement under the same terms and conditions
for an additional one year term on an annual basis by providing the Village
with written notice of the owner's intention and offer to renew the Agreement
at least ninety (90) days prior to the termination of the then current
Agreement and at the same time providing the Village with a new certificate of
insurance which complies with the terms of the Agreement and which extends
coverage for the full term of the renewal period. In order to extend the
Agreement, the Village must provide the owner with written acceptance of the
owner's offer to extend the Agreement for an additional one year term at least
sixty (60) days prior to the termination of the existing term of the Agreement.
All renewals of the Agreement shall, however, remain subject to the termination
provisions of the original Agreement. The Village's failure to provide the
owner with written acceptance by the Village of the owner's notice and offer to
extend the Agreement for one year at least sixty (60) days prior to the
termination date of the existing Agreement shall constitute a termination of
the Agreement by the Village, which shall take effect at the end of the term of
the then existing Agreement.
   E.   If the President and Board of Trustees determine that it is in the
public interest to do so, they may waive, by resolution of the Board setting
forth findings with regard to same, any or all of the requirements set forth in
this Section. (Ord. 2001-0-75, 9-4-01)
22-13-9: P.A.A.C. RECOMMENDATION TO THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
At the conclusion of the meeting at which an applicant's application has been
considered and all interested parties have had an opportunity to comment
thereon, P.A.A.C. shall vote to approve or deny the application.
If P.A.A.C. votes to deny said application, the decision of P.A.A.C. shall be
final. If P.A.A.C. votes to approve said application, it shall forward a
recommendation to the President and Board of Trustees with regard to the
acceptance, placement and maintenance of the subject public artwork, together
with findings, supporting documentation and such other conditions and
restrictions as P.A.A.C. deems appropriate. In the case of an application to
acquire public art by purchase or rental, the recommendation shall also include
a recommended purchase price or rent amount, an appraisal and recommended
sources of funding. (Ord. 2001-0-75, 9-4-01)
22-13-10: FINAL ACTION BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
Upon receipt of a recommendation from P.A.A.C., the President and Board of
Trustees, at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board, shall vote to accept,
reject or modify the findings and recommendations of P.A.A.C. In considering
the recommendation of P.A.A.C., the Village Board shall accept the judgment of
P.A.A.C. on artistic matters and will not exercise its independent judgment
with regard to same.
If the Village Board rejects the recommendation of P.A.A.C., such rejection
will serve as the final decision of the Village. The applicant shall be
prohibited from filing the same or similar application for a period of one year
from the date of the rejection.
If the Village Board accepts the recommendation of P.A.A.C. as presented or as
modified by the Board with regard to the acquisition or temporary loan of
public artwork, the Village Board shall do so by adopting a resolution
authorizing and directing the Village Manager to acquire or receive the
temporary loan of such public artwork and directing the manner and site
location for placing and affixing of the public artwork to Village property and
the manner in which it shall be maintained. If the acquisition of the public
art is by purchase the resolutions shall also establish the purchase price. If
the Village Board accepts the recommendation of P.A.A.C. as presented or as
modified by the Board with regard to the temporary placement of a privately
owned artwork on public property, the Board shall do so by resolution
authorizing and directing the Village Manager to permit the temporary placement
of such privately owned artwork on public property and, except under
circumstances where the Board finds it otherwise appropriate and reasonable, to
further authorize and direct the Village Manager to enter into a temporary
License Agreement setting forth the terms and conditions recommended in the
guidelines found in Section
22-13-8 of this Article. (Ord. 2001-0-75, 9-4-01)
22-13-11: PUBLIC ARTWORK PLAQUE:
The only items of information which may be displayed with public artwork are
the name of the artist, the title of the artwork and the year in which it was
created, on a plaque of brass or other similar material in letters and numbers
which do not exceed three-fourths (3/4) of an inch in height. (Ord. 2001-0-75,
9-4-01)
22-13-12: RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF PUBLIC ARTWORK:
   A.   P.A.A.C. shall inspect all existing public artwork on an annual basis
to assess the condition of same.
   B.   P.A.A.C. may recommend relocation of public artwork for one or more of
the following reasons:
      1.   The condition or security of the artwork can no longer be reasonably
guaranteed at its current site.
      2.   The artwork has become a danger to public safety in its current
site.
      3.   The site has changed so that the artwork is no longer compatible
with the site.
In the case of an unconditional, permanent acquisition of public artwork which
qualifies for relocation hereunder, P.A.A.C. will, nevertheless, attempt to
obtain approval from the artist prior to recommending relocation. If it is
unable to obtain the approval of the artist, P.A.A.C. may still recommend and
the Village Board may authorize relocation of the public artwork to another
public site. In the case of temporarily placed privately owned artwork which
qualifies for relocation, P.A.A.C. will seek the permission of the owner to
relocate same.
If P.A.A.C. is unable to obtain the permission of the private owner to relocate
the artwork, P.A.A.C. may recommend and the Village may authorize removal of
the artwork from Village property.
   C.   P.A.A.C. may recommend removal of artwork from Village property for one
or more of the following reasons:
      1.   Physical deterioration and damage;
      2.   Excessive cost of maintenance;
      3.   Incompatibility with the site or neighborhood, with no alternative
site or neighborhood available.
In the case of public artwork which qualifies for removal hereunder, P.A.A.C.
will make a good faith effort to notify the artist and/or donor and the artist
and/or donor shall be given the opportunity to reacquire title to the artwork
prior to its removal and final disposition, which may result in Board
authorized storage, sale, exchange, gift or destruction.
In the case of temporarily placed, privately owned artwork which qualifies for
removal hereunder, the Village shall store said artwork in a safe and secure
location for sixty (60) days during which time said owner must retrieve the
owner's public artwork.
Upon removal of temporarily placed, privately owned artwork from the public
site, the Village shall provide written notice to the owner of said public
artwork of the date and time of the Village's removal of said public artwork
and the location of the place at which said public artwork is stored and the
time period and hours of the day within which the public artwork may be picked
up from said location and said notice shall further indicate if the artworks
are not picked up within said time frame that the public artworks shall become
the property of the Village and that the Village may retain the public artwork
as it sees fit or it may declare the public artwork as surplus property and
dispose of same in the manner directed by ordinance. At the conclusion of the
sixty (60) day period, the Village Board may declare the artwork as surplus and
dispose of same in the manner prescribed by ordinance.
   D.   In all cases where removal, relocation or alteration of public artwork
is considered by the P.A.A.C. and the Village, the P.A.A.C. and the Village
shall abide by the Federal Visual Artists' Rights Act of 1990. (Ord. 2001-0-75,
9-4-01)
22-13-13: ACQUISITION AND MAINTENANCE FUND:
A general public artworks acquisition and maintenance fund shall be established
by the Village to acquire and maintain public artworks. Funds from any special
endowment fund that has been established for a specific artwork may be
transferred to the general public artworks acquisition and maintenance fund if
that artwork has been removed from the public artworks collection. Proceeds of
all sales of public artworks shall be deposited in the acquisition and
maintenance fund. The President and Board of Trustees shall on an annual basis
determine the extent to which the Village will designate funds for the Public
Art Acquisition and Maintenance Fund and shall consider the recommendations and
supporting acquisition and maintenance plan and cost analysis of the Public Art
Advisory Commission in making its determination. (Ord. 2001-0-75, 9-4-01)
22-13-14: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, chapter, provision, or phrase of
this Article or its application to any person or circumstance is found to be
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the Article or the
application or the provisions to other persons or circumstances. (Ord. 2001-0-
75, 9-4-01)
ARTICLE 14
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
22-14-1: Definitions
22-14-2: Interaction With Other Code Provisions And Laws
22-14-3: Zoning
22-14-4: Permits; Application Process
22-14-5: Construction
22-14-6: Duration Of Permits
22-14-7: Height Limitations
22-14-8: General Requirements
22-14-9: Concealment And Design Standards
22-14-10: Reservation Of Village Utility Pole Space
22-14-11: Applicability Of Existing Agreements
22-14-12: Collocation On Village Owned Infrastructure
22-14-13: Notice Of Sale Or Transfer
22-14-14: Abandonment
22-14-15: Dispute Resolution
22-14-16: Indemnification
22-14-17: Insurance
22-14-18: Maintenance Of Small Wireless Facilities
22-14-19: Revocation Of Permit
22-14-20: Exceptions To Applicability
22-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings set forth below, and are hereby defined, as follows:
ACT: The Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, 50 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 835/1 et seq.
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes
adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those
codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole, whether existing or new.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5),
as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as
amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A monetary one-time charge unless otherwise provided in this article.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group
of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the National
Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their
eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at
47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or
local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or
initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the
State, a unit of local government, or a Special Purpose District located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
PUBLIC UTILITY: A "public utility" shall have the same meaning as set forth in
section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-
105.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
Right-of-way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
STRUCTURAL ENGINEER: A person licensed under the laws of the State of Illinois
to practice structural engineering.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic
control, or a similar function.
VILLAGE: The Village of Oak Park.
VILLAGE UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in public
rights-of-way.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
18-393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-2: INTERACTION WITH OTHER CODE PROVISIONS AND LAWS:
The provisions of this article are intended to supplement general requirements
and standards regarding the siting of telecommunication facilities and
generally applicable requirements for construction within public rights-of-way
set forth elsewhere in this Code. In the event of a conflict between a
provision of this article and a provision contained elsewhere in this Code
regarding small wireless facilities as defined above, the provision of this
article shall control. In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or
regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the wireless
provider shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum
extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or regulations. (Ord.
18-393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-3: ZONING:
Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and shall not
be subject to zoning review if collocated in rights-of-way in any zoning
district. Small wireless facilities outside rights-of-way shall be subject to
the Village's zoning approval processes and restrictions as required by the
Village's zoning ordinance. (Ord. 18-393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-4: PERMITS; APPLICATION PROCESS:
Unless otherwise specifically exempted in this article, a permit to collocate a
small wireless facility within the Village shall be required. Permits are
subject to the following:
   A.   Permit Applications: Permit applications for the collocation of small
wireless facilities shall be made on a form provided by the Village. In
addition to any generally applicable information required of other
communications service providers or for other installations in the public
right-of-way, small wireless facility applications to collocate on a utility
pole or wireless support structure shall provide the following information:
      1.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, 225
Illinois Compiled Statutes 340/4;
      2.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed
small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or
structures would be installed. The photographs shall include a digital photo
simulation of the proposed location providing before and after views
demonstrating the true visual impact of proposed wireless facilities on the
surrounding environment;
      3.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 340/4, for each proposed small wireless
facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed;
      4.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
      5.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
      6.   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained in this article and with the various
other requirements set forth in this Code to the best of the applicant's
knowledge;
      7.   Copies of all licenses, permits and approvals required by or from
the Village (i.e., zoning approval where required), other agencies and units of
government with jurisdiction of the design, construction, location and
operation of said small wireless facilities. The applicant shall maintain such
licenses, permits and approvals in full force and effect and provide evidence
of renewal or extension thereof when granted; and
      8.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facilities are to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
   B.   Means Of Submission: Permit applications and all supporting information
shall be submitted by personal delivery or by other means approved by the
Village.
   C.   Multiple Applications For Same Location: Multiple applications for
collocations on the same utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
processed based on a first fully complete application, first-served basis.
   D.   Permit Application Fees: All applications for collocation of small
wireless facilities shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as
follows:
      1.   A fee of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) for an application to
collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure;
      2.   A fee of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small
wireless facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more
than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support
structures; and
      3.   A fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each small wireless
facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new
utility pole for such collocation.
   E.   Permit Review Timelines:
      1.   Completeness Of Application: Applications for the collocation of
small wireless facilities shall be reviewed for conformance with the
requirements of the Act, this article and other applicable provisions of this
Code. Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the Village shall
determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an
application is incomplete, the Village must specifically identify the missing
information. Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends a
notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information. An application shall be deemed complete if the Village fails to
provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days after all
documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the Village's permit
application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
      2.   Existing Pole Or Wireless Support Structure: An application to
collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be
deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within
ninety (90) days after the submission of a completed application. A permit
application shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny
the application within ninety (90) days, subject to the following:
         a.   If an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on
a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of
its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five
(75) days after the submission of a completed application.
         b.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the
ninetieth (90th) day after submission of the complete application or the tenth
(10th) day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The
receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial
of the permit request within the allowed time limit.
      3.   New Utility Pole: An application to collocate a small wireless
facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails
to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after
the submission of a completed application. A permit application shall be deemed
approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within one
hundred twenty (120) days subject to the following:
         a.   If an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on
a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of
its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred
five (105) days after the submission of a completed application.
         b.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the one
hundred twentieth (120th) day after submission of the complete application or
the tenth (10th) day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the
Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the
Village's denial of the permit request within the allowed time limit.
   F.   Tolling: The time limitations for approval or denial of applications
shall be tolled by notice to an applicant that its application is incomplete as
set forth above, upon mutual agreement of the parties, or by a local, State or
Federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes a delay.
   G.   Pole Replacement: Permit approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure at the applicant's
sole cost where such replacement is deemed necessary for compliance with the
requirements of this article or this Code regarding the siting of small
wireless facilities or other applicable codes or regulations concerning public
safety.
   H.   Denial: The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this article. The reasons for any permit denial shall be
provided in a written denial notice sent to the applicant and shall include the
specific Code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based.
   I.   Resubmittal After Denial: In the case of a permit denial, an applicant
may cure the deficiencies identified in the denial notice and resubmit a
revised application once within thirty (30) days after the denial notice is
sent to the applicant without payment of an additional application fee. The
Village shall have thirty (30) days to approve or deny the resubmitted
application or it is deemed approved if the applicant has notified the Village
in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed
approved basis, which notification must be provided with the resubmitted
application. Review of a resubmitted application is limited to the deficiencies
in the original denial notice. This subsection does not apply if a revised
application is not resubmitted within thirty (30) days, or curing any
deficiencies in the original application requires review of a new location, new
or different structure for collocation, new antennas, or other wireless
equipment associated with the small wireless facilities. In such cases, a new
application and application fee are required.
   J.   Consolidated Applications: Consolidated applications for the
collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless facilities shall be
permitted if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small
wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. Each
consolidated application shall provide all the information required by this
article for each small wireless facility at each location. If such an
application includes incomplete information for one or more small wireless
facility collocations, or includes small wireless facilities that do not
qualify for consolidated treatment, or that are otherwise denied, the Village
may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
   K.   Alternate Locations: If an applicant is seeking to install a new
utility pole as part of its application, the Village may propose that the small
wireless facility be located on an existing pole or existing wireless support
structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed collocation. The
applicant shall accept the proposed alternate location so long as it has the
right to use the location on reasonable terms and conditions unless the
alternate location imposes technical limits or additional material costs as
determined by the applicant. If the applicant refuses an alternate location
based on the foregoing, the applicant shall provide legally competent evidence
in the form of a written certification under oath describing the property
rights, technical limits or material cost reasons that prevent the alternate
location from being utilized.
   L.   Exemptions: No application, permit approval or fee shall be required
from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the right-of-way
for the work set forth below, subject to the provider's compliance with Village
permit requirements where traffic patterns are affected or lane closures are
required:
      1.   Routine maintenance not requiring replacement of wireless facilities
if the wireless provider notifies the Village in writing at least forty eight
(48) hours prior to the planned maintenance;
      2.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that
are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider
notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement
and includes equipment specifications, including the following:
         a.   The equipment type and model numbers for the replacement of
equipment consistent with the equipment specifications information required for
a permit application for original installation;
         b.   Information sufficient to establish that the replacement is
substantially similar. The wireless provider shall provide all information
necessary and requested by the Village to establish that the replacement is
substantially similar. The Village has the sole right and responsibility to
determine if a proposed small wireless facility is substantially similar to the
existing small wireless facility; or
         c.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables that are
strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety
Codes. (Ord. 18-393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-5: CONSTRUCTION:
Collocation for which permits are approved shall be completed within one
hundred eighty (180) days of issuance of the permit, unless the Village agrees
to extend the period or delay is caused by make-ready work for a Village
utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the
site, provided the applicant has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Permits that are not completed
within applicable timelines shall be void absent an extension granted in
writing by the Village. (Ord. 18-393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-6: DURATION OF PERMITS:
Permits issued for small wireless facilities pursuant to this article shall be
for a period of not less than five (5) years. Permits are subject to renewal at
the end of the five (5) year permit period for a successive five (5) year term
so long as the installation complies with the applicable code provision in
force at the time of renewal. A finding by the Village at the time of a request
for renewal that an installation does not comply with the applicable code
provisions in force at the time of the renewal request shall be in writing. If
the Act is repealed or found unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, all permits granted by the Village under this article shall
terminate at the end of their current term. (Ord. 18-393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-7: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Antenna Installations: The maximum permitted height of a small wireless
facility is ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support structure
on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
   B.   New Poles: The maximum permitted height of new or replacement utility
pole or wireless-support structure on which a small wireless facility is
collocated is the higher of:
      1.   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted, and that is located within three
hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support
structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the Village. The Village
may designate which intersecting right-of- way within three hundred feet (300')
of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the
height limitation for such facility; or
      2.   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
   C.   Waiver Process: A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the
Village Manager or the Manager's designee from the maximum permitted height of
a new pole set forth in this section, if the wireless provider can establish
that:
      1.   Because of a particular unusual condition, a particular hardship or
practical difficulty to the wireless provider would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, and such hardship or difficulty has not been created
by the wireless provider; and
      2.   Existing utility poles or wireless support structures, or a new
utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new pole allowed by this
section cannot accommodate the wireless facility at a height necessary to
function effectively, under reasonable terms and conditions; and
      3.   The use of existing utility poles or other wireless support
structures, or a new utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new
pole allowed by this section, is not technically feasible. (Ord. 18-393, 7-23-
2018)
22-14-8: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Public Safety Technology: A wireless provider's operation of a small
wireless facility may not interfere with the frequencies used by a public
safety agency for public safety communications. A wireless provider must
install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause
unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications
equipment. Unacceptable interference is determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licenses by a public safety agency. If a small wireless facility causes such
interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the
interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own
expense, shall take all reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate the
interference, including, but not limited to, powering down the small wireless
facility and later powering up the small wireless facility for intermittent
testing, if necessary. The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless
facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not making a
good faith effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the
abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety
spectrum established by the FCC, including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973
and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. The burden to establish the good faith
effort shall be on the wireless provider, which shall timely deliver to the
Village all information necessary to demonstrate its efforts to resolve the
interference consistent with the Code of Federal Regulations sections cited
above. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a
public nuisance and the small wireless facility may be abated through the
procedures for abatement of such nuisances set forth in this Code.
   B.   Restrictions: A wireless provider shall not construct or maintain any
wireless facility that:
      1.   Obstructs, impedes or hinders the usual travel or public safety on a
right-of-way;
      2.   Obstructs the legal use of right-of-way by utility users;
      3.   Violates nondiscriminatory applicable codes;
      4.   Violates or conflicts with any provision of this Code or other
applicable ordinance or regulation adopted by the Village, except to the extent
such provision, ordinance or regulation may be modified by the provisions of
this article; or
      5.   Violates the Federal Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 USC
section 12101 et seq.
   C.   Contractual Requirements: Wireless providers shall comply with all
requirements imposed by a contract between the Village and any private property
owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles
and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   D.   Ground-Mounted Equipment: Ground-mounted equipment may be installed by
a wireless provider in the rights-of-way pursuant to a license agreement with
the Village as required by this article with regard to spacing and other
requirements.
   E.   Undergrounding: The wireless provider shall comply with Village Code
provisions, ordinances or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements,
if any, that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing
utility poles or equipment in the right-of-way.
      1.   Waiver: A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the Village
Manager or the Manager's designee to allow wireless facilities to be located
above ground in an area where this Code, Village ordinances or regulations
prohibit or restrict above ground facilities if the wireless provider can
establish that:
         a.   Underground equipment is not technically feasible and there is no
reasonable alternative or location that is more aesthetically favorable to
adjacent property owners and to effective use and management of the right-of-
way;
         b.   An above ground wireless facility at the proposed location is
necessary at the proposed location to provide coverage in a specified area;
         c.   An above ground wireless facility at the proposed location will
not disrupt traffic or pedestrian circulation or constitute a safety hazard;
         d.   An above ground wireless facility at the proposed location will
not interfere with public safety uses or frequencies;
         e.   Space exists within the public right-of-way to accommodate the
above ground wireless facility at the proposed location;
         f.   An above ground wireless facility at the proposed location will
not create a safety hazard;
         g.   The above ground wireless facility is located and designed in
such a way so as to minimize its visual impact on adjacent properties; and
         h.   In any historical area, that the above ground wireless facility
will not detrimentally affect the historical nature of the area.
      2.   Screening For Ground Mounted Facilities: Where a ground- mounted
facility is allowed, such equipment shall be screened around the perimeter in
accordance with a landscape plan sealed by a professional landscape engineer
and approved by the Village Manager or the Manager's designee. The owner or
wireless provider shall be responsible for maintenance of all landscaping as
provided in the approved landscape plan.
      3.   Future Undergrounding: The Village may determine to eliminate above-
ground utility poles of a particular type generally. In the event that such a
utility pole has a collocated small wireless facility in place at the time of
such a determination, the Village shall either:
         a.   Continue to maintain the utility pole, or install and maintain a
reasonable utility pole or wireless support structure for the collocation of
the small wireless facility; or
         b.   Offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider at a
reasonable cost, or allow the wireless provider to install its own utility pole
so it can maintain service from that location.
   F.   Collocation Limits: Wireless providers shall not collocate small
wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of an electric
distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone
of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole. However, the antenna and
support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the
communications space on the Village utility pole and on the top of the pole, if
not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable
codes for work involving the top of the pole. For purposes of this subsection,
the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and
"electric supply zone" have the meanings given to those terms in the National
Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers.
   G.   Code Compliance: Wireless providers shall comply with applicable codes
and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety. (Ord. 18-
393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-9: CONCEALMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
Every wireless facility installation shall comply with the following standards:
   A.   General Stealth, Concealment And Design Standards: Installations shall
comply with any stealth, concealment, design and aesthetic standards applicable
to utility installations in the public rights-of-way as determined by the
Village Manager or the Manager's designee, as well as any written design
standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment, design and aesthetic requirements as adopted
by the Village.
   B.   Historic Districts And Landmarks: For areas designated as Historic
Districts, or on buildings or structures designated as historic landmarks
pursuant to chapter 7, article 9, "Historic Preservation", of this Code, in
addition to the stealth, concealment and design requirements referenced above,
the following additional restrictions/conditions apply to the installation of
small wireless facilities:
      1.   Small wireless facilities shall be comprised of materials that are
consistent with the surrounding elements so as to blend architecturally with
any buildings or structures designated as historic landmarks or located within
a designated Historic District, and shall be designed to blend with the
surrounding historical landmarks and/or district in design and color.
      2.   Small wireless facilities shall be approved by the Village Manager
or the Manager's designee.
   C.   Limitations:
      1.   Any stealth, concealment and design standards, including
restrictions on a specific category of utility poles, may not have the effect
of prohibiting any provider's technology. Such stealth, concealment and design
measures shall not be considered a part of the small wireless facility for
purposes of the size restrictions of a small wireless facility.
      2.   This subsection shall not be construed to limit the Village's
enforcement of historic preservation in conformance with the requirements
adopted pursuant to the Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation
Act, 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3420/1 et seq., or the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966, 54 USC section 300101 et seq., and the regulations
adopted to implement those laws.
   D.   Signage: Other than signs required by Federal or State laws or
regulations or identification and locating markings, installation of signs on a
small wireless facility is prohibited.
   E.   Color: A small wireless facility, including all related equipment and
appurtenances, must be a color that blends with the surroundings of the pole,
structure, tower or infrastructure on which it is mounted and use non-
reflective materials which blend with the materials and colors of the
surrounding area and structures. Any wiring must be covered with an appropriate
cover.
   F.   Antenna Panel Covering: A small wireless facility antenna may include a
cap or other antenna panel covering or shield to the extent such covering would
not result in a larger or more noticeable facility. Such covering must be of a
color that blends with the color of the pole, structure, tower or
infrastructure on which it is mounted. (Ord. 18-393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-10: RESERVATION OF VILLAGE UTILITY POLE SPACE:
The Village may reserve space on Village-owned utility poles for future public
safety uses or for Village electric utility uses. Such reservation may preclude
collocation of small wireless facilities if the Village reasonably determines
that the Village's utility pole cannot accommodate both uses. (Ord. 18-393, 7-
23-2018)
22-14-11: APPLICABILITY OF EXISTING AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Existing Installations: Subject to any applicable termination
provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the Village and a
wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall remain in effect
for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted prior to June 1, 2018.
   B.   Applications Received Between June 1, 2018 And June 1, 2020: Subject to
any applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place
between the Village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of
small wireless facilities on Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such
agreement shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated
on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1,
2018, but prior to June 1, 2020, until June 1, 2020 or receipt by the Village
from the wireless provider of a notice that it is opting to accept the rates,
fees and terms of this article and the Act received after June 1, 2020,
whichever is later.
   C.   Applications Received After June 1, 2020: Subject to any applicable
termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the
Village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless
facilities on Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall
remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1, 2020, until
receipt by the Village of a notice from the wireless provider that it is
accepting the rates, fees, terms and conditions of this article. (Ord. 18-393,
7-23-2018)
22-14-12: COLLOCATION ON VILLAGE OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE:
   A.   Fee: The annual fee to collocate a small wireless facility on a
Village-owned utility pole located in a right-of-way shall be the higher of:
      1.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00)/year per small wireless facility; or
      2.   The actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider's use of space on the pole.
   B.   Exception: Small wireless facilities collocated on Village- owned
utility poles located outside of public right-of-way are not subject to the
rate limitations in this section.
   C.   License Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an approved permit to
collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility pole, the Village and
the applicant shall enter into a license agreement in a form provided by the
Village for the initial collocation on a Village utility pole by the applicant.
For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a
Village utility pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a
supplement to the license agreement. (Ord. 18-393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-13: NOTICE OF SALE OR TRANSFER:
A wireless provider shall, prior to any sale or transfer of ownership or
control of a small wireless facility located within the jurisdiction of the
Village, provide written notice to the Village of such sale or transfer of
control. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider. (Ord. 18-393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-14: ABANDONMENT:
   A.   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period
of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the
facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after
receipt of written notice from the Village notifying it of the abandonment. The
notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested,
by the Village to the owner at its last known address. If the small wireless
facility is not removed within ninety (90) days after receipt of such notice,
such wireless facility shall be deemed to be a nuisance and the Village may
remove or cause the removal of such facility and recover or place a lien for
its costs, pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment or other agreement for
Village utility poles or through the procedures for abatement of nuisances set
forth in this Code.
   B.   In the event the Village suspects that the wireless provider is no
longer using the small wireless facilities to provide wireless service, it may
send the wireless provider written notice that requires the wireless provider
to remove the small wireless facility or provide proof that the small wireless
facility is operational and still being used within thirty (30) days, and
informs the wireless provider that failure to provide proof or to remove the
small wireless facility will result in the Village removing the small wireless
facility at the wireless provider's cost. (Ord. 18-393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-15: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Cook County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve
all disputes arising under the Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning
rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles
within the right-of-way, the Village shall allow the collocating person to
collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) per year per pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution
of the dispute. (Ord. 18-393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-16: INDEMNIFICATION:
Other than for liabilities and losses due to or caused by the sole negligence
of the Village or its officers, officials, employees, agents or volunteers, a
wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village and its officers,
officials, employees, agents or volunteers harmless against any and all
liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or
arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the Village
infrastructure or improvements, or right-of-way associated with such
infrastructure or improvements by the wireless provider or its employees,
agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under
this article and the Act. A wireless provider proceeding under this article
waives any claims it may have against the Village or its officers, officials,
employees, agents or volunteers with respect to consequential, incidental, or
special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. 18-
393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-17: INSURANCE:
At all times during the period in which a wireless provider's facilities are
located on Village infrastructure, improvements or in right-of-way, the
wireless provider shall, at its own sole cost and expense, carry the following
insurance coverages:
   A.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   B.   Workers' compensation insurance within statutory limits as required by
law; and
   C.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities
on the Village infrastructure, improvements or rights- of-way, including
coverage for bodily injury and property damage, with limits not less than:
      1.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to
each person;
      2.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting
from any one accident; and
      3.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability.
   D.   The wireless provider shall include the Village and its officers,
officials, employees, agents or volunteers as additional insureds on the
commercial general liability policy and shall provide certificates of insurance
and proof of inclusion of the Village and its officers, officials, employees,
agents or volunteers in a commercial general liability policy to the Village
prior to the collocation of any wireless facility, and shall keep updated
certificates and proof of inclusion on file with the Village at all times that
the provider maintains small wireless facilities within the Village.
   E.   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limits required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement that the Village and its officers, officials, employees, agents
or volunteers be named additional insureds. A wireless provider that self-
insures shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its
financial ability to self-insure the insurance limits required by the Village.
(Ord. 18-393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-18: MAINTENANCE OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   A wireless provider shall maintain all small wireless facilities
installed within the Village in a condition that maintains the safety,
integrity and aesthetics of such facilities. Small wireless facilities shall
not appear to be unkempt. In the event of a failure to properly maintain such
facilities, the Village shall notify the wireless provider, in writing, who
shall have thirty (30) days to correct the identified maintenance violation. If
not corrected within such period, the Village reserves the right to take such
action as it deems necessary, including revocation of the permit. Maintenance
and replacement of small wireless facilities shall be performed by the wireless
provider at the wireless provider's sole cost and expense.
   B.   In the event of an emergency involving an imminent threat to life or
property, the Village may take corrective action to eliminate such emergency at
the wireless provider's expense. (Ord. 18-393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-19: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   A permit to collocate a wireless facility may be revoked for one or
more of the following reasons:
      1.   The wireless provider obtained approval by means of fraud or made a
misrepresentation of a material fact with respect to the permit application, or
any required documentation or submittal.
      2.   The wireless provider failed to construct the small wireless
facility in accordance with the approved plans.
      3.   The wireless provider failed to comply within any material condition
of a permit issued.
      4.   The wireless provider substantially expanded or altered the use or
the structure of the small wireless facility beyond what was requested in the
permit application or approved, without the approval of the Village.
      5.   The wireless provider failed to notify the Village of the
replacement of small wireless facilities as required by this article.
      6.   A substantial change of law has occurred affecting the wireless
provider's authority to occupy or use the property upon which the small
wireless facility is located.
      7.   The small wireless facility interferes with vehicular or pedestrian
use of the public right-of-way.
      8.   The wireless provider has failed to make a safe and timely
restoration of the right-of-way or the property upon which the small wireless
facility is located.
      9.   The wireless provider has failed to properly maintain the wireless
facility as required by this article.
      10.   The wireless provider has failed to abate interference with public
safety communications in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
      11.   The small wireless facility has been abandoned and the wireless
provider has failed to remove the wireless facilities as provided in this
article.
   B.   Written notification of the permit revocation shall be sent by
certified mail or shall be personally delivered to the wireless provider
setting forth the basis for the revocation. The wireless provider shall within
fourteen (14) days of the notice of revocation file a written response with the
Village Manager or the Manager's designee setting forth the reasons why the
permit should not be revoked along with such evidence in opposition to the
revocation as the wireless provider determines necessary. Failure to file a
response with the Village Manager or the Manager's designee shall be deemed an
admission of the facts set forth in the notification of written notification
and shall result in automatic revocation of the permit. The Village Manager or
the Manager's designee shall render findings and a decision within twenty one
(21) days of the date of receipt of the wireless provider's response, if any.
   C.   If the Village Manager or the Manager's designee revokes the permit,
the wireless provider may file a written notice of appeal with the Village
Manager within twenty one (21) days of notification of the permit revocation.
Such notice shall contain a response to the decision of the Village Manager or
the Manager's designee. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear the revocation
appeal and render a decision on such appeal. (Ord. 18-393, 7-23-2018)
22-14-20: EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY:
This article does not apply to the collocation of small wireless facilities on:
   A.   Property owned by a private party;
   B.   Property owned or controlled by a unit of local government that is not
located within rights-of-way (local governments are, however, required to
authorize the collocation of small wireless facilities on utility poles owned
or controlled by the local government or located within rights-of-way to the
same extent the local government permits access to utility poles for other
commercial projects or uses);
   C.   A privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure, without
the consent of the property owner;
   D.   Property owned, leased or controlled by a Park District, Forest
Preserve District, or Conservation District for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes, without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-101 et seq.;
   E.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18c-7201, Metra
Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility
as defined in section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes, 5/16-102, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter
rail service, or electric utility;
   F.   Facilities of an electric or gas public utility or such utility's
wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained
consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the
Public Utilities Act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes, 5/16-108.5; or
   G.   Small wireless facilities owned by the Village. (Ord. 18-393, 7-23-
2018)
ARTICLE 15
SYSTEM OF NUMBERING FOR DWELLING UNITS AND COMMERCIAL/OFFICE UNITS IN BUILDINGS
SECTION:
22-15-1: Definitions
22-15-2: Building Addresses In General
22-15-3: Dwelling - Multi-Family, Commercial/Office And Hotel/Motel Addresses
22-15-4: Coach House Addresses
22-15-5: Multi-Tenant Retail Center Addresses
22-15-6: Applicability Of Article
22-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, and are
hereby defined as follows:
APARTMENT: A dwelling unit located in a dwelling - multi-family building where
the building is owned by single or multiple owners.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the enclosure, protection, shelter, or
support of persons, animals, or property of any kind and which is permanently
affixed to the ground. The term building does not include fences.
BUSINESS: An occupation, employment, or enterprise that occupies time,
attention, labor and materials, where merchandise is exhibited or sold, or
where services are offered.
COACH HOUSE: An additional dwelling unit located within a detached garage on
the upper floor that is associated with, and incidental to, the principal
single-family dwelling on the same lot as defined in section 2.3 of the
Village's Zoning Ordinance, as amended. A coach house includes separate cooking
and sanitary facilities, with its own means of ingress and egress.
COMMERCIAL: Any use of floor space in a building for the engagement of any
commerce.
CONDOMINIUM: A dwelling unit located in a dwelling - multi-family building that
is owned pursuant to the Illinois Condominium Property Act, 765 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 605/1 et seq., as amended.
DWELLING: A structure, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for
human habitation, including single-family dwellings (detached and attached),
two-family dwellings, townhouse dwellings, and multi-family dwellings, but
excluding hotels/motels.
DWELLING - MULTI-FAMILY: A structure containing two (2) or more dwelling units
used for residential occupancy not designed as a townhouse dwelling as defined
in section 2.3 of the Village's Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
DWELLING - SINGLE-FAMILY: A structure containing only one dwelling unit as
defined in section 2.3 of the Village's Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms, including individualized bathroom and kitchen
facilities, which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for a
household as defined in section 2.3 of the Village's Zoning Ordinance, as
amended.
HOTEL/MOTEL: A facility that provides sleeping accommodation for a fee and
customary lodging services as defined in section 2.3 of the Village's Zoning
Ordinance, as amended.
MULTI-TENANT RETAIL CENTER: A group of three (3) or more retail establishments
that is planned, owned and/or managed as a single property as defined in
section 2.3 of the Village's Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
OFFICE: A business that engages in the processing, manipulation, or application
of business information or professional expertise as defined in section 2.3 of
the Village's Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in a property or recorded in the official records of the
state, county, or municipality as holding title to a property, or otherwise
having control of a property, including the guardian of the estate of any such
person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
UNIT: An area within a building that has a door and walls that is located
within a passageway of a building, including corridors and hallways. (Ord. 20-
072, 9-8-2020)
22-15-2: BUILDING ADDRESSES IN GENERAL:
   A.   All buildings facing a street shall have an address as required by this
article, including coach houses located on a street corner with street access,
to be submitted by an owner and subject to approval by the Village.
   B.   An address for a below grade unit located within a building shall have
an "L" preceding its address, i.e. L101, L102, L201, and L202.
   C.   Unit numbers shall only be numerical and shall contain no spaces or
special characters except for lower level units as set forth in subsection B
above.
   D.   Any building with nine (9) or less floors above grade with multiple
units on each floor shall have a three (3) digit numerical address for each
unit and the first digit of the unit number shall reflect the floor number,
i.e., first floor numbers shall be 101, 102 and 103 and for each unit
thereafter shall follow this sequence and second floor numbers shall be 201,
202 and 203 each unit thereafter shall follow this sequence.
   E.   Any building with ten (10) or more floors above grade with multiple
units on each floor shall have a four (4) digit numerical address for each unit
for floors ten (10) or more above grade, and the first two digits of the unit
number shall reflect the floor number, i.e., tenth floor numbers shall be
1001,1002 and 1003 and for each unit thereafter shall follow this sequence and
eleventh floor numbers shall be 1101,1102 and 1103 each unit thereafter shall
follow this sequence.
   F.   Any building with one (1) unit per each floor shall have a one (1)
digit numerical address for each unit. (Ord. 20-072, 9-8-2020)
22-15-3: DWELLING - MULTI-FAMILY, COMMERCIAL/OFFICE AND HOTEL/MOTEL ADDRESSES:
   A.   Each unit in a dwelling - multi-family building or in a commercial/
office building or combination thereof shall have an address. Unit addresses
shall be sequenced consistently for all building levels.
   B.   Dwelling units shall have an address based upon the type of unit as
follows:
      1.   A dwelling unit in an apartment building shall have the designation
"APT" preceding the unit number.
      2.   A dwelling unit in a condominium building shall have the designation
"Unit" preceding the unit number.
      3.   All other units located in an apartment building or a condominium
building shall have the designation "#" proceeding the unit number, i.e., units
that contain laundry facilities, storage space, or mechanical or electrical
equipment.
   C.   A commercial/office unit shall have the designation "STE" or "OFC"
preceding the unit number and the unit designation must be consistent
throughout the building. Numbers shall follow the requirements of section
22-15-2 above. All other commercial/office units located in a building shall
have the designation "#" proceeding the unit number, i.e., units that contain
supply closets, breakrooms, storage space, or mechanical or electrical
equipment.
   D.   Units located in a hotel/motel shall have the designation "RM"
preceding the unit number. Numbers shall follow the requirements of section
22-15-2 above. All other commercial/office units located in a building shall
have the designation "#" proceeding the unit number, i.e., units that contain
laundry facilities, supply closets, breakrooms, storage space, or mechanical or
electrical equipment. (Ord. 20-072, 9-8-2020)
22-15-4: COACH HOUSE ADDRESSES:
A coach house that is not located on a street corner with street access shall
have an address with the designation "Rear" or "Side" with no number. A coach
house shall have the same primary street address as a principal building on a
property. (Ord. 20-072, 9-8-2020)
22-15-5: MULTI-TENANT RETAIL CENTER ADDRESSES:
A multi-tenant retail center as defined in the Village's Zoning Ordinance shall
have a single, unique base address for the entire center and each individual
commercial establishment within the center shall have its own individual
designated address. In the event no single, unique base address can be
designated between individual establishments, the address for each individual
establishment shall follow a single floor unit address sequence set forth in
above. Unit addresses shall follow the commercial/office unit designations in
section 22-15-3(C) above. (Ord. 20-072, 9-8-2020)
22-15-6: APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE:
   A.   The requirements of this article shall only be applicable in the
following instances:
      1.   The construction of a new building;
      2.   The conversion of a building from one use defined in this article to
another use defined in this article, i.e., apartment building to a condominium
building, apartment building to commercial building;
      3.   Any building that is vacant for which an occupancy permit
application has been filed with the Village;
      4.   A change in occupancy of a commercial establishment; and
      5.   When a building or unit owner proposes to change the existing unit
numbering of a building.
   B.   No occupancy permit or other required permit for any of the above
instances set forth in subsection A above shall be issued by the Village until
there is compliance with this article. (Ord. 20-072, 9-8-2020)
ARTICLE 16
PARKWAY MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
22-16-1: Definitions
22-16-2: Persons Required To Maintain Parkway Fronting Or Abutting Parcels Or
Lots Owned, Occupied, Leased Or Otherwise Controlled By Them Within The Village
22-16-1:   DEFINITIONS:
CULTIVATED GARDEN: An area of land in which plants, other than turf grasses,
are intentionally grown and receive care such as mulching, watering, pruning,
or the removal of noxious plants. Plants within a cultivated garden may be
installed or naturally recruited, as may occur with native plants.
NATIVE GARDEN: A native garden is a cultivated garden containing a minimum of
seventy percent (70%) plants which are native to Northeastern Illinois or which
provide nourishment or habitat for native or migratory pollinators during any
stage of their lifecycle, or both.
PARKWAY: The portion of Village Owned Property generally described as the
public property between the public sidewalk and the street curb.
TREES AND SHRUBS: All woody vegetation with a height in excess of 30" at
maturity. (Ord. 25-138, 3-18-2025)
22-16-2:   PERSONS REQUIRED TO MAINTAIN PARKWAY FRONTING OR ABUTTING PARCELS OR
LOTS OWNED, OCCUPIED, LEASED OR OTHERWISE CONTROLLED BY THEM WITHIN THE
VILLAGE:
   A.   The maintenance of trees and shrubs in the parkway is the
responsibility of the Forester as set forth in chapter 25 of this code.
   B.   The owner, occupant, lessee or person otherwise legally in possession
and control of any lot or parcel in the Village is responsible for the
condition and maintenance of the parkway fronting, abutting, or adjacent to any
such lot or parcel, per IPMC General Requirements, Section 302 (Exterior
Property Areas) 302.4 Weeds/Plants, except for the installation of a cultivated
or native garden, for which no permit is required.
   C.   All plants within the cultivated and native gardens in the parkway
shall be maintained in a manner consistent with their habit, except that within
clear site areas plants must be maintained per section
25-1-6  of this code and in no case shall plants exceed 36" in height, or
otherwise by reason of location or condition constitute an imminent danger to
the health, safety or welfare of the general public.
   D.   Cultivated and native gardens in the parkway shall not be placed within
four (4) feet of a fire hydrant.
   E.   Between March 1 and October 31 containers smaller than thirty (30)
gallons may be placed in the parkway as a feature of a cultivated or native
garden so long as their placement by reason of location or condition does not
constitute an imminent danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the general
public.
   F.   The Village shall not be responsible for compensating, financial or
otherwise, persons for gardens, containers, fences, or structures in the
parkway if their disturbance is a result of Village work on Village owned
property. (Ord. 25- 138, 3-18-2025)
CHAPTER 23
SUBDIVISIONS
Subdivision Requirements   1
ARTICLE 1
SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
23-1-1: Certified Map or Plat to be Recorded
23-1-2: Rules, Regulations and Conditions
23-1-3: Prerequisite to Approval of Map or Plat
23-1-1: CERTIFIED MAP OR PLAT TO BE RECORDED:
Any person subdividing lands, blocks, lots or sublots, or any part thereof,
located in the Village, shall make a map or plat of such subdivision, and
before recording the same in the Recorder's office of Cook County, as provided
by law, shall submit the same to the Director of Public Works and the Director
of Community Development for their examination who, if they shall approve the
same, shall so certify. The map or plat shall not be valid or effective as far
as the interests of the Village are concerned until it shall have been approved
by the Board of Trustees.
23-1-2: RULES, REGULATIONS AND CONDITIONS:
Any person subdividing lands, blocks, lots, sublots or parcels of land, or any
part thereof, shall, in the plat thereof, comply with the following rules,
regulations and conditions:
   A.   Streets. Each street in the proposed new subdivision shall be
continuous with the established street, if any, near to or contiguous thereto
and running in the same direction: i.e. Each new street shall be a projection
of an established street, if any, in the Village, whether the established
street immediately adjoins a given street in the proposed new subdivision or is
interrupted before it reaches the new street which is to be a projection of the
established street. The width of each street in the proposed new subdivision
shall be not less than sixty six feet (66') or more than one hundred feet
(100'). (1981 Code)
   B.   Lots and Blocks. Lots and blocks shall be shown on the plat submitted
and the required width of each lot for the respective use district shall be as
set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the Village. (Ord. 1982-0-65, 11-15-82)
   C.   Occupation of Land by Buildings. No land shall become occupied by a
building and accessory buildings except in accordance with the subdivision plat
submitted and approved by the Board of Trustees.
23-1-3: PREREQUISITES TO APPROVAL OF MAP OR PLAT:
No plat, map or subdivision of any block, lot, sublot or part thereof, or any
piece or parcel of land shall be approved by the Board of Trustees until the
same shall be properly certified by a surveyor and acknowledged by the owner as
provided by the general laws of this State; and until the owner shall make oath
that he believes he is the owner in fee of the property described in the plat;
and until the same shall have been approved by the Plan Commission, the
Director of Community Development, and the Director of Public Works.
CHAPTER 23A
TAXES
Real Estate Transfer Tax   1
Alcoholic Liquor Purchase At Retail, Privilege Tax   2
Municipal Telecommunications Tax   3
Hotel/Motel And Transient Occupancy Rental Unit Tax   4
Home Rule Retailers' And Service Occupation Tax      5
Motor Fuel Tax   6
Municipal Gas Use Tax   7
Cable/Video Service Provider Fee And PEG Access Support Fee      8
Utility Tax   9
Cannabis Retailers' Occupation Tax      10
ARTICLE 1
REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX
SECTION:
23A-1-1: Definitions
23A-1-2: Imposition Of Tax
23A-1-3: Primary Liability For Tax
23A-1-4: Declaration Forms
23A-1-5: Deeds
23A-1-6: Exempt Transactions
23A-1-7: Exemptions
23A-1-8: Revenue Stamps Required; Proof Of Water Bill Payment And Release Of
Recorded Liens Required
23A-1-9: Real Estate Transfer Declaration; Filing
23A-1-10: Transfers In Trust
23A-1-11: Lien Created; Enforcement
23A-1-12: Enforcement; Suit For Collection
23A-1-13: Interest And Penalties
23A-1-14: Proceeds Of Tax; Exception For HOME Participants
23A-1-15: Penalty For Violation
23A-1-16: Effective Date
23A-1-17: Severability
23A-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
PERSON: Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator,
assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint
venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, municipal
corporation, political subdivision of the state of Illinois, domestic or
foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society or any group of
individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal,
nonprofit, or otherwise, and the United States or any instrumentality thereof.
Whenever the term "person" is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the term as applied to associations shall mean the owners or part
owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
RECORDATION: The recording of deeds with the office of recorder of deeds or the
registration of deeds with the registrar of titles of Cook County, Illinois.
VALUE: The amount of the full actual consideration for any transfer covered
hereunder, including the amount of any mortgage or other lien assumed by the
grantee or purchaser. (Ord. 1983-0-77, 11-21-1983; amd. Ord. 1984-0-75, 11-19-
1984)
23A-1-2: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
A tax is imposed on the transfer of title to real estate located in the Village
as evidenced by the recordation of a deed by any person or by the delivery of
any deed or assignment of interest of said real property, whether investing the
owner with the beneficial interest in or legal title to said property or merely
the possession or use thereof for any purpose or to secure future payment of
money or the future transfer of any such real property.
The tax imposed shall be eight dollars ($8.00) for every one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) value or fraction thereof as stated in the declaration. (Ord. 1986-
0-23, 4-7-1986; amd. Ord. 1993-0-7, 1-19-1993)
23A-1-3: PRIMARY LIABILITY FOR TAX:
The primary liability for payment of said tax shall be borne by the grantor or
seller involved in any such transaction; provided, however, it shall be
unlawful for the grantee or purchaser to accept a conveyance if the transfer
tax has not been paid. If the tax has not been paid and the stamps affixed to
the deed, then the grantee's title shall be subject to the lien provided in
section 23A-1-11 of this article and the grantee or purchaser shall be liable
for payment of the tax. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and
all other taxes. (Ord. 1983-0-77, 11-21-1983)
23A-1-4: DECLARATION FORMS:
At the time the tax is paid, there shall also be presented to the Director of
Finance, on a form prescribed by him, a declaration signed by at least one of
the sellers or grantors and also signed by at least one of the purchasers or
grantees involved in the transaction, or by their attorneys or agents, or by a
licensed real estate salesperson or broker having knowledge of the terms of the
transaction, which declaration shall state the full consideration for the
property so transferred and shall be deemed a confidential record by the
Village Clerk. Where the declaration is signed by an attorney, agent, licensed
real estate salesperson or broker, on behalf of sellers or buyers who have the
power of direction to deal with the title to the real estate under a land trust
agreement, the trustees being the mere repository of record legal title with a
duty of conveying the real estate only when and if directed in writing by the
beneficiary or beneficiaries having the power of direction, said attorney,
licensed real estate salesman, or broker need only identify the land trust
which is the repository of record legal title and not the beneficiary or
beneficiaries having the power of direction under the land trust agreement.
(Ord. 1983-0-77, 11-21-1983)
23A-1-5: DEEDS:
Every deed shall show the date of the transaction which it evidences, the names
of the grantor and grantee, and a legal description of the property to which it
relates. (Ord. 1983-0-77, 11-21-1983)
23A-1-6: EXEMPT TRANSACTIONS 1 :
The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the following transactions,
provided said transaction in each case is accompanied by an exemption service
fee paid to the Village in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00) per exempt
transaction and by a certificate setting forth the facts or such other
certificate of record or other documentation as the Director of Finance may
require:
   A.   Transactions involving property acquired by or from any governmental
body, or any transaction involving property acquired by and from corporations,
societies, associations, foundations or institutions organized and operated
exclusively for charitable, religious or educational purposes ("charitable
organizations"). The latter transaction is exempt only when one charitable
organization conveys property to another charitable organization or when
property is acquired from a religious organization by an organization or person
other than a charitable organization;
   B.   Transactions in which the deeds secure debt or other obligations;
   C.   Transactions in which the deeds, without additional consideration,
confirm, correct, modify or supplement deeds previously recorded;
   D.   Transactions in which the actual consideration is less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00);
   E.   Transactions in which the deeds are tax deeds;
   F.   Transactions in which the deeds are releases of property which is
security for a debt or other obligation;
   G.   Deeds of partition;
   H.   Transactions made pursuant to mergers, consolidations, or transfers or
sales of substantially all of the assets of a corporation pursuant to plans of
reorganization;
   I.   Transactions between subsidiary corporations and their parents for no
consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of the subsidiary
corporation's stock;
   J.   Transactions wherein there is an actual exchange of real property
except that the money difference or money's worth paid from one or the other
shall not be exempt from the tax;
   K.   Transactions representing transfers subject to the imposition of a
documentary stamp tax imposed by the government of the United States; and
   L.   A transfer by lease. (Ord. 15-103, 6-1-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. Applicable to any and all transactions on or after May 1, 2015.
23A-1-7: EXEMPTIONS:
The taxes imposed by this article shall not be imposed on or transferred by an
executor or administrator to a legatee, heir or distributee where the transfer
is being made pursuant to will or by intestacy. The tax provided by this
article shall further be exempt where the transaction is effected by operation
or law or upon delivery or transfer in the following instances:
   A.   From a decedent to his executor or administrator;
   B.   From a minor to his guardian or from a guardian to his ward upon
attaining majority;
   C.   From an incompetent to his conservator, or similar legal
representative, or from a conservator or similar legal representative to a
former incompetent upon removal or disability;
   D.   From a bank, trust company, financial institution, insurance company or
other similar entity, or nominee, custodian, or trustee therefor, to a public
officer or commission, or person designated by such officer or commission or by
a court, in the taking over of its assets, in whole or in part, under state or
federal law regulating or supervising such institutions, nor upon redelivery or
retransfer by any such transferee or successor thereto;
   E.   From a bankrupt or person in receivership due to insolvency to the
trustee in bankruptcy or receiver, from such receiver to such trustee or from
such trustee to such receiver, nor upon redelivery or retransfer by any such
transferee or successor thereto;
   F.   From a transferee under subsections
23A-1-7A through E of this section, inclusive, to his successor acting in the
same capacity, or from one such successor to another;
   G.   From a foreign country or national thereof to the United States or any
agency thereof, or to the government of any foreign country directed pursuant
to the authority vested in the president of the United States by section 5(b)
of the trading with the enemy act (40 Stat. 415), as amended, by the first war
powers act (55 Stat. 839);
   H.   From trustees to surviving, substitute, succeeding or additional
trustees of the same trust;
   I.   Upon the death of a joint tenant or tenant by the entirety to the
survivor or survivors. (Ord. 1983-0-77, 11-21-1983)
l23A-1-8: REVENUE STAMPS REQUIRED; PROOF OF WATER BILL PAYMENT AND RELEASE OF
RECORDED LIENS REQUIRED:
   A.   The tax herein levied and imposed shall be collected by the Director of
Finance for the Village through the sale of revenue stamps, which shall be
caused to be prepared by said Director of Finance in such quantities as said
Director of Finance may from time to time prescribe.
The stamp shall be generated from a tax meter machine on a thermally printed
self-adhesive tape and include the following:
The name of the Village of Oak Park.
The date of the purchase of the transfer stamp.
Serial number of the Village of Oak Park's tax meter machine.
Amount of the real estate transfer tax.
Serial number of the transaction.
Such revenue stamps shall be available for sale at and during the regular
business hours of the Village offices or at other locations designated by the
Director of Finance. Upon payment of the tax herein levied and imposed, the
revenue stamps so purchased shall be affixed to the deed or other instrument of
conveyance. Any person so using and affixing a revenue stamp or stamps shall
cancel it and so deface it as to render it unfit for reuse by marking it with
his initials and the day, month and year when the affixing occurs. Such
markings shall be made by writing or stamping in indelible ink or by
perforating with a machine or punch. However, the revenue stamp(s) shall not be
so defaced as to prevent ready determination of its denomination and
genuineness.
   B.   The Director of Finance shall issue no revenue stamps unless both of
the following conditions are met:
      1.   The Account Supervisor of the Water Division issues a certificate of
payment showing that all water and sewer assessments are paid in full or
otherwise issues a waiver of certification issued pursuant to rules and
regulations promulgated by the Director of Finance and in accordance with the
requirements set forth hereinbelow:
A waiver of certification may only be issued when:
         a.   A deposit is made with the Account Supervisor or his/her designee
in an amount determined by the Account Supervisor to be adequate to satisfy the
water bill in full after the final reading has been taken;
         b.   Arrangements are made with the Account Supervisor or his/her
designee to pay the water bill in full out of the sale proceeds at closing;
         c.   Evidence is presented, indicating to the satisfaction of the
Account Supervisor that the bill has been paid or that the bill is incorrect at
least with regard to the unpaid balance set forth thereon and that no unpaid
balance is due and owing on the water bill; or
         d.   As otherwise specifically set forth in the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Director of Finance.
      2.   The seller has obtained a release, executed by the Village Manager
or his designee, for all Village of Oak Park liens and encumbrances recorded
against the property. (Ord. 2011-0-64, 10-17-2011)
23A-1-9: REAL ESTATE TRANSFER DECLARATION; FILING:
A signed copy of the real estate transfer declaration filed pursuant to section
3 of the real estate transfer act of the state shall be filed with the Village
Clerk by the grantee of any deed or assignee of beneficial interest within ten
(10) days after delivery of the deed or assignment of beneficial interest, or
at the time of payment of the tax herein levied or imposed, whichever first
occurs. (Ord. 1983-0-77, 11-21-1983)
23A-1-10: TRANSFERS IN TRUST:
No trustee of real estate shall accept an assignment of beneficial interest in
real estate located in the Village without first obtaining a real estate
transfer declaration from the assignor and assignee and unless revenue stamps
in the required amount, as set forth in this article, have been affixed to the
assignment. (Ord. 1983-0-77, 11-21-1983)
23A-1-11: LIEN CREATED; ENFORCEMENT:
In the event a deed is filed for recordation or there is an assignment of
beneficial interest conveying real estate within the corporate limits of the
Village without the revenue stamps provided by this article, a lien is declared
against said real estate conveyed in the amount of the tax. The fact that the
deed or assignment does not contain an Oak Park revenue stamp in an amount
equal to five (5) times the amount of county and state transfer taxes shall
constitute constructive notice of lien. The lien may be enforced by proceedings
to foreclose, as in cases of mortgages or mechanics' liens. Suit to foreclose
this lien must be commenced within three (3) years after the date of recording
the deed. Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the Village from
bringing a civil action to collect the tax imposed by this article from any
person who has the ultimate liability for payment of the same, including
interest and penalties as hereinbelow provided. (Ord. 1983-0-77, 11-21-1983)
23A-1-12: ENFORCEMENT; SUIT FOR COLLECTION:
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any taxes herein provided, or any
purchaser or grantee shall accept a conveyance where the tax has not been paid,
the Village Attorney shall, upon request of the Village Manager, bring or cause
to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax, including interest
and penalties as hereinbelow provided, on behalf of the Village in any court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1983-0-77, 11-21-1983)
23A-1-13: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event of failure by any person to collect and pay to the Director of
Finance the tax required hereunder when the same shall be due, interest shall
accumulate and be due upon said tax at the rate of one percent (1%) per month
commencing as of the first day following the day when the tax becomes due. In
addition, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the tax and interest due shall be
assessed and collected against any person who shall fail to pay the tax imposed
by this Chapter. (Ord. 1983-0-77, 11-21-1983)
23A-1-14: PROCEEDS OF TAX; EXCEPTION FOR H.O.M.E. PARTICIPANTS:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Article,
including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the Treasury of the
Village and shall be credited to and deposited in the General Fund of the
Village; except in transactions between grantors and grantees in which the
grantee:
   A.   Is a participant in the Illinois Home Ownership Made Easy Program
(H.O.M.E.) as set forth in chapter 671/2, section 1107 of the Illinois Revised
Statutes, 1989;
   B.   Is qualified for participation in the Illinois Housing Development
Authority's low interest mortgage loan program authorized under section 7.23 of
the Illinois Housing Development Act as now or hereafter amended; and
   C.   Enters into a contract for the purchase of a H.O.M.E. qualified
property on or before January 31, 1997.
In transactions in which the grantee satisfies the three (3) conditions set
forth hereinabove, the Village shall donate the proceeds of the tax imposed
under this Article, including interest and penalties, to such grantees within
thirty (30) days after the Village's collection of said taxes. (Ord. 1992-0-7,
2-3-1992)
23A-1-15: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
In addition to the remaining provisions of this Chapter, any person found
guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement
of any provision of this Chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by
a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the first offense. (Ord. 1983-0-77, 11-21-
1983)
23A-1-16: EFFECTIVE DATE:
These provisions shall be in full force and effect from and after April 15,
1978, provided, however, these provisions shall not apply to contracts executed
prior to March 7, 1978. (Ord. 1983-0-77, 11-21-1983)
23A-1-17: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this Chapter,
or application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall for any reason be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or
invalid, said judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of
this Chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or
circumstances, but shall be confined in its operation to the provision, clause,
sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and to the person
or circumstances involved. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent
of the Village Board that this Chapter would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional or invalid provisions, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or
part thereof not been included. (Ord. 1983-0-77, 11-21-1983)
ARTICLE 2
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR PURCHASE AT RETAIL, PRIVILEGE TAX
SECTION:
23A-2-1: Village Tax On The Privilege Of Purchasing Alcoholic Liquor At Retail
Within The Village
23A-2-2: Definitions
23A-2-3: Tax Imposed
23A-2-4: Liability For Payment
23A-2-5: Collection Of Tax
23A-2-6: Rules And Regulations
23A-2-7: Filing Of Return
23A-2-8: Failure To Pay Tax
23A-2-9: Records
23A-2-10: Suspension Or Revocation Of License For Failure To Pay Tax
23A-2-11: Proceeds To Be Paid To Village Finance Director
23A-2-12: Penalty
23A-2-1: VILLAGE TAX ON THE PRIVILEGE OF PURCHASING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR AT RETAIL
WITHIN THE VILLAGE:
A tax at the rate hereinafter specified is hereby levied and imposed by the
Village on the privilege of purchasing alcoholic liquor at retail within the
Village. (Ord. 1987-0-9, 2-2-87)
23A-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Article whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this subsection:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of this
Article shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol
produced in accordance with acts of Congress and regulations promulgated
thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent
(0.5%) or less, of alcohol by volume.
PERSON: Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator,
assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint
venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation,
association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit,
whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise, whenever the
term "person" is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the
term as applied to associations shall mean the owners or part owners thereof,
and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: To obtain for use or consumption on the premises or in the
original package in exchange for consideration, whether in the form of money,
credits, barter or any other nature, and not for resale. (Ord. 1987-0-9, 2-2-
87)
23A-2-3: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon the privilege of purchasing alcoholic
liquor at retail within the Village at a rate of three percent (3%) of the
purchase price 1 , exclusive of any other tax charged for such alcoholic
liquor. However, the seller may retain an amount of money equal to two percent
(2%) of the total tax due as compensation for services rendered in the
collection and payment of such tax. (Ord. 2002-0-65, 12-2-02)
 
Notes
1 1. The effective date for this amended rate is on sales occurring after
  January 1, 2003.
23A-2-4: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT:
   A.   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall
be borne by the person who seeks the privilege of purchasing beverages
containing alcoholic liquor within the Village. Nothing in this Article shall
be construed to impose a tax on or upon the occupation of retail alcoholic
beverage dealer.
   B.   The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other
taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner, operator or manager of
every retail liquor seller to secure said tax from the purchaser and pay to the
Village of Oak Park the taxes due in accordance with any rules and regulations
which may be prescribed by the Village Manager and reviewed and approved by the
President and Board of Trustees and as otherwise provided in this Article.
(Ord. 1987-0-9, 2-2-87)
23A-2-5: COLLECTION OF TAX:
Every person required to collect the tax levied by this Article shall secure
said tax from the purchaser at the time he collects payment for the purchase of
beverages containing alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 1987-0-9, 2-2-87)
23A-2-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Village Manager of the Village of Oak Park may promulgate rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Article concerning the
enforcement and application of this Article. The term "rules and regulations"
includes, but is not limited to, a case-by-case determination of the
applicability of the tax imposed by this Article. (Ord. 1987-0-9, 2-2-87)
23A-2-7: FILING OF RETURN:
Every seller of alcoholic liquor at retail within the Village of Oak Park shall
file tax returns showing tax receipts received during each month period on
forms prescribed by the Village Manager. The returns shall be due on or before
the thirtieth day of the calendar month succeeding the end of the monthly
filing period. At the time of filing said returns, the owner shall pay to the
Village of Oak Park all taxes due for the period to which the tax return
applies. (Ord. 1987-0-9, 2-2-87)
23A-2-8: FAILURE TO PAY TAX:
If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of two
percent (2%) per month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid shall be due
and owing. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided,
the Village Attorney, upon the request of the Village Manager, shall bring or
cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of
the Village of Oak Park in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1987-0-9,
2-2-87)
23A-2-9: RECORDS:
   A.   Every owner, manager or operator of a seller at retail of alcoholic
liquor in the Village of Oak Park shall keep books and records which at a
minimum include a daily sheet showing:
      1.   The amount of taxable sales receipts within the twenty four (24)
hour period; and
      2.   The actual tax receipts collected for the tax imposed under this
Article for the date in question.
   B.   The Village Manager or his delegate shall at all reasonable times have
full access to said books and records. The books and records of a seller at
retail of alcoholic liquor shall be retained for a minimum of twenty four (24)
months.
   C.   The financial records of any seller at retail of alcoholic liquor
submitted pursuant to this Article or any rule and regulation promulgated
hereunder shall not be available for public inspection in order to protect the
owner's right to privacy. (Ord. 1987-0-9, 2-2-87)
23A-2-10: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE FOR FAILURE TO PAY TAX:
In addition to other penalties authorized by this action, the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued by him if he
determines the licensee has failed to comply with the duties imposed under this
Article. However, no such license shall be so revoked or suspended except after
a public hearing by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner with a three (3) day
written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear
and defend. This hearing will be held pursuant to the rules, regulations and
authority provided by the Liquor Control Commissioner pursuant to Chapter 3 of
the Oak Park Village Code. The suspension or revocation of the liquor license
shall not release or discharge the owner, manager or operator of the lawfully
licensed liquor dealer from his civil liability for payment of the tax nor from
prosecution of said offense. (Ord. 1987-0-9, 2-2-87)
23A-2-11: PROCEEDS TO BE PAID TO VILLAGE FINANCE DIRECTOR:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Article,
including penalties, shall be paid to the Finance Director of the Village of
Oak Park and shall be credited to and deposited in the General Fund of the
Village. (Ord. 1987-0-9, 2-2-87)
23A-2-12: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Article except when otherwise specifically provided, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. (Ord. 1987-0-9, 2-2-87)
ARTICLE 3
MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
23A-3-1: Title
23A-3-2: Definitions
23A-3-3: Tax Imposed
23A-3-4: Collection of Tax by Retailers
23A-3-5: Filing Returns and Remittances by Retailers
23A-3-6: Registration
23A-3-7: Obligation of Taxpayers to File Returns and Pay Tax
23A-3-8: Resale Numbers
23A-3-9: Maintaining Books and Records
23A-3-10: Rules and Regulations
23A-3-11: Violation; Penalty
23A-3-1: TITLE:
This Article shall be known and cited as the "Village of Oak Park
Telecommunications Tax Ordinance". The tax imposed by this Article shall be
known as the "Village of Oak Park Telecommunications Tax" and is imposed in
addition to all other taxes imposed by the Village, the State or any other
Municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof. (Ord. 1994-0-7, 1-24-
94)
23A-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
When any of the following words or terms are used in this Article, whether or
not capitalized, they shall have the meaning or construction ascribed to them
in this Section:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address located in
the Village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
BAD DEBT: Any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail, for which
gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable, that has become
worthless or uncollectible as determined by applicable Federal income tax
standards.
DEPARTMENT or FINANCE DEPARTMENT: The Finance Department of the Village.
DIRECTOR or FINANCE DIRECTOR: The Finance Director of the Village.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the Village, and for all services rendered in
connection therewith, valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise,
including cash, credits, services, and property of every kind or nature, and
shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such
telecommunications, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs or any
other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall
be included only as and when paid. However, "gross charge" shall not include:
   A.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this Article, 2) additional charges added to
the purchaser's bill pursuant to section 9-222 of the Illinois Public Utilities
Act, 3) the tax imposed by the Illinois Telecommunications Excise Tax Act or 4)
the tax imposed by section 4251 of the United States Internal Revenue Code;
   B.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
Village;
   C.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data
or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information
intended to change its form or content. This subsection C applies, but it not
limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment,
tabulating equipment and accounting equipment and also applies to the usage of
computers under a time-sharing agreement;
   D.   Charges for customer equipment, including equipment that is leased or
rented by the customer from any source, provided that such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   E.   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the
Illinois Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the
period of time specified by the Illinois Department of Commerce and Community
Affairs;
   F.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries, or between the wholly owned subsidiaries, when the tax imposed
under this Article previously was paid to a retailer, but only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries,
or between the wholly owned subsidiaries, represent an expense allocation
between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation
rendering such service;
   G.   Bad debts; provided, however, that if any portion of a debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion of the debt paid during the reporting period;
   H.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin- operating telecommunication
devices.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or
terminate outside the State.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within the State.
PERSONS: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, any receiver, trustee,
guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court, the Federal
government, state governments, state universities created by statute or any
city, town, county or other political subdivision of this State.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as
defined in "Sale at Retail".
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (or any like
designation): Any retailer having or maintaining within the State directly or
by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities,
sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or an agent or other
representative operating within the State of Illinois permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in Illinois.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services rendered in connection therewith for consideration:
   A.   To persons other than the Village, Federal government, State
governments and State universities created by statute; and
   B.   Other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries, or between the wholly owned subsidiaries, but only when the tax
previously has been paid to a retailer and the gross charge made by one such
corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge
paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications are originated or at which telecommunications are received
by a taxpayer. If this location is not a defined location, as in the case of
mobile phones, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems and the
like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of
the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization
code or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person that individually, or through its agents, employees or
permittees, engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in the Village and that incurs a tax liability under this
Article.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: A. In addition to the usual and popular meaning, includes,
but is not limited to messages or information transmitted through use of local,
toll and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services,
telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services,
cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio services,
paging service or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way
communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities.
   B.   The definition of "telecommunications" set forth in subsection A shall
not include 1) value-added services in which computer processing applications
are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission or 2) purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service
provided by it to the ultimate retail consumer originating or terminating the
taxable end-to-end telecommunications.
VILLAGE: The Village of Oak Park, Illinois. (Ord. 1994-0-7, 1-24-94)
23A-3-3: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   A tax is hereby imposed upon:
      1.   The act or privilege of originating in the Village or receiving in
the Village intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of five percent
(5%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer; and
      2.   The act or privilege of originating in the Village or receiving in
the Village interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of five percent
(5%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer.
   B.   To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or privilege that is
subject to taxation under subsection A2 of this Section, any taxpayer, upon
proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on the same event,
shall be allowed a credit against the tax authorized by subsection A2 to the
extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state
which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local
tax in this State.
   C.   The tax imposed by this Article is not imposed on any act or privilege
to the extent that such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution or
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the Village.
   D.   Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
inter-company facilities and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of or integrated into end-to-end
telecommunications service are sales for resale and are not subject to the tax
imposed by this Article.
   E.   The tax imposed by this Article shall be in addition to the payment of
money, or value of products or services furnished to the Village by the
taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public
places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon, or thereunder of
poles, wires, pipes, or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's
business. (Ord. 1994-0-7, 1-24-94)
23A-3-4: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   A.   1. Any retailer maintaining a place of business in this State and
making or effectuating a sale at retail shall collect the tax imposed by this
Article from the taxpayer and remit it to the Department as provided by Section
23A-3-5 of this Article.
      2.   Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this Article and any
tax collected by the retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to
the Village.
      3.   The retailer shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the
tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications when sold for use in the manner prescribed by this Article.
      4.   The tax imposed by this Article shall constitute a debt of the
purchaser to the retailer providing taxable services until paid and, if unpaid,
is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for taxable
services.
   B.   The Director shall, upon application, authorize the collection of this
tax by any retailer not maintaining a place of business in this State who, to
the satisfaction of the Director, furnishes adequate security to ensure
collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without
charge, a permit to collect the tax imposed by this Article. When so
authorized, it shall be the duty of the retailer to collect the tax upon all of
the gross charges for telecommunications originated or received in the Village
in the same manner, and subject to the same requirements, as a retailer
maintaining a place of business in this State.
   C.   The tax authorized by this Article shall, when collected, be stated as
a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for
telecommunications. (Ord. 1994-0-7, 1-24-94)
23A-3-5: FILING RETURNS AND REMITTANCES BY RETAILERS:
Unless otherwise approved by the Village Manager, on or before the last day of
each calendar month, every retailer maintaining a place of business in this
State and every retailer authorized by the Director to collect the tax imposed
by this Article shall file with the Department a remittance return and remit
all applicable tax for the preceding calendar month except if such a retailer
collects less than four thousand eight hundred dollars ($4,800.00) in the
preceding calendar year, then the retailer shall file with the Department a
remittance return and remit all applicable tax for the preceding calendar year
on or before January 31 of the subsequent year. The return shall be filed on a
form prescribed by the Director, containing such information as the Director
may reasonably require. (Ord. 1999-0-72, 12-6-99, eff. 1-1-00)
23A-3-6: REGISTRATION:
Every retailer maintaining a place of business in this State shall register
with the Department within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this
Article or the date of becoming such a retailer, whichever is later. (Ord.
1994-0-7, 1-24-94)
23A-3-7: OBLIGATION OF TAXPAYERS TO FILE RETURNS AND PAY TAX:
   A.   If a retailer fails to collect the tax imposed by this Article from a
taxpayer, as required by Section
23A-3-4 of this Article, then the taxpayer shall pay the tax directly to the
Department.
   B.   On or before the last day of each calendar month, every taxpayer that
has not paid the tax imposed by this Article to a retailer shall file with the
Department a tax return and pay the tax upon the gross charges the taxpayer
paid to the retailer during the preceding calendar month. The return shall be
filed on a form prescribed by the Director, containing such information as the
Director may reasonably require. (Ord. 1994-0-7, 1-24-94)
23A-3-8: RESALE NUMBERS:
   A.   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications in the
Village claims to be a reseller of telecommunications, that person shall apply
to the Department for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing
why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this Article on any purchases of
telecommunications and shall furnish such additional information as the
Department may reasonably require.
   B.   Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
   C.   The Department may cancel the resale number of any person if the
number:
      1.   Was obtained through misrepresentation,
      2.   Is used to originate or receive telecommunications tax-free when
such telecommunications are not for resale, or
      3.   Is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making
resales.
   D.   The act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in
the Village shall not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale
unless the person has an active resale number issued by the Department and
furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the
retailer that a sale is nontaxable as a sale for resale. (Ord. 1994-0-7, 1-24-
94)
23A-3-9: MAINTAINING BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every retailer maintaining a place of business in this State, every retailer
authorized by the Director to collect the tax imposed by this Article and every
taxpayer required by Section
23A-3-7 of this Article to pay the tax directly to the Department shall keep
accurate books and records of its business or activity, including original
source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions that gave rise,
or may have given rise, to any tax liability or exemption. All such books and
records shall be kept in the English language and, at all times during business
hours of the day, shall be subject to and available for inspection by the
Department. (Ord. 1994-0-7, 1-24-94)
23A-3-10: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Director is authorized to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations,
subject to approval of the Village Manager, and enforce such rules and
regulations pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this Article.
(Ord. 1994-0-7, 1-24-94)
23A-3-11: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who
wilfully violates any other provision of this Article is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and in
addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due, plus
interest and costs. (Ord. 1994-0-7, 1-24-94)
ARTICLE 4
HOTEL/MOTEL AND TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY RENTAL UNIT TAX
SECTION:
23A-4-1: Definitions
23A-4-2: Tax Imposed
23A-4-3: Duty To Collect Tax From Renter
23A-4-4: Books And Records
23A-4-5: Transmittal Of Tax Revenue
23A-4-6: Collection
23A-4-7: Proceeds To Be Paid To Village’s Chief Financial Officer
23A-4-8: Penalty
23A-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used herein, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
FACILITATOR: Any person who provides a means through which a person, owner,
operator, or operator's agent may offer a hotel/motel room or transient
occupancy rental unit for rent, regardless of whether the rental or leasing
charge is transferred through or processed by such facilitator, or by a
separate entity.
GROSS RENTAL OR LEASING CHARGE: The gross amount of consideration for the use
or privilege of using hotel/motel accommodations and transient occupancy rental
units in the Village, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise,
including cash, credits, property, and services determined without any
deduction for costs or expenses whatsoever. The term “gross rental or leasing
charge” includes any and all charges that the lessee or tenant pays incidental
to obtaining the use or privilege of using hotel/motel accommodations and
transient occupancy rental units, including but not limited to any and all
related markups, service fees, convenience fees, facilitation fees,
cancellation fees, late departure fees, and other such charges, regardless of
terminology. The term “gross rental or leasing charge” does not include charges
that are added to the charge or fee on account of the tax imposed by this
article or on account of any other tax imposed on the charge or fee. The term
“gross rental or leasing charge” shall exclude separately stated optional
charges not for the use or privilege of using hotel accommodations. The fact
that the lessee or tenant could have avoided the charge by obtaining the use or
privilege from or through a different owner, manager, or operator, pursuant to
different terms, or through a course of performance that would have avoided the
obligation to pay the charge, does not make the charge “optional.”
HOTEL/MOTEL: Every building or structure within the Village kept, used,
maintained as or advertised and held out to the public to be a place where
lodging or lodging and food or other accommodations are offered for
consideration to guests including "bed and breakfast" establishments.
Accommodations within said buildings or structures which are leased to the same
occupant for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days shall be exempt
from the tax provisions of this article.
OWNER: Any person having an ownership interest in or conducting the operation
of a hotel/motel room or transient occupancy rental unit or receiving
consideration for the rental of such hotel/motel room or transient occupancy
rental unit.
PERSON: Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator,
assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint
venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation,
association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit,
whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise, whenever the
term "person" is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the
term as applied to associations shall mean the owners or part owners thereof,
and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY RENTAL UNIT: A dwelling unit or a habitable unit that is
offered for rent, lease or hire that is rented, leased or hired for which an
owner receives consideration from a person for a period of thirty (30) days or
less and that person has the right to use, occupy or possess the dwelling unit
or habitable unit for said period. (Ord. 16-109, 9-16-2016, eff. 11-1-2016;
amd. Ord. 24-108, 2-20-2024; Ord. 25-103, 1-28-2025)
23A-4-2: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of
renting, leasing or letting of a hotel/motel room or transient occupancy rental
unit in the Village at a rate of four percent (4%) of the gross rental or
leasing charge. The ultimate incidence and/or liability for payment of said tax
shall be in addition to any and all other taxes.
   B.   In addition to the tax imposed under subsection A of this section, a
surcharge is imposed and shall immediately accrue and be collected upon the
rental or lease of any transient occupancy rental unit in the Village at the
rate of three and one-half percent (3.5%) of the gross rental or leasing
charge. The purpose of this surcharge is to fund the activities of the Housing
Trust Fund established pursuant to section
12-7-3  of this Code. The ultimate incidence and/or liability for payment of
said surcharge is in addition to any and all other taxes. The surcharge is a
part of the tax imposed by this article, and all references to the tax shall be
deemed to include the surcharge.
   C.   The ultimate incident of and liability for payment of the tax imposed
in this article will be borne by the person who seeks the privilege of
occupying any such hotel or motel room, said person hereinafter referred to as
“renter.” (Ord. 16-109, 9-16-2016, eff. 11-1-2016; amd. Ord. 24-108, 2-20-2024;
Ord. 25-103, 1- 28-2025)
23A-4-3: DUTY TO COLLECT TAX FROM RENTER:
The owner, operator, or facilitator of each hotel/motel or transient occupancy
rental unit bear jointly and severally the duty to act as trustee for and
account of the Village and to collect the tax from each renter and to pay over
to the Village Finance Director the tax under procedures prescribed by the
Village Finance Director or as otherwise set forth in this article; provided,
however, that the person collecting the tax as trustee for and account of the
Village, may retain two percent (2%) of the tax due as compensation for
services rendered in the collection and payment of such tax. Every person
required to collect the tax levied by ordinance shall secure said tax from the
renter at the time that such person collects the price, charge or rent to which
it applies. The amount of tax due must be stated separately on the invoice
receipt or other statement or memorandum of the rent given to the renter at the
time of payment. (Ord. 16-109, 9-16-2016, eff. 11-1-2016; amd. Ord. 25-103, 1-
28-2025)
23A-4-4: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The Finance Director, or the Director's authorized representative, may enter
the premises of any hotel/motel, transient occupancy rental unit, and
facilitator for inspection and examination of records in order to effectuate
the proper administration of this chapter, and to assure the enforcement of the
collection of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent,
hinder, or interfere with the Finance Director or the Director's authorized
representative in the discharge of the Director's duties in the performance of
this chapter. It shall be the duty of every owner, operator, and facilitator to
keep accurate and complete books and records to which the Finance Director, or
the Director's authorized representative, shall at all times have full access,
which records shall include a daily sheet showing the number of hotel/motel
rooms or transient occupancy rental units rented during the twenty four (24)
hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel/motel room or
transient occupancy rental unit where such shall occur and the actual hotel/
motel or transient occupancy rental unit tax receipts collected for the date in
question. (Ord. 16-109, 9-16-2016, eff. 11-1-2016; amd. Ord. 25-103, 1-28-2025)
23A-4-5: TRANSMITTAL OF TAX REVENUE:
   A.   The owner, operator, or facilitator of each hotel/motel or transient
occupancy rental unit within the Village shall file tax returns showing tax
receipts received with respect to each hotel/motel room or transient occupancy
rental unit during each one month period commencing on February 1, 1995, and
continuing on the first day of every month thereafter on forms prescribed by
the Village Finance Director. The monthly return for each completed calendar
month shall be due within fifteen (15) days of the completion of the calendar
month. A separate return shall be filed for each place of business within the
Village regardless of ownership.
   B.   The first taxing period for the purpose of this article shall commence
on February 1, 1995, and the tax return and payment for such period shall be
due on or before March 15, 1995. Thereafter reporting periods and tax payments
shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article. At the time of
filing such tax returns, the owner, operator, or facilitator shall pay to the
Village all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies.
   C.   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate
of two percent (2%) per thirty (30) day period, or portion thereof, from the
day of delinquency shall be added and collected. (Ord. 16-109, 9-16-2016, eff.
11-1-2016; amd. Ord. 25-103, 1-28-2025)
23A-4-6: COLLECTION:
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the Village
shall bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of the tax
on behalf of the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 16-109,
9-16-2016, eff. 11-1-2016)
23A-4-7: PROCEEDS TO BE PAID TO VILLAGE’S CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER::
Proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article, including
penalties, shall be paid to the Village's Chief Financial Officer and shall be
credited to and deposited in the Village's Housing Trust Fund as set forth in
chapter 12 ("Housing"), article 7 ("Housing Trust Fund") of this Code. Proceeds
shall also be used for the purpose of promoting tourism, meetings, conventions
or other events within the Village or otherwise attracting nonresidents to
visit the Village and patronize Village businesses and in furtherance of that
purpose, all proceeds from the tax shall be paid to Visit Oak Park or a
successor entity in accordance with the Village's then existing agreement with
the applicable entity. Any remaining proceeds from the tax shall be deposited
into the Village's general fund. (Ord. 16-109, 9-16-2016, eff. 11-1-2016; amd.
Ord. 24-108, 2-20-2024)
23A-4-8: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this article, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 16-109, 9-16-
2016, eff. 11-1-2016)
ARTICLE 5
HOME RULE RETAILERS' AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
23A-5-1: Imposition Of Tax
23A-5-2: Collection By Illinois Department Of Revenue
23A-5-3: Effective Date
23A-5-1: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
   A.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal
property titled or registered with an agency of this State's government, at
retail in this Municipality at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this Article
is in effect.
   B.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the City in the
business of making sales of service, at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such
servicepeople as an incident to a sale of service.
   C.   The above taxes shall not be applicable on the sales of food for human
consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food which has been prepared for
immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs,
medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles
used by diabetics.
   D.   The imposition of these Home Rule Taxes are in accordance with the
provisions of sections 5/8-11-1 and 5/8-11-5, respectively, of the Illinois
Municipal Code. (Ord. 1997-0-71, 12-15-97)
23A-5-2: COLLECTION BY ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE:
The taxes hereby imposed in this Chapter, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Department shall have the
full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this Article. (Ord.
1997-0-71, 12-15-97)
23A-5-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The effective date for the Home Rule Retailers' and Service Occupation Tax
shall be January 1, 1999. (Ord. 1997-0-71, 12-15-97)
ARTICLE 6
MOTOR FUEL TAX
SECTION:
23A-6-1: Tax Imposed
23A-6-2: Collection Of Tax
23A-6-3: Registration And Maintenance Of Records
23A-6-4: Late Payment Penalty
23A-6-5: Definitions
23A-6-6: Penalty
23A-6-7: Effective Date
23A-6-1: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby imposed and levied a tax upon the retail purchase within the
Village of Oak Park of motor fuel, at the rate of six cents ($0.06) per gallon
or fraction thereof. This tax shall be in addition to any and all other taxes.
The ultimate incidence and liability for payment of such tax shall be upon the
retail purchaser of motor fuel. Nothing herein shall be construed to impose a
tax upon the occupation of selling motor fuel. (Ord. 2009-0-095, 11-23-09)
23A-6-2: COLLECTION OF TAX:
Each motor fuel retailer in the Village of Oak Park shall have the duty to
collect the Motor Fuel Tax from each purchaser and to pay it over to the
Village of Oak Park, along with an accounting therefor on return forms provided
by the Village. The return and tax payment shall be filed with the Village
Director of Finance on the same filing dates as are established for filing with
the Illinois department of revenue of the Retailer's Occupations Tax Return
Form ST.-1 and any other supplemental supporting documentation. (Ord. 1997-0-
72, 12-15-97)
23A-6-3: REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
Each motor fuel retailer shall register with the Village of Oak Park on forms
provided by the Director of Finance. Each motor fuel retailer shall have the
duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records, and accounts showing the
gross receipts for the sale of motor fuel and the taxes collected from the
purchaser thereof, which shall be available in the Village of Oak Park for
examination and for audit by the Village upon reasonable notice during
customary business hours. (Ord. 1997-0-72, 12-15-97)
23A-6-4: LATE PAYMENT PENALTY:
If any tax imposed by this article is not paid over to the Village when due, a
late payment penalty equal to one percent (1%) of the unpaid tax is added for
each month or any portion thereof, that such tax remains unpaid and the total
of such late payment penalty shall be paid along with the tax imposed hereby.
The Village may bring an action to collect any unpaid tax or penalty. (Ord.
1997-0-72, 12-15-97)
23A-6-5: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
MOTOR FUEL: All volatile liquids compounded or used for fueling motor vehicles,
including, but not limited to, gasoline, gasohol, and diesel fuel.
MOTOR FUEL RETAILER: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
selling motor fuel at retail, and not for resale. (Ord. 1997-0-72, 12-15-97)
23A-6-6: PENALTY:
In addition to any other penalty, any person violating any provision of this
article upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such
offense. Each day of violation and each failure to collect the tax imposed
hereby and each failure to pay such tax over to the Village shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 1997-0-72, 12-15-97)
23A-6-7: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The effective date for amended rate of the Motor Fuel Tax is January 1, 2010.
(Ord. 2009-0-095, 11-23-09)
ARTICLE 7
MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX
SECTION:
23A-7-1: Tax Imposed
23A-7-2: Definitions
23A-7-3: Gas Use Tax
23A-7-4: Collection Of Tax
23A-7-5: Books And Records
23A-7-1: TAX IMPOSED:
The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the "municipal gas use tax"
and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the Village of Oak
Park, the state of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political
subdivision thereof. (Ord. 2003-0-06, 2-3-2003)
23A-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT: The public utilities act as amended 1 .
PUBLIC UTILITY: A public utility as defined in section 3-105 of the public
utilities act.
RETAIL PURCHASER: Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.
SALE AT RETAIL: Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or
consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means
any person engaged in the business of distribution, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas. (Ord. 2003-0-06, 2-3-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq. (1996).
23A-7-3: GAS USE TAX:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided by this article, a tax is imposed on the
privilege of using or consuming gas in the Village that is purchased in a sale
at retail at the rate of five cents ($0.05) per therm.
   B.   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on
the retail purchaser, and nothing in this article shall be construed to impose
a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or
transporting gas.
   C.   The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas
delivered to the retail purchaser's premises, to the public utility designated
to collect the tax pursuant to section
23A-7-4 of this article on or before the payment due date of the public
utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the Village Finance
Director on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month
in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no public utility has
been designated to collect the tax pursuant to section
23A-7-4 of this article or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a
public utility so designated.
   D.   Nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United
States or state of Illinois may not be made the subject of taxation by the
Village.
   E.   A person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the
tax imposed by this article with respect to the use or consumption of the gas,
but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax
directly to the Village Finance Director on or before the fifteenth day of the
second month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
   F.   The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail
purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after February 1, 2003.
   G.   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this article, whether as a result of mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be: 1) credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment, or 2) subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become
due; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior
to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited or refunded.
   H.   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
article shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such
amount.
   I.   To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the Village by a retail
purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this article if the gross
receipts from the sale at retail of such gas to the retail purchaser are
properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such gas pursuant to the
Village's municipal utility tax, as amended from time to time, article 9,
"Utility Tax", of this chapter, authorized pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the
Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2, as amended.
(Ord. 16-164, 12-5-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
23A-7-4: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   The Village Manager is authorized to enter into a contract for
collection of the tax imposed by this article with any public utility providing
gas service in the Village.
   B.   The contract pursuant to this section shall include and substantially
conform with the following provisions:
      1.   The public utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as an
independent contractor;
      2.   The public utility will remit collected taxes to the Village no more
often than once each month;
      3.   The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections
a service fee equal to three percent (3%) of the amounts collected and timely
remitted to the Finance Director;
      4.   The public utility shall not be responsible to the Village for any
tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and
      5.   Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon. (Ord. 16-164,
12-5-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
23A-7-5: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source
documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that gave
rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under this
article. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours,
be subject to and available for inspection by the Village. (Ord. 2003-0-06, 2-
3-2003)
ARTICLE 8
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
SECTION:
23A-8-1: Definitions
23A-8-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
23A-8-3: PEG Access Support Fee Imposed
23A-8-4: Applicable Principles
23A-8-5: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
23A-8-6: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
23A-8-7: Late Fees; Payments
23A-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: A. The one-way transmission to subscribers of: 1) video
programming, or 2) other programming service, and
   B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or
use of such video programming or other programming service.
COMMISSION: The Illinois Commerce Commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the Village.
   A.   Gross revenues shall include the following:
      1.    Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.    Event based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3.    Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.    Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
      5.    Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.    Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.    A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
Village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
Village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
      8.    Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this
definition.
      9.    In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.    The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   B.   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.    Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.    Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the State issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
      3.    Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
      4.    The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which
the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the Village and pay the fee permitted by 220
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      5.    Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a city, State, Federal, or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the State issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes.
      6.    Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      7.    Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   C.   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under section
23A-8-3 of this article and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the
holder to the Village for the service areas within its territorial
jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under section
23A-8-2 of this article and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the
holder to the Village for the service areas within its territorial
jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 2008-0-028, 7-7-08)
23A-8-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the Village.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
   C.   Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the Village at least ten
(10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service
or video service in the Village.
   D.   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the Village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt
of the ordinance adopting this article by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this article shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the Village.
   E.   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.
   F.   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the Village in which a fee is paid.
   G.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection
23A-8-2B of this section. (Ord. 2008-0-028, 7-7-08)
23A-8-3:   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the Village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to section
23A-8-2 of this article.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues.
   C.   Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the
Village. The holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence
on the date set forth in subsection
23A-8-2D of this article.
   D.   Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   E.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments
made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be
credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection
23A-8-3B of this section. (Ord. 2008-0-028, 7-7-08)
23A-8-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this article shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 2008-0-028, 7-7-08)
23A-8-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the Village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A State issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the Village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A State issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 2008-0-
028, 7-7-08)
23A-8-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   A.   Audit Requirement: The Village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the Village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
Village. If all local franchises between the Village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the Village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
   B.   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the Village's submission of an invoice for
the sum. (Ord. 2008-0-028, 7-7-08)
23A-8-7: LATE FEES; PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this Village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of
Rights Act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 2008-0-028, 7-7-
08)
ARTICLE 9
UTILITY TAX
SECTION:
23A-9-1: Tax Imposed
23A-9-2: Exempted From Tax
23A-9-3: Tax In Addition To Other Payments
23A-9-4: Definitions
23A-9-5: Effective Date
23A-9-6: Returns
23A-9-7: Overpayment Of Tax
23A-9-8: Recovery Of Tax Due
23A-9-9: Penalty
23A-9-10: Electric Utility Tax
23A-9-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax at the rate hereinafter specified is hereby established and levied by the
Village of Oak Park on the following occupations or privileges:
   A.   Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of
electricity at a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts from such
business originating within the corporate limits of the Village of Oak Park.
   B.   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing,
or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the
Village of Oak Park, and not for resale, at a rate of five percent (5%) of the
gross receipts therefrom. (Ord. 1966-0-5, 1-17-1966)
   C.   The tax imposed under this section shall not apply with respect to
gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing or
sale of electricity where the use or consumption of the electricity is subject
to the tax imposed under section 23A-9-10 of this article. (Ord. 1998-0-44, 7-
20-1998)
   D.   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling water for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the
Village of Oak Park, and not for resale, at a rate of five percent (5%) of the
gross receipts therefrom. (Ord. 1966-0-5, 1-17-1966)
23A-9-2: EXEMPTED FROM TAX:
None of the taxes authorized by this article are imposed with respect to any
transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such
business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be
made the subject of taxation by this state or any political subdivision
thereof, nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas, water or electricity or engaged in the
business of transmitting messages be subject to taxation under the provisions
of this article for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation
under the provisions of the municipal retailers' occupation tax act authorized
by section 8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 1966-0-5, 1-17-1966)
23A-9-3: TAX IN ADDITION TO OTHER PAYMENTS:
The taxes enumerated in this article shall be in addition to the payment of
money, or value of products or services furnished to the municipality by the
taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public
places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of
poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's
business. (Ord. 1966-0-5, 1-17-1966)
23A-9-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of the taxes enumerated in this article:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for the transmission of messages,
the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling
gas for use or consumption and not for resale, and the consideration received
for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling water for use or consumption
and not for resale and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued
in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit,
services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of transmitting such messages, without any deduction on account of the cost of
the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor
or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, municipal corporation or
political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
TRANSMITTING MESSAGES: In addition to the usual and popular meaning of person
to person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a consideration, of
services or facilities (whether owned or leased), or both, to persons in
connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do not, in
turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not include
such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the transmission of
messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for the
transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration, by such persons to
other persons, for the transmission of messages. (Ord. 1966-0-5, 1-17-1966;
amd. Ord. 1998-0-44, 7-20-1998)
23A-9-5: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall be effective as of March 1, 1966, and the tax provided for
herein shall be based on the "gross receipts", as herein defined, actually paid
to the taxpayer for services billed on and after March 1, 1966. (Ord. 1966-0-5,
1-17-1966)
23A-9-6: RETURNS:
On or before May 31, 1966, each taxpayer shall make a return to the Village
Treasurer for the month of March 1966, stating:
   A.   His name;
   B.   His principal place of business;
   C.   His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax
is imposed;
   D.   Amount of tax;
   E.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
On or before August 31, 1966, each taxpayer shall make said return to the
Village Treasurer for the months of April, May and June and on or before the
last day of each third month thereafter each taxpayer shall make a like return
to the Village Treasurer for a corresponding three (3) month period.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making
such return, pay to the Village Treasurer, the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided, that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he so elects,
report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to
the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any
amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon
any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. (Ord.
1966-0-5, 1-17-1966)
23A-9-7: OVERPAYMENT OF TAX:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under
the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years
prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. (Ord. 1966-0-5,
1-17-1966)
If a taxpayer is unable to use a credit authorized by this section solely
because the tax imposed by this article has been replaced by a kilowatt per
hour tax, then the taxpayer may apply such credit against any tax due under
such kilowatt per hour tax. (Ord. 1998-0-44, 7-20-1998)
23A-9-8: RECOVERY OF TAX DUE:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article
shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
(Ord. 1966-0-5, 1-17-1966)
23A-9-9: PENALTY:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or
who wilfully violates any other provision of this article is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and in
addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord.
1966-0-5, 1-17-1966)
23A-9-10: ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires:
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions,
any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or
maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently
or temporarily or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the
Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2, as amended,
directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of
electricity.
   PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of
the Village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
   TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
   VILLAGE: The Village of Oak Park.
   B.   Tax Imposed:
      1.   Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code, 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2, as amended, and any and all other
applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming
electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the
corporate limits of the Village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly
basis for each purchaser:
         a.   For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.61 cents per kilowatt hour;
         b.   For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.40 cents per kilowatt hour;
         c.   For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.36 cents per kilowatt hour;
         d.   For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.35 cents per kilowatt hour;
         e.   For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.34 cents per kilowatt hour;
         f.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.32 cents per kilowatt hour;
         g.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.315 cents per kilowatt hour;
         h.   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.31 cents per kilowatt hour;
         i.   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.305 cents per kilowatt hour;
         j.   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt hours a month; 0.30 cents per kilowatt hour.
      2.   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the Village, the state of Illinois or any other political
subdivision of the state.
      3.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the tax shall
not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax
would violate the constitution or statutes of the United States or the
constitution or statutes of the state of Illinois.
      4.   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or
after September 1, 1998; and with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to
such customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the
public utilities act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-104, as amended, or
the first bill issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever
issuance occurs sooner.
   C.   Collection Of Tax:
      1.   Subject to the provisions of subsection
23A-9-10E of this section regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers,
the tax imposed under this section shall be collected from purchasers by the
person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers electricity
to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the
person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the
same time and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the
electricity.
      2.   Any tax required to be collected by this article, and any tax in
fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the Village by the person
delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity
shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the
charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that
if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be
obligated to remit such tax.
      3.   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to
such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect
to reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data
to the Village upon request. For purposes of this section, any partial payment
of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed
to be for the delivery of electricity.
   D.   Tax Remittance And Return:
      1.   Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form
prescribed by the Village's Director of Finance. The return and accompanying
remittance shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the
month during which the tax is collected.
      2.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from
the purchaser then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by
the Village's Director of Finance and pay the tax directly to the Village on or
before the last day of the month following the month during which the
electricity is used or consumed.
   E.   Resales:
      1.   Electricity that is delivered to a person in this Village shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the Village and
furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies
to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a
sale for resale.
      2.   If a person who receives electricity in the Village claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the Village for
a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable
for the tax imposed by this section on any purchases of electricity and shall
furnish such additional information as the Village may reasonably require.
      3.   Upon approval of the application, the Village shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
      4.   The Village may cancel the resale number of any person if the person
fails to pay any tax payable under this chapter for electricity used or
consumed by the person, or if the number: a) was obtained through
misrepresentation; or b) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
      5.   a.    If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or
consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by
this section directly to the Village pursuant to subsection
23A-9-10D2 of this section or this subsection
23A-9-10E on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and
shall collect the tax pursuant to subsection
23A-9-10D2 of this section or this subsection
23A-9-10E and remit the tax pursuant to subsection
23A-9-10D1 of this section or this subsection
23A-9-10E on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a
purchaser.
         b.   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an
active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section
shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the
electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the
Village the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such
other information that the Village may reasonably require.
   F.   Books And Records: Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to
pay the tax imposed by this section, shall keep accurate books and records of
its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting
the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability
under this section. The books and records shall be subject to and available for
inspection at all times during business hours of the day.
   G.   Credits And Refunds: Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the Village,
no person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under
this section unless the person files a claim for refund or credit within one
year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted. (Ord. 16-150, 11-21-
2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
ARTICLE 10
CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
23A-10-1: Cannabis Privilege Tax Imposed
23A-10-2: Collection Of Tax
23A-10-3: Deposit Of Funds
23A-10-1: CANNABIS PRIVILEGE TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is imposed upon any person engaged in the business of selling cannabis,
other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Pilot Program Act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 130/1 et seq., at retail in
the Village on the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of that
business at the rate of three percent (3%). This tax shall be in addition to
any and all other taxes imposed upon such sales and is imposed pursuant to the
Municipal Cannabis Retailers' Occupation Tax Law, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/8-11-22. (Ord. 19-4, 10-7-2019)
23A-10-2: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   The tax imposed by this article shall be remitted by such retailer to
the Illinois Department of Revenue ("Department"). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this article and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any state tax that sellers are required to collect.
   B.   The tax imposed by this article, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident of the tax shall be collected and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Department shall have the
full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. 19-
4, 10-7-2019)
23A-10-3: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax set forth in this
article, including interest and penalties, shall be used for public safety
capital expenditures in order to provide property tax debt service relief.
(Ord. 19-4, 10-7-2019)
CHAPTER 24
TAXICABS
Generally   1
Taxicab Drivers; Village Licenses And Regulations   2
Taximeters   3
ARTICLE 1
GENERALLY
SECTION:
24-1-1: Definitions
24-1-2: Police Authority For Inspection And License
24-1-3: Appointment Of Taxicab Inspectors
24-1-4: Taxicab License Required; Term
24-1-5: Inspections Of Vehicles As Prerequisite To Licensing
24-1-6: Bond Or Insurance Policy Required
24-1-7: Applications And Issuance Of Taxicab Licenses
24-1-8: Public Convenience And Necessity; Declaration Prerequisite To Issuance
Of Taxicab License; Exceptions
24-1-9: Public Convenience And Necessity; Grounds For Determination
24-1-10: Public Convenience And Necessity; Hearing And Procedure
24-1-11: Requirements For Taxicab License Decals
24-1-12: Revocation Or Suspension Of Taxicab License
24-1-13: Register Of Licensed Taxicabs
24-1-14: Duty Of Owners To Furnish Service; Abandonment Of Service
24-1-15: Taxicab Colors And Name
24-1-16: Carrying Additional Passengers
24-1-17: Overcharging
24-1-18: Prepayment Of Fare May Be Demanded; Duty Of Drivers To Convey Orderly
Persons
24-1-19: Receipt For Fare Paid
24-1-20: Schedule Of Rates Of Fares; Rate Card Required
24-1-21: Credit Card Payments
24-1-22: No Smoking
24-1-23: Cellular Telephones
24-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
OWNER: Every person having the use or control of one or more taxicabs as
defined in this section.
TAXICAB: All public vehicles driven by mechanical power, used for the carriage
of persons for hire, except those vehicles commonly known as buses.
TAXIMETER: A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a
taxicab is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled or for waiting
time, or for both, and upon which such charge shall be indicated by means of
figures. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-2: POLICE AUTHORITY FOR INSPECTION AND LICENSE:
The establishment of a mechanical inspection test for taxicabs, the licensing
and inspecting of taxicabs in accordance with such test, the examining of
applicants for licenses to drive such taxicabs, the licensing of drivers and
enforcing of the provisions of this article shall be under the control of the
Chief of Police. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-3: APPOINTMENT OF TAXICAB INSPECTORS:
The Chief of Police shall have power to appoint from the Police Department or
from a public or private entity authorized by the Village, such taxicab
inspectors as the Chief may deem necessary for the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter. Any employee of the Police Department shall serve
as such as part of his or her police duties. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-4: TAXICAB LICENSE REQUIRED; TERM:
No taxicab shall pick up passengers in the Village unless there shall first
have been obtained therefor a taxicab license from the Village Clerk. Such
taxicab license shall be issued annually January 1 in each and every year, and
should be valid to and including December 31 next succeeding and shall be
effective for such period of time unless sooner suspended or revoked. (Ord.
2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-5: INSPECTIONS OF VEHICLES AS PREREQUISITE TO LICENSING:
   A.   No vehicle shall be licensed as a taxicab, whether upon new application
or renewal, unless it is eight (8) years of age or less, measured from its year
of manufacture, and until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and
examined and found to be in a thoroughly safe condition for the transportation
of passengers, clean, fit, of good appearance and well painted.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the owner of each taxicab to submit to the
Chief of Police each taxicab for inspection prior to the issuance of the
license and at least annually thereafter, or at any time upon complaint.
   C.   Violations of the motor vehicle code observed at the annual inspection
but which do not prevent the issuance of a taxicab license, shall be cited on a
warning ticket, issued to the owner of the affected taxicab, with a twenty one
(21) day grace period given for correction of the violation. The license and
measures inspector, with the concurrence of the Police Department, may extend
this grace period for fifteen (15) days further upon a request by the owner,
demonstrating extraordinary circumstances.
   D.   A reinspection shall be made at the expiration of the aforesaid twenty
one (21) day grace period, or any extension thereof. The owner shall be issued
a citation requiring his or her appearance in court for each violation
uncorrected as of the reinspection date. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-6: BOND OR INSURANCE POLICY REQUIRED:
No owner shall be licensed to operate a taxicab until he has complied with the
state law pertaining to a surety bond or liability insurance coverage. (Ord.
2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-7: APPLICATIONS AND ISSUANCE OF TAXICAB LICENSES:
Applications for taxicab licenses shall be made to the Village Clerk by the
owner thereof upon blank forms to be furnished by the Village Clerk, and such
application shall contain the full name and address of the owner or operator, a
list containing the class of the vehicles for which the license is desired, the
length of time the vehicles have been in use, the number of persons each
vehicle is capable of carrying, and the motor power thereof. Such application
shall thereupon be referred by the Village Clerk to the Chief of Police. Upon
approval of the application by the Chief of Police, he shall so endorse such
application and file the same with the Village Clerk who shall, upon payment of
the fee prescribed by section 8-2-1 of this code, issue the license, complying
with section 24-1-11 of this article. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-8: PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY; DECLARATION PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE
OF TAXICAB LICENSE; EXCEPTIONS:
No taxicab license shall be issued under this article unless the Board of
Trustees, after a hearing, shall by resolution declare and determine that
public convenience and necessity require the proposed taxicab service for which
application for a license is made; provided, that such declaration of public
convenience and necessity shall not be necessary:
   A.   For the licensing of the same number of taxicabs licensed for operation
and operated by the applicant under the same name and colors, for which a
license was issued previously, or the renewal of the license annually
thereafter; or
   B.   For the renewal of a license to the applicant for the number of
taxicabs of the applicant, for which the Board of Trustees shall have at any
time prior to the date of application for such renewal, made a declaration of
public convenience and necessity. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-9: PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY; GROUNDS FOR DETERMINATION:
In determining whether public convenience and necessity require the licensing
of such taxicabs for which application may be made, the Board of Trustees shall
take into consideration whether the demands of public convenience and necessity
require such proposed or such additional taxicab service within the Village;
the financial responsibility of the applicant; the number, kind and type of
equipment; the schedule of maximum rates proposed to be charged; the color
scheme to be used by the applicant; the increased traffic congestion and demand
for increased parking spaces on the streets of the Village which may result;
whether the safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular and
pedestrian, will be preserved by the granting of such additional license and
such other relevant facts as the Board of Trustees may deem advisable or
necessary. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-10: PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY; HEARING AND PROCEDURE:
If the Board of Trustees finds from the investigation and hearing that the
public convenience and necessity justify the operation of the taxicab for which
license is desired, it shall notify the applicant of its finding. Within sixty
(60) days thereafter, the applicant shall furnish to the Board of Trustees any
and all additional information which may be required, and if the Board of
Trustees then finds that the applicant is the owner and bona fide operator of
the vehicle for which the license is desired, and that such vehicle complies
with all of the provisions of this code and other ordinances of the Village,
the license shall thereupon be issued to the applicant upon the payment of the
proper license fee.
If the Board of Trustees finds from such investigation and hearing that the
public convenience and necessity do not justify the operation of the vehicle
for which the license is desired, it shall forthwith notify the applicant of
such finding. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-11: REQUIREMENTS FOR TAXICAB LICENSE DECALS:
All taxicabs licensed by the Village Clerk as provided in section
24-1-7 of this article shall be issued annual decals which shall contain a
number assigned to the taxicab, together with the date of the most recent
inspection. Such decal shall contain a space upon which an entry shall be made
of the date of inspection of the taxicab by the Chief of Police or an inspector
appointed by him. License decals shall be of a distinctly different color each
renewal period and shall be affixed to the lower passenger side of the rear
windshield of each taxicab. There shall be a five dollar ($5.00) fee for the
transfer of the decal to a new vehicle. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-12: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF TAXICAB LICENSE:
Any taxicab license shall be subject to suspension or revocation upon
conviction of the holder thereof for any violation of this chapter. The Board
of Trustees may at its discretion suspend or revoke a license granted upon any
provision of this chapter pending or in advance of the criminal prosecution of
the licensee, after notice and hearing. There shall be no refund of the annual
license fee. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-13: REGISTER OF LICENSED TAXICABS:
The Village Clerk and Chief of Police shall keep a register of the name and
address of each person owning or operating a taxicab licensed under this
chapter, together with the decal number and the description, make and necessary
dimensions of such taxicab, with the date and complete record of inspections
made of it. Such records shall be open to the inspection of the public at all
reasonable times, and shall be public records, extracts of which may be
certified for use as evidence by the Village Clerk. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-14: DUTY OF OWNERS TO FURNISH SERVICE; ABANDONMENT OF SERVICE:
The applicant shall operate his licensed vehicle or vehicles during each day of
the licensed year to the extent reasonably necessary to meet the public demand
of such service. Upon complete abandonment of such service for the period of
ten (10) consecutive days by the owner or operator of such service, the Chief
of Police upon hearing, after five (5) days' notice to such owner or operator,
shall thereupon recommend to the Board of Trustees that the license of such
owner or operator shall be revoked, covering all licensed vehicles of such
owner or operator. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-15: TAXICAB COLORS AND NAME:
No taxicab license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter to any
person having the name or colors of his taxicab similar to that of any other
person having a taxicab license within the corporate limits of the Village.
(Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-16: CARRYING ADDITIONAL PASSENGERS:
No driver of a taxicab licensed under this chapter shall carry any person other
than the first passenger first employing the taxicab without the consent of the
first passenger. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-17: OVERCHARGING:
No driver of any taxicab shall charge or attempt to charge any passenger a
greater fare than that to which such driver is entitled under the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-18: PREPAYMENT OF FARE MAY BE DEMANDED; DUTY OF DRIVERS TO CONVEY ORDERLY
PERSONS:
   A.   The required prepayment of fares by taxicab drivers shall be prohibited
except that every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand payment in
advance under the following circumstances:
      1.   From any person seeking conveyance when that person:
         a.   Has failed to pay the posted or metered taxi fare after having
been transported by such taxi to the requested destination on one or more
occasions during the previous two (2) year period;
         b.   Appears to be under the influence of alcohol based upon objective
indicators including, but not limited to, slurred speech, smell of alcohol on
one's breath, bloodshot and/or glassy eyes and/or a lack of balance; and/or
         c.   Is unfamiliar to the driver and does not exit from the address to
which the driver was dispatched.
   B.   Required prepaid fares and the reasons therefor, shall be reported by
the driver to the company within twenty four (24) hours of each such occurrence
and a written record of such prepayments, and reasons therefor, shall be
maintained by the company for two (2) years and shall be made available to the
Village for inspection upon request.
   C.   No driver of a taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any
orderly person upon request anywhere in the Village unless previously engaged
or unable to do so. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-19: RECEIPT FOR FARE PAID:
If demanded by the passenger, the driver in charge of a taxicab shall deliver
to the person paying for the hiring of the same at the time of such payment, a
receipt therefor in legible type or writing containing the name of the owner or
operator, the Village decal number, or the driver's Village license number, or
the taximeter number and any items for which a charge is made, the total amount
paid and the date of payment. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-20: SCHEDULE OF RATES OF FARES; RATE CARD REQUIRED:
No person owning, operating, or controlling any taxicab within the limits of
the Village shall charge rates not to exceed the following rates to be
determined by the taximeter:
 
 For the first 1/11 mile or fraction thereof for 1 person               $2.30
 For each succeeding 1/11 mile or fraction thereof                      0.20
 For each additional person over 12 years of age for the whole journey  0.75
 For each 32 seconds of waiting time or fraction thereof                0.20
 
Waiting time shall include the time when the taxicab is not in motion,
beginning with the arrival at the place to which it had been called, or the
time consumed while standing at the direction of the passenger, or time
consumed while standing because of conditions beyond control of the operator,
but no charge shall be made for time lost for inefficiency of the taxicab or
its operator, or time consumed by premature response to a call.
Flat rate charges for a posted destination or distance shall not exceed the
meter rate charge for such destination or distance.
Every taxicab operated under this chapter shall have a rate card setting forth
the authorized rates of fare displayed in the rear passenger compartment in
plain view of all passengers. The rate card shall also contain a list of
communities where straight meter rates apply, the cab number, the name of the
cab owner, the name of the business or association to which the cab belongs and
a telephone number at which complaints can be received.
A licensed taxicab company may provide for multiple passengers and shared
rides, provided that the passengers are advised when ordering a cab that the
ride will be shared. Group rates for shared rides will be established by the
taxi company provided the rate for the group does not exceed the rate that
would have been applicable under this section to one passenger multiplied by
the number of persons in the group. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-21: CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS:
Each vehicle shall be equipped to process credit card payments by passengers.
(Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-22: NO SMOKING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke any tobacco at any time in any
taxicab. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-1-23: CELLULAR TELEPHONES:
Taxicab operators may not use cellular telephones while transporting
passengers. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
ARTICLE 2
TAXICAB DRIVERS; VILLAGE LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
24-2-1: Individual License Required
24-2-2: Qualifications Of Applicants
24-2-3: Application; Affidavit; Photographs Generally
24-2-4: Investigation And Examination Of Applicants; Issuance Or Refusal Of
License
24-2-5: License Issuance And Expiration Date
24-2-6: License Form
24-2-7: Photo To Be Attached; Exhibition Of License
24-2-8: License Renewal
24-2-9: Suspension And Revocation Generally
24-2-10: Defacing License
24-2-11: License Records
24-2-12: Drivers To Report Changes Of Residence
24-2-13: Disposition Of Material Left In Taxicabs
24-2-14: Parking In Or Near Taxicab Stands; Use Of Taxicab Stands
24-2-15: Cruising Streets Prohibited
24-2-1: INDIVIDUAL LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every person driving a taxicab must be licensed by the Village as a taxicab
driver. It shall be unlawful to employ or otherwise permit to operate a
taxicab, any person who does not have a current, valid taxicab driver's
license. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-2-2: QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS:
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license must:
   A.   Be of the age of eighteen (18) years or over;
   B.   Be of sound mental and physical condition with good eyesight, and not
subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or
mind which might render such applicant unfit for the safe operation of a
taxicab;
   C.   Be able to read, write and speak the English language;
   D.   Be clean in dress and person, of good moral character and not be
addicted to the use of narcotics or intoxicating liquors. For purposes of this
section, convictions for a felony or any of the following misdemeanors may be
considered as an indication of character and habits (references are to the
Illinois Compiled Statutes):
720 ILCS 5/12-12 et seq.
720 ILCS 5/11-6
720 ILCS 5/11-9
720 ILCS 5/11-14
720 ILCS 5/11-15
720 ILCS 5/11-16
720 ILCS 5/11-17
720 ILCS 5/11-19
720 ILCS 5/11-20.1
720 ILCS 5/11-21
720 ILCS 5/12-2
720 ILCS 5/12-6
720 ILCS 5/16-1
720 ILCS 5/24-1
720 ILCS 5/24-3
720 ILCS 5/24-3.1
720 ILCS 5/25-1
720 ILCS 5/28-3
720 ILCS 5/31-1
720 ILCS 5/31-4
720 ILCS 5/31-6
720 ILCS 5/31-7
720 ILCS 5/32-1
625 ILCS 5/11-501
625 ILCS 5/11-503
625 ILCS 5/6-103
Pursuant to the provisions hereinafter set forth, any applicant who has been
convicted of the offenses enumerated herein may present evidence of
rehabilitation which may negate any inferences drawn from evidence of
conviction. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-2-3: APPLICATION; AFFIDAVIT; PHOTOGRAPHS GENERALLY:
Any person desiring to secure a Village taxicab driver's license shall make
application in writing therefor to the Village Clerk, upon a form to be
provided by the Village Clerk. Such application shall set forth the name of the
applicant, the applicant's residence and occupation, and shall be endorsed by
at least two (2) responsible citizens who shall certify that the applicant is a
person of good habits, honest, sober and industrious and a fit person to drive
or operate a taxicab. Together with the application, the applicant shall submit
an application fee in the amount set forth in section
8-2-1 of this code.
Along with such application, the applicant shall file an affidavit stating the
applicant's full name, residence, places of residence during the previous five
(5) years, age, sex, race, height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth,
whether a citizen of the United States, places of previous employment, whether
he has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, whether he has
previously been licensed as a driver or chauffeur and if so, whether his
license has ever been revoked and for what cause, which affidavit shall be
filed with the Village Clerk as a permanent record.
Such applicant shall be fingerprinted by the Police Department and shall also
file with the application to the Village Clerk two (2) recent photographs of
himself, of a size which may be easily attached to the license, one of which
shall be attached to the license when issued, and the other shall be filed with
the application in the office of the Village Clerk. The Police Chief shall
perform a criminal history records check but may in the alternative, accept a
report on an applicant if performed on behalf of another authorized state of
Illinois law enforcement agency no more than ninety (90) days prior to the
submission of the taxi driver license application to the Village, provided the
Chief is able to confirm the completeness and authenticity of such criminal
history records check report to the Chief's reasonable satisfaction.
If the Police Chief is able to obtain a preliminary criminal history records
report which reasonably indicates that the applicant is of good moral
character, the Chief in his or her discretion may authorize the Village Clerk
to issue a temporary taxi driver permit pending completion of the full criminal
history records check report and issuance of the regular annual license.
Such temporary permit may be voided immediately by the Police Chief upon
disclosure of criminal history during the criminal history records check
indicating applicant's lack of good moral character. (Ord. 2011-0-65, 10-17-
2011)
24-2-4: INVESTIGATION AND EXAMINATION OF APPLICANTS; ISSUANCE OR REFUSAL OF
LICENSE:
The application, affidavit, fingerprints and photographs referred to in section
24-2-3 of this article shall be referred to the Chief of Police, who shall
investigate the qualifications and the physical and mental condition of the
applicant. Each applicant for a Village taxicab driver's license under the
provisions of this chapter shall be examined by the Chief of Police or some
person by him designated, as to the applicant's knowledge of the provisions of
this chapter, the traffic regulations and the geography of the Village. If the
results of the examinations be unsatisfactory, the applicant shall be refused a
license. If the Chief of Police shall approve the application he shall endorse
thereon such approval and return the same together with the affidavit and
photographs to the Village Clerk, who shall forthwith issue such license. (Ord.
2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-2-5: LICENSE ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION DATE:
Taxicab drivers' licenses shall be issued as of January 1 or as of the date of
initial application in each and every year, and shall be valid to and including
December 31 next succeeding. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-2-6: LICENSE FORM:
Taxicab drivers' licenses shall be in such form as to contain the signature of
the licensee and blank spaces upon which a record may be made of any arrest of
or serious complaint against him. All taxicab drivers' licenses shall be
numbered when issued. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-2-7: PHOTO TO BE ATTACHED; EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
The taxicab driver's license issued by the Village Clerk shall have attached
thereto one of the photographs of the driver previously deposited with that
office as provided in section
24-2-3 of this article, in such manner that it cannot be removed and another
photograph substituted without detection. Each licensed driver shall, while
operating a taxicab, display this license in a prominent place in the taxicab
in plain view of all passengers while seated in the cab. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-
2011)
24-2-8: LICENSE RENEWAL:
The Village Clerk may renew a taxicab driver's license from year to year by
appropriate endorsement thereon. A taxicab driver in applying for a renewal of
his taxicab driver's license shall make an application upon a form to be
furnished by the Village Clerk entitled "application for renewal of license",
which shall be filled out with the full name and address of the applicant,
together with a statement of the date upon which his original license was
granted and the number thereof. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-2-9: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION GENERALLY:
A taxicab driver's license may be suspended or revoked at any time for
violation of the provisions of this chapter or other cause after notice and
hearing as provided in chapter 8 of this code. The Chief of Police may suspend
such license for ten (10) days pending final action by the Board of Trustees.
Any such suspension shall be noted on the license, together with a statement of
the reasons therefor, and the driver shall be deprived of his license by the
officer suspending or revoking such license. No driver whose license has been
revoked shall again be licensed as a taxicab driver in the Village, unless upon
presentation of reasons satisfactory to the Board of Trustees. The Village
Clerk shall notify the Police Department when any such license is revoked.
(Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-2-10: DEFACING LICENSE:
No holder of a taxicab driver's Village license shall deface, remove or
obliterate any official entry made upon his taxicab driver's license. (Ord.
2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-2-11: LICENSE RECORDS:
There shall be kept in the office of the Village Clerk and the Police
Department a complete record of each taxicab driver's Village license issued
and of all renewals, suspensions or revocations thereof. The Village Clerk's
record shall be kept on file with the original application of the driver for a
license. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-2-12: DRIVERS TO REPORT CHANGES OF RESIDENCE:
If the driving or criminal record, insurance coverage or residence of any
person licensed as a taxicab driver under this chapter shall change at any time
while his license is in force, the driver shall immediately notify the Village
Clerk. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-2-13: DISPOSITION OF MATERIAL LEFT IN TAXICABS:
Whenever any package or article of baggage or goods of any kind shall be left
in or on any taxicab, or shall be left in the custody of the driver thereof,
the driver of the taxicab shall, upon the discovery of such package or article,
forthwith deliver the same to the police station of the Village, unless such
package or article shall be sooner delivered to the owner thereof, or upon the
order of such owner. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-2-14: PARKING IN OR NEAR TAXICAB STANDS; USE OF TAXICAB STANDS:
Only taxicabs in such numbers and of such kinds as are set forth on the
required metal sign may remain at the stand while waiting for employment, and
only in single file pointed in accordance with the traffic regulations. No
taxicab standing at the head of any such line shall refuse to carry any orderly
person applying for a taxicab who agrees to pay the proper fare, but this shall
not prevent any person from electing any taxicab he may desire on the stand,
whether it be at the head of the line or not. As the taxicabs leave the line
with passengers those behind shall move up, and any taxicab seeking a space on
the stand shall approach the same only from the rear of the stand and shall
stop as near as possible to the last cab already on the line. No taxicab shall
stand at the curb within fifteen feet (15') of the entrance of any building
adjacent to a taxicab stand located and designated by the Board of Trustees
which distance shall be determined by measuring fifteen feet (15') on each side
of the point of the curb opposite the middle of the entrance to the adjacent
building. No private vehicle shall be permitted to stand or use the space in a
public stand except to receive or to discharge passengers or merchandise. (Ord.
2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
24-2-15: CRUISING STREETS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to seek employment by
repeatedly and persistently driving his taxicab about the same streets and/or
locations in the Village or otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly
access to or egress from any theater, hall, hotel, public resort, railway
station, or other place of public gathering. (Ord. 2011-0-1, 1-3-2011)
ARTICLE 3
TAXIMETERS
SECTION:
24-3-1: Required
24-3-2: Prerequisite to Taxicab License
24-3-3: Driving Taxicab With Taximeter not Inspected and Approved
24-3-4: General Requirements
24-3-5: Inspections by Inspector of Weights and Measures; Complaints
24-3-6: Procedure for Testing
24-3-7: Subject to Test Upon Demand
24-3-8: Transferring Meters to Vehicle of Different Wheel Size
24-3-9: Inspector of Weights and Measures to Seal Taximeters and Keep Records
of Inspections
24-3-10: Inspection Fees
24-3-11: Dial to be Illuminated and Located in Plain View of Passenger
24-3-12: False Signals
24-3-13: Penalty
24-3-1: REQUIRED:
Each taxicab must have affixed thereto and in good working order, a taximeter.
24-3-2: PREREQUISITE TO TAXICAB LICENSE:
No taxicab license shall be issued for any taxicab until the taximeter attached
thereto shall have been inspected as provided by this Article and found to be
accurate.
24-3-3: DRIVING TAXICAB WITH TAXIMETER NOT INSPECTED AND APPROVED:
No person shall drive a taxicab to which is attached a taximeter that has not
been duly inspected and approved.
24-3-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
The dial of every taximeter with which every taxicab shall be equipped shall
show but one tariff. Such taximeter shall also properly and accurately
register, indicate and display the distance traveled, and the amount of fare to
be determined and charged therefor. Each taximeter shall be equipped with a
flag at least three inches (3") by two inches (2") in size, either painted red
or bearing thereon in letters at least one inch (1") in height the word
"vacant" or the words "for hire". The flag post of such flag shall be kept up
or towards a vertical position when the taxicab is for hire and when such
taxicab is engaged in the service of a passenger or passengers, such flag post
shall be kept down or in a horizontal position.
24-3-5: INSPECTIONS BY INSPECTOR OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES; COMPLAINTS:
Before any license shall be issued to a taxicab it shall be the duty of the
Inspector of Weights and Measures to examine and inspect the taximeter attached
thereto and report its condition to the Village Clerk. At least once annually,
such Inspector shall in like manner examine, inspect, and seal all taximeters
used in vehicles licensed in the Village; provided, however, that in the event
complaint is made to the Inspector of Weights and Measures that any taximeter
registers improperly or inaccurately, then it shall be the duty of the
Inspector immediately to examine and inspect such taximeter complained of. If
such taximeter does not comply with the requirements of the preceding Section,
then and in that event it shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge
of such taxicab to permit its use until such taxicab is equipped with a
taximeter approved by the Inspector of Weights and Measures.
24-3-6: PROCEDURE FOR TESTING:
Every taximeter shall be tested by running the taxicab to which it is attached
over a course of a standard mile in length or by a mechanical test to prove the
accuracy of the register thereof. Either of the foregoing tests may be made in
the discretion of the Inspector of Weights and Measures.
In order to determine whether such taximeter correctly registers "waiting
time", it shall be the duty of the Inspector of Weights and Measures to test
such taximeter by comparing the time recorded as shown by the fare computed on
the dial thereof with the standard time.
24-3-7: SUBJECT TO TEST UPON DEMAND:
It shall be the duty of any person owning, controlling or operating a taxicab
to deliver either the taxicab together with the taximeter, or the taximeter
detached therefrom, to the Inspector of Weights and Measures, or any of his
deputies, for the purpose of making the aforesaid test upon demand; provided,
however, such person may, if desired, be present at the time such test is made.
24-3-8: TRANSFERRING METERS TO VEHICLE OF DIFFERENT WHEEL SIZE:
No person shall detach any certified or inspected taximeter from any taxicab
and attach the same to any other taxicab, the front wheels of which are of
different diameter from those with reference to which the taximeter was
originally tested, unless a new inspection or certification is had on such
taximeter.
24-3-9: INSPECTOR OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES TO SEAL TAXIMETERS AND KEEP RECORDS
OF INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Inspector of Weights and Measures to seal all
taximeters found accurate and correct and to keep a record of the numbers of
each taximeter and the date of the inspection thereof in the books of his
office.
24-3-10: INSPECTION FEES:
The fee to be charged for the annual inspection of each taximeter is hereby
fixed at the sum of two dollars fifty cents ($2.50). No charge shall be made
for additional inspections unless the taximeter registers incorrectly or
inaccurately, in which case an additional inspection fee of two dollars fifty
cents ($2.50) shall be charged.
24-3-11: DIAL TO BE ILLUMINATED AND LOCATED IN PLAIN VIEW OF PASSENGER:
Each taxicab shall, during the period between sunset and sunrise, be equipped
with a light which shall be so reflected upon the dial of the taximeter as to
enable the passenger engaging and using such taxicab to read the figures
indicated thereon.
Every taximeter placed on a taxicab shall be so arranged that the dial thereof
is in plain view of the passenger while riding in such taxicab, or upon
alighting from the same.
24-3-12: FALSE SIGNALS:
No driver of a taxicab equipped with a taximeter while carrying a passenger or
under employment shall display the signal affixed to such taximeter or other
similar device in such a position as to denote that he is employed at a rate of
fare different from that to which he is entitled under the provisions of this
Chapter.
24-3-13: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined as
provided by Section
1-1-5 of this Code.
In addition to such fine, any license issued pursuant to this Chapter may be
suspended or revoked as provided in this Code.
CHAPTER 25
TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER PLANTS
Planting, Maintenance And Removal Of Trees And Shrubs   1
Dutch Elm Disease   2
ARTICLE 1
PLANTING, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL OF TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
25-1-1: Purpose And Intent
25-1-2: Definitions
25-1-3: Village Forester; Duties
25-1-4: Tree And Shrub Maintenance And Planting Approval
25-1-5: Public Nuisances
25-1-6: Clear Sight Areas At Street Intersections
25-1-7: Violation And Penalty
25-1-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this article to promote and protect the
public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of
the planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs within the Village.
   B.   Intent: It is the intent of the Village Board that the terms of this
article shall be construed so as to promote:
      1.   The planting, maintenance, restoration and survival of desirable
trees and shrubs within the Village; and
      2.   The protection of community residents from personal injury and
property damage, and the protection of the Village from property damage, caused
or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance or removal of trees and
shrubs located within the community. (1981 Code)
25-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
   FORESTER: The Village Forester of the Village of Oak Park, Illinois.
   PROPERTY OWNER: The record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of
land.
   TREES AND SHRUBS: All vegetation, woody or otherwise, except lawn grass and
herbaceous flowers.
   URBAN FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN: A plan adopted by the Village Board to
regulate the management of public trees in the Village, three (3) copies of
which are on file in the offices of the Village Clerk and Village Forester and
shall be available for public inspection.
   VILLAGE OWNED PROPERTY: Property within the Village limits and: a) owned by
the Village in fee simple absolute, or b) impliedly or expressly dedicated to
the public sewer easements.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 24-101, 1-30-2024)
25-1-3: VILLAGE FORESTER; DUTIES:
   A.   The Forester shall administer the Village Urban Forest Management Plan;
   B.   The Forester shall approve or disapprove tree plantings on public
property and approve or disapprove any other acts in regard to tree and shrub
removal and maintenance as are required by this chapter and shall obtain as a
condition precedent to the granting of any approval, the written agreement of
each person who applies for such approval that he or she will comply with the
requirements of this chapter and with the Urban Forest Management Plan. The
Forester shall have the right to inspect all work performed after such approval
is granted. If, pursuant to such inspection, the Forester finds that the work
performed pursuant to the approval has not been performed in compliance with
the requirements of this article or with the Urban Forest Management Plan, the
forester shall provide written notice of such finding to the applicant, and the
notice shall contain a copy of this subsection, and
      1.   The approval shall be rescinded and shall be void ab initio, and
      2.   The Forester may issue a written order that the applicant cease and
desist all work for which the approval was granted, and
      3.   The applicant shall be subject to penalty under the terms of this
chapter, and
      4.   The Forester may take steps to correct the results of the
noncomplying work and the reasonable costs of such steps shall be charged to
the applicant.
   C.   The Forester shall establish a program of public information and
education that will encourage the planting, maintenance or removal of trees,
shrubs and other plants on private property in furtherance of the general
program for optimizing the tree, shrub and other plant resources of the
Village. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 24-101, 1-30-2024)
25-1-4: TREE AND SHRUB MAINTENANCE AND PLANTING APPROVAL:
   A.   Scope Of Requirement: No person except the Forester, an agent of the
Forester or a contractor hired by the Village may perform any of the following
acts without first obtaining approval from the Forester:
      1.   Plant on Village owned property, or spray, fertilize, prune, remove
or otherwise disturb any tree or shrub located on Village owned property,
except that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit owners of
property adjacent to or appurtenant to Village owned property from watering
without approval any tree or shrub located on such Village owned property;
      2.   Trim, prune or remove any tree or portions thereof if such tree or
portions thereof reasonably may be expected to fall on or across Village owned
property and thereby to cause damage to persons or property;
      3.   Place on Village owned property, either above or below ground level,
a container for trees or shrubs;
      4.   Damage, cut, tap, carve or transplant any tree or shrub located on
Village owned property;
      5.   Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster or any other manmade
object to any tree or shrub located on Village owned property;
      6.   Make or cause to be made any tree well or sidewalk cut on Village
owned property.
   B.   Approval: Within seven (7) days of receipt of the application, set
forth in subsection 25-1-4B3 of this Section, the Forester shall grant approval
to perform within thirty (30) days of the day of approval any of the acts
specified in subsection 25-1-4A of this Section, for which approval is
requested whenever:
      1.   Such acts would result in the abatement of a public nuisance; or
      2.   Such acts are not inconsistent with the Urban Forest Management
Plan; and whenever:
      3.   A letter of application has been signed by the applicant and
submitted to the Forester detailing the location, number, size and species of
trees or shrubs that will be affected by such acts, setting forth the purpose
of such acts and the methods to be used, and presenting any additional
information that the Forester may find reasonably necessary to a determination
of whether such acts are consistent with this Chapter and with the provisions
of the Urban Forest Management Plan; and
      4.   The applicant agrees in writing to perform the work for which
approval is sought in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and with
the regulations and standards set forth in the Urban Forest Management Plan;
and
      5.   If the work for which approval is sought entails the felling of any
tree or part thereof located on private property, which as a result of such
felling, reasonably may be expected to fall on or across Village owned
property, the applicant agrees in writing to indemnify and hold harmless the
Village for all damages resulting from work conducted pursuant to the approval;
and (1981 Code)
      6.   Further in regard to the felling of any tree or part thereof located
on private property, which as a result of such felling may reasonably be
expected to fall upon or across Village owned property, if such felling is done
by a contractor or some person other than the owner of the property upon which
the tree is located, the contractor shall deposit with the Forester a liability
insurance policy in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00)
per accident for bodily injury liability and fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) aggregate for property damage liability. A blanket certificate may
be filed with the Forester covering all tree work by the contractor during the
policy period. (1981 Code)
   C.   Exemptions Not Construed From Section: Nothing in this Section shall be
construed to exempt:
      1.   Public utility companies or their agents from any of the
requirements of this Chapter; or
      2.   Any person from the requirements of obtaining any permits as are
required by law.
   D.   Granting Approval For Removal And Maintenance Of Trees On Private
Property: Nothing in this Section shall be construed as granting the Forester
the authority to disapprove tree removal or maintenance on private property
provided the Forester is notified of such removal or maintenance pursuant to
subsection 25-1-4B3 of this Section and provided the applicant under subsection
25-1-4B3 of this Section complies with subsection 25-1-4B3 of this Section.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 1981-0-54, 8-3-81, eff. 8-3-81; Ord. 24-101, 1-30-2024)
25-1-5: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
   A.   Definition: The following are hereby declared public nuisances under
this Article:
      1.   Any dead or dying tree or shrub, whether located on Village owned
property or on private property;
      2.   Any otherwise healthy tree or shrub, whether located on Village
owned property or on private property, which harbors insects or diseases which
reasonably may be expected to injure or harm any tree or shrub;
      3.   Any tree or shrub or portion thereof, whether located on Village
owned property or on private property, which by reason of location or condition
constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare of the general
public;
      4.   Any tree or shrub or portion thereof whether located on Village
owned property or on private property which obstructs the free passage of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a streetlight; and
      5.   Any tree or shrub or portion thereof whether located on Village
owned property or on private property which obstructs the view of any vehicular
traffic in or approaching an intersection.
   B.   Abatement: The following are the prescribed means of abating public
nuisances under this Section:
      1.   Any public nuisance under this Section which is located on Village
owned property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the Forester in
whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance within a
reasonable time after its discovery.
      2.   Any public nuisance under this Section which is located on private
property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the property owner or
his/her agent in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the
nuisance. No property owner may be in violation of this provision unless and
until the following requirements of notice have been satisfied:
         a.   The Forester shall cause a written notice to be sent by
registered or certified mail to the owner of the property upon which the
nuisance is found;
         b.   Such notice shall describe with particularity the tree or shrub
which has been declared to be a public nuisance;
         c.   Such notice shall state with particularity the alternative
actions that the property owner may undertake to abate the nuisance;
         d.   Such notice will require the elimination of the nuisance within
thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice by the property owner, although,
upon a showing of good cause, said period may be extended by the Forester for a
reasonable period.
      In the event that the nuisance is not abated within thirty (30) days
following receipt of notice by the property owner or within any further time
period allowed by the Forester, the Forester is authorized to cause the
abatement of said nuisance, and the reasonable cost of such abatement shall be
filed as a lien against the property on which the nuisance was located, and the
property owner of the property upon which the nuisance is located shall be
subject to prosecution under Section 25-1-7 of this Article. Nothing in this
provision shall be construed to exempt any person from the requirements of
obtaining approvals under Section
25-1-4 of this Article.
      3.   The provisions of subsections
25-1-4B1 and B2 of this Article notwithstanding, the Forester is hereby
empowered to cause the immediate abatement of any public nuisance under this
Article, provided that the nuisance is declared by the Forester to threaten
imminent and serious danger of injury or death to any person, and provided that
the owner of the property on which the nuisance is located cannot be found
through the reasonable efforts of the Forester.
      4.   The Forester is hereby empowered to seek from any court of competent
jurisdiction an order directing the immediate abatement of any public nuisance
under this Chapter.
   C.   The control of trees infected with Dutch Elm Disease shall be governed
by Article 2 of this Chapter. (Ord. 2002-0-11, 3-4-02; amd. Ord. 24-101, 1-30-
2024)
25-1-6: CLEAR SIGHT AREAS AT STREET INTERSECTIONS:
   A.   Finding: In order to promote greater safety at street intersections, it
is in the public interest that shrubs, solid fences and other interferences
with the sight of pedestrians or of operators of vehicles at such intersections
be regulated in accordance with the daylighting standards hereinafter set
forth.
   B.   Definition Of Clear Sight Area: A clear sight area is that area between
the roadways of intersecting streets containing no traffic control signs or
signals, which is included within lines connecting the centerlines of such
intersecting streets at points one hundred feet (100') from the center of the
intersection. In a usual four-way intersection, the clear sight area is the
area included in a diamond the corners of which are in the centerlines of the
intersecting streets and one hundred feet (100') from the center of the
intersection as illustrated by the diagram below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae96cf51568f39f5f7d376545367bda0b1dea85c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3326.gif]
(1981 Code)
   C.    Trees: Except for trimming standards set forth in subsection
25-1-6D of this Section, trees shall be exempt from clear sight area standards
unless warranted as set forth in Section
15-11-3 of this Code.
   D.   Overhanging Branches Of Trees And Bushes: Branches of trees and bushes
overhanging in the clear sight area shall be trimmed to a height of no less
than seven feet (7') from the ground, or higher if necessary to comply with
subsection
25-1-6F of this Section. (1981 Code)
   E.   Maximum Height Of Shrubs And Plantings: When warranted as set forth in
Section
15-11-3 of this Code, shrubs, bushes and plantings within the clear sight area
shall be trimmed or limited to a maximum height of thirty inches (30").
Measurements shall be from the ground to the top of the object. When warranted
as set forth in Section
15-11-3 of this Code, a lesser height must be maintained if necessary to comply
with the minimum horizontal sight distance across such clear sight area
specified in subsection
25-1-6F of this Section.
   F.   Minimum Horizontal Sight Distance: When warranted as set forth in
Section
15-11-3 of this Code, no overhanging branches, shrubs, bushes or plantings in
clear sight areas may be of a height which obstructs horizontal sight lines
across such clear sight areas measured from points forty five inches (45")
above the centerlines of the intersecting streets along such centerlines for a
distance of one hundred feet (100') from the center of the intersection.
   G.   No Future Plantings Of Trees And Shrubs In Parkways Within Clear Sight
Areas: No future plantings of trees and shrubs shall be permitted in parkways
within clear sight areas. (1981 Code)
   H.   Enforcement Of Daylighting Standards: The Public Works Department shall
be responsible for issuing warnings to homeowners not complying with the
daylighting standards herein specified, advising them of proper application of
same in relation to their property, and notifying the Law Department for
enforcement if noncompliance continues. (Ord. 1982-0-50, 9-7-82; amd. Ord. 24-
101, 1-30-2024)
25-1-7: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or who fails to comply
with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, upon being
found guilty of violation, shall be subject to a fine as provided in Section
1-1-5 of this Code. If, as the result of the violation of any provision of this
Article, the injury, mutilation or death of a tree or other plant located on
Village owned property is caused, the cost of repair or replacement of such
tree or other plant shall be borne by the party in violation. The replacement
value of trees may be determined in accordance with the latest version of
"Guide for Plant Appraisal as published by the International Society of
Arboriculture". (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 24-101, 1-30-2024)
ARTICLE 2
DUTCH ELM DISEASE
SECTION:
25-2-1: Dutch Elm Diseased Trees Declared a Public Nuisance
25-2-2: Elm Bark Beetle Breeding Places Declared a Public Nuisance
25-2-3: Enforcement by Village Forester
25-2-4: Removal of Infected Trees
25-2-1: DUTCH ELM DISEASED TREES DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Trees of all species and varieties of elm, zelkova and planera affected with
the fungus Ceratostomella ulmi, as determined by laboratory analysis, are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be removed and burned within
ten (10) days following notification of the discovery of such infection.
25-2-2: ELM BARK BEETLE BREEDING PLACES DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Trees or parts thereof of elm, zelkova or planera in a dead or dying condition
that may serve as a breeding place for the European Elm Bark Beetle, Scolytus
Multistriatus, are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and it shall be
unlawful for the person, firm or corporation owning property whereon the same
is situated to possess or keep the same.
25-2-3: ENFORCEMENT BY VILLAGE FORESTER:
The Village Forester is charged with enforcement of this Article, and to that
end, may enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for purposes of
inspecting trees thereon, and may remove such specimens as are required for
purposes of analysis to determine whether or not the same are infected. It
shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to prevent the Village
Forester or his representative from entering on private property for purposes
of carrying out his duties hereunder, or to interfere with such Village
Forester or his representative in the lawful performance of his duties.
25-2-4: REMOVAL OF INFECTED TREES:
The Director of Public Works or the Village Forester shall serve notice on the
owner of premises containing trees infected with Dutch Elm Disease, said notice
to be in conformance with section 11-20-12 of the Illinois Municipal Code. The
notice shall be served by registered mail or personally on the person to whom
was sent the tax bill for general taxes on said property for the last preceding
year and the notice shall be delivered or sent not less than thirty (30) days
prior to the removal of the tree(s). In the event the tree is not removed
within said thirty (30) day period, the Village shall proceed to remove the
tree(s), charge the cost to the owner, and in the event of nonpayment, file a
lien against the property in accordance with section 11-20-12. In the event a
tree is particularly infectious because of its proximity to other elm trees or
because of the time of year the disease is discovered, then the notice period
shall be five (5) days instead of thirty (30) days. The Village Forester shall
determine when the conditions exist warranting the imposition of the shorter
notice period based on the foregoing standards. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 26
WATER
General Provisions   1
Charges And Collections   2
Meters Generally   3
Service Installation Rules, Regulations And Fees   4
Conservation Measures   5
Cross Connection Control   6
Sewer Connections   7
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
26-1-1: Municipal Code Governs Water System
26-1-2: Application For Water Service; Information Required
26-1-3: Permit; Issuance
26-1-4: Permit; Charge
26-1-5: Authorized Plumbers To Do Plumbing Work; Pavement Replacement; Permit
Required
26-1-6: Separate Round-Ways For Each Premises Required; Permit Fee For Each
Service
26-1-7: Automatic Sprinkler Systems; Water For Fire Protection
26-1-8: Obstructing Round-Ways, Hydrants, Etc., Prohibited
26-1-9: Interfering With Water System
26-1-10: Authorized Persons To Activate System Connection; Penalty
26-1-11: Tampering With Village Placed Seals Prohibited
26-1-12: Use Of Water From Fire Hydrants
26-1-13: Village Not Liable For Interruption Of Service
26-1-14: Responsibility For Repair Of Pipes
26-1-15: Penalties
26-1-1: MUNICIPAL CODE GOVERNS WATER SYSTEM:
Every person making a connection with the water system or plant of the Village
or using water therefrom, shall make such connection and use such water and
maintain the same, subject at all times to the provisions and conditions of
this Code or other ordinances of the Village, in force or to become in force at
any time during the period such connections are maintained, or such water is
used, and shall in all respects conform to the provisions and conditions of
this Chapter. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-1-2: APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE; INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Any person desiring to make any connection with the water system or plant, or
use water therefrom, shall first make application to the Director of Public
Works upon a blank form to be furnished by the Water Division. Every such
applicant shall state specifically and in detail the place, location and kind
of connection and appendages sought, the purpose for which the water is to be
used, and all the plumbing or plumbing work in any manner or way connected
therewith, and in case any street paving shall be opened or disturbed by such
work, such application shall conform to the requirements of Sections
26-1-3 to
26-1-5 of this Article. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-1-3: PERMIT; ISSUANCE:
When the applicant for water service has complied with all the provisions of
this Chapter, a permit shall then be issued by the Director of Public Works
authorizing the connection to be made and specifying the size thereof. (Ord.
2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-1-4: PERMIT; CHARGE:
A charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be made for each permit to
connect with the water system. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-1-5: AUTHORIZED PLUMBERS TO DO PLUMBING WORK; PAVEMENT REPLACEMENT; PERMIT
REQUIRED:
All plumbing and plumbing work, also all excavating, filling and replacement of
pavement shall be done by a plumber authorized by this Code or other ordinances
of the Village to do such plumbing; provided, however, that all such
replacements of pavement shall be done at the plumber's expense in accord with
the provisions of Chapter 22 of this Code. The permit shall authorize any such
plumber to do such plumbing and plumbing work as is described in the permit.
(Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-1-6: SEPARATE ROUND-WAYS FOR EACH PREMISES REQUIRED; PERMIT FEE FOR EACH
SERVICE:
No service pipe shall be laid or used to supply water to two (2) or more
distinct premises or buildings unless separate round-ways for each of the
premises or buildings shall be placed outside of such premises in the parkway,
as provided in this Chapter. A permit fee shall be charged for each service.
(Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-1-7: AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS; WATER FOR FIRE PROTECTION:
Water pipes entering premises and used for fire protection only and connected
with automatic sprinkler devices shall be supplied from a pipe having a
connection with the water main and provided with an outside controlling valve,
an approved backflow preventer, and a meter of a type, design and size to be
approved by the Village. Such pipe shall be of a size to accommodate both the
fire sprinkler system, as well as domestic service feed. The domestic service
feed shall be tapped off the supply pipe and a separate round-way will be
provided outside of the building as to provide access to the domestic service
feed, while still providing an uninterrupted fire protection to the building.
Such round-way will be kept within five feet (5') of the outside of the
building, in order to ensure that the water in the supply pipe does not become
stagnant, thus ensuring the quality of the water. All costs incurred for the
construction and maintenance of this system will be at the expense of the
person using the same. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-2000)
26-1-8: OBSTRUCTING ROUND-WAYS, HYDRANTS, ETC., PROHIBITED:
No person shall in any manner obstruct the access to any round-way, hydrant or
valve, or any public faucet or opening for taking water in any street, alley,
public ground or place connected with or a part of the Village water system or
plant, nor pile or place any lumber, brick or building material or other
article, thing or hindrance whatsoever so as to in any manner hinder, delay or
obstruct the members of the Fire Department in reaching the same. (Ord. 2000-0-
32, 6-19-2000)
26-1-9: INTERFERING WITH WATER SYSTEM:
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner interfere with or obstruct
the flow, retention, storage or authorized use of water in the Village water
system or plant or water main, hydrant, service pipe, water meter, shut-off
box, public fountain, valve, engine or building connected with such water
system or plant, or to cause, suffer or permit any of such things to be done.
(Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-2000)
26-1-10: AUTHORIZED PERSONS TO ACTIVATE SYSTEM CONNECTION; PENALTY:
No person not duly authorized shall turn the water on at any round-way, or use
water therefrom when so turned on, and the person so using or wasting water in
such unlawful manner shall be liable to pay therefor at the standard water rate
plus a penalty in accord with section
1-1-5 of this Code. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-2000)
26-1-11: TAMPERING WITH VILLAGE PLACED SEALS PROHIBITED:
No seal placed by the Village for the protection of any meter, valve, fitting
or other water connection shall be defaced or broken except on written
authority from the Village. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-2000)
26-1-12: USE OF WATER FROM FIRE HYDRANTS:
No person other than members of the Fire Department or employees of the
Department of Public Works of the Village, shall use water from any fire
hydrant connected with the Village water system, except for extinguishing fires
or unless especially authorized by the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 2000-0-
32, 6-19-2000)
26-1-13: VILLAGE NOT LIABLE FOR INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE:
All connections and water applied for under the provisions of this chapter, and
all such water used shall be upon the express condition that the Village shall
not be liable, nor shall any claim be made against it for damages or injury
caused by reason of the breakage of any main, branches, service pipes,
apparatus or appurtenances connected with the water system or plant, or any
part or portion of such plant, or for any interruption of the supply by reason
of the breakage of machinery or by reason of stoppage, alteration, extensions
or renewals. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-2000)
26-1-14: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPAIR OF PIPES:
All repairs to service pipes and connections therefrom shall be at the expense
of the owner or tenant of the premises supplied, except repairs on the section
of the pipe included between the Village round-way at the main and the round-
way in the parkway.
In the event of a leak between the curb round-way and the water meter, the
Village shall cut off the supply of water to the premises until the necessary
repairs are made by the owner. The owner or tenant of the premises shall obtain
a Village permit to repair a leak between the curb round-way and the water
meter and no fee shall be required for such a permit when the Village
identifies the leak through the Village's leak detection program as of October
1, 2018. (Ord. 18-461, 12-10-2018)
26-1-15: PENALTIES:
Persons who neglect or refuse to comply with this article shall be subject to
the general penalty provided for in section
1-1-5 of this Code. In addition to the penalties provided for in section
1-1-5 of this Code, services which have not been properly permitted, installed,
connected or activated in accordance with this article may be shut off by the
Village. The Village shall, in such cases, make a good faith effort to provide
notice of the shutoff to the owner or user of the property being served at
least twenty four (24) hours prior to such shutoff. In the case of a failure to
maintain a service in accordance with the provisions of this article, the
Village may, in addition to the penalties provided herein, shut off such
improperly maintained water service by serving the owner of the property
responsible for the maintenance of said service with notice of such shutoff and
an opportunity to be heard in accordance with the notice and hearing
requirements set forth in section
26-2-4 of this chapter, except that the Village may take immediate action to
shut off services where the lack of maintenance of a water service creates an
immediate threat to public health and safety. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-2000)
ARTICLE 2
CHARGES AND COLLECTIONS
SECTION:
26-2-1: Charges To Village For Water Use
26-2-2: Meter Charges
26-2-3: Due Date Of Charges; Statement
26-2-4: Delinquent Accounts; Shutoff; Reconnection Fee; Deposit; Rental Units
26-2-5: Computation Of Charges When Meter Fails
26-2-6: Responsibility For Water Registered By Meter; Tenant Deposit Required
26-2-7: Final And Initial Meter Readings Required
26-2-8: Two Or More Meters On One Service
26-2-9: Lien On Real Estate Served From Village Water System
26-2-10: Procedures To Enforce Collection Of Water Charges
26-2-1: CHARGES TO VILLAGE FOR WATER USE:
All water consumed by the Village, or any department thereof, shall be paid for
at the rates fixed in this article, and shall be subject to the provisions of
this article, except that the charge to the Village for fire protection shall
be ten dollars ($10.00) per annum for each fire hydrant. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-
2000)
26-2-2: METER CHARGES:
   A.   Water Charge: The charge for water supplied through meters shall be
fixed as set forth in this section.
   B.   Utility Tax: The five percent (5%) Utility Tax established by the
Village shall be paid by the Village from the water charges set forth herein.
   C.   Fire Suppression Charge: Effective January 1, 1999, a monthly minimum
charge of five dollars ($5.00) per month shall be assessed to all customers who
own or lease a premises that has a meter to record fire suppression water
usage.
   D.   Customer Unit Charges: The customer unit charges per one thousand
(1,000) gallons of water and sewer service shall be as follows:
 
Volume                 Rate On
Rate Per 1,000 Gallons January 1, 2025
Water                  $11.37
Sewer                  3.26
 
   The aforesaid charges shall be applicable on a monthly basis and the charges
shall be based upon actual or estimated meter readings.
   E.   Customer Fixed Charge: The customer fixed charge per meter on a monthly
basis shall be as follows:
 
              Rate On    Rate On    Rate On    Rate On January Rate On January
Meter Size    January 1, January 1, January 1, 1, 2023         1, 2024
              2020       2021       2022
1 inch or     $5.00      $5.50      $5.50      $6.00           $6.00
under
1 1/2 inch to $10.00     $11.00     $11.00     $12.00          $12.00
3 inch
4 inch or     $15.00     $15.00     $16.50     $16.50          $18.00
larger
 
   F.   Alley Improvement Fee: Any residential building containing six (6) or
more dwelling units, commercial business or not-for-profit or governmental
entity who is not directly charged by the Village for waste hauling and
recycling services pursuant to chapter 20, article 7, "Garbage, Weeds And
Littering", of this Code shall be charged an alley improvement fee of five
dollars ($5.00) per month in addition to the charges above. (Ord. 18-454, 11-
19-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; amd. Ord. 19-120, 11-18-2019; Ord. 23-110, 11-20-2023,
eff. 1-1-2024; Ord. 24-172, 12-3-2024, eff. 1-1-2025)
26-2-3: DUE DATE OF CHARGES; STATEMENT:
All water charges shall be due and payable on or before the twenty first day
after the date when the statements of such charges are rendered, and shall
become delinquent if remaining unpaid thereafter.
Upon the net amount of any statement of charges for water supplied, there shall
be added ten percent (10%) provided that the statement is not paid within
twenty six (26) days of the date it was rendered. The net amount plus the ten
percent (10%) shall be known as the gross amount.
It shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to cause the statement for
water charges to be delivered on the respective dates thereof and at least
every three (3) months to each consumer of water. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-2-4: DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS; SHUTOFF; RECONNECTION FEE; DEPOSIT; RENTAL UNITS:
   A.   Whenever any charges under this Article shall remain unpaid for a
period of more than thirty (30) days from the date of the statement herein
provided for, and the Village has provided notice to the delinquent consumer of
its intention to turn off the water supply to the consumer due to such
nonpayment and has provided the consumer with an opportunity for a hearing to
present reasons why the water should not be turned off, and the consumer either
fails to request a hearing or fails to provide adequate reasons to prevent the
water shutoff, then the water shall be turned off from the premises of such
delinquent consumer and the service shall not be resumed until the following
has occurred:
      1.   All water bills in arrears have been paid;
      2.   A reconnection fee is paid. The charge shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) for the services of the Water Division in turning the water off and on
if said reconnection is made during working hours (7:00 A.M. to 2:30 P.M.) and
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) if said reconnection is made after working
hours, or on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday; and
      3.   A deposit equal to one-sixth (1/6) of the last actual or estimated
annual water bill has been paid. In the case of tenants already required to
make deposits in accordance with Section
26-2-6 of this Article, the deposit required herein shall be in addition to the
deposit required under Section
26-2-6 of this Article. The deposit shall be refunded to the consumer at the
time the water service is terminated, provided that there are no water charges
due and unpaid at that time. If there are unpaid water charges due at the time
the water service is terminated, the deposit shall first be applied to the
unpaid water charges and any remaining deposit funds shall be returned to the
consumer.
The Director of Finance shall cause all notices of water shutoff to be mailed
by first class mail, delivered or posted at the mailing address of the water
consumer listed in the Village water billing records not less than ten (10)
days prior to the scheduled date of the water shutoff. Copies of said notice
shall also be delivered to the Village's Community Relations Department and to
all social service or housing agencies that may be subsidizing the rent for any
dwelling unit affected by the impending water shutoff. The Director of Finance
shall designate a supervisory employee of the Finance Department to act as a
hearing officer with regard to water shut-off hearings.
The notice of water shutoff shall indicate the date of the water shutoff, the
amount of the delinquency which must be satisfied, the place and manner in
which the payment of such delinquent amount must be made, or the time, place
and manner in which to request a hearing at which the consumer can provide the
designated hearing officer with reasons why the consumer's water should not be
shut off. All requests for hearings must occur during the ten (10) day period
prior to the scheduled date of the water shutoff. The notice shall conform in
all other respects to the requirements set forth in 765 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 735/3. Reasons which will prevent a water shutoff from occurring shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to:
         a.   A mistake in the water bill or water bill amount;
         b.   A payment of the water bill amount shown as due and owing on the
face of the water bill; and/or
         c.   A serious public health and safety hazard which will prevent the
water shutoff.
If the hearing officer determines that the reasons presented by the consumer
for not turning off the water are valid, the hearing officer shall provide the
consumer with written notice of the hearing officer's decision as soon as
possible but no later than seventy two (72) hours after the completion of the
hearing, and shall cancel the water shutoff and shall order whatever Village
record corrections are necessary to reflect the fact that the consumer is not
subject to water shutoff at that time. No water shutoff shall occur during the
pendency of a water shut-off hearing.
No person owing water charges and moving to other premises within the Village
where there are water connections or where connections shall afterwards be
made, shall be supplied with water until such charges in arrears are paid in
full.
   B.   Whenever, pursuant to any agreement, either written or verbal, a
landlord or the landlord's agent is required to pay for water service, and the
landlord or the landlord's agent does not pay for such service, the tenant, or
tenants in the event more than one tenant is served by a common system of water
service which goes through a common meter in a single building, may pay for
such service if the nonpayment jeopardizes the continuation of the service to
the tenant or tenants, as the case may be. The Village shall not terminate
service for such nonpayment until it mails, delivers or posts a notice in the
same manner as specified in subsection 26-2-4A of this section to all tenants
of a building. Upon receipt of such payment of the past due cost of such water
service owed by the landlord, the Village shall immediately restore service to
such tenant or tenants. In the alternative, the Village shall immediately
restore and continue such service to any tenant or tenants who enter into a
payment plan agreement with the Village to pay the delinquent balance on the
landlord's water bill within a reasonable period of time to be determined by
the Director of Finance. In the event of a default on any such agreement by a
party or parties thereto failing to make payments to the Village on the
delinquent water bill in accordance with the terms and payment schedule set
forth therein, no further notice shall be required of the Village prior to
shutting off the water service. Any sums the tenant or tenants, as the case may
be, pays for water service that the landlord or the landlord's agent was
required to pay may be deducted from the rent due by the tenant or tenants, and
the total rent is diminished by the amount the tenant or tenants, as the case
may be, have paid for the continuation of the water service. (Ord. 2000-0-32,
6-19-00)
26-2-5: COMPUTATION OF CHARGES WHEN METER FAILS:
Whenever any meter, by reason of its being out of repair, or for any cause,
fails to properly register the water passing through the same, the consumer
shall be charged at the rate shown for a corresponding time of a previous year
under like conditions. If no record of a previous year exists, then it shall be
the duty of the Director of Finance to estimate or determine so far as he or
she can, the amount of water consumed during the time such meter fails to
operate, and the consumer shall pay the amount estimated by the Director of
Finance. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-2-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER REGISTERED BY METER; TENANT DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
The owner or tenant of premises supplied with water will be held responsible
for all water registered by the meter. No reduction shall be made or rebate
allowed to any consumer on account of leakage, or alleged leakage, in any pipe,
tank or other apparatus or device.
   A.   Tenant Deposit: Tenants of premises who are required by their lease to
pay water charges shall be required to deposit with the Village a sum equal to
one quarter's estimated maximum water bill for the leased premises. Said sum
shall be refunded to the tenant when the lease has been terminated, provided
there are no water charges due at that time. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
   B.   Meter Testing And Fees: Effective January 1, 2010, customers may
request that the Village test their meters. If a tested meter is found to be
running accurately or slow, the customer must pay for the meter test. All
customers requesting a meter test shall make a cash deposit at the time of the
request to cover the cost of the test.
Customers requesting a meter test for five-eighths inch (5/8") through two inch
(2") disk meters shall provide the Village with a one hundred dollar ($100.00)
deposit. After the Village has received this deposit, the Village will pull and
test the meter, and temporarily install a new pretested meter in its place.
If the test results show the meter to be running fast according to AWWA
standards, the Village will return the one hundred dollar ($100.00) deposit to
the customer and leave the newly installed meter in place. In addition to the
deposit refund, the water bill for the current billing cycle will also be
adjusted to reflect the accurate rate at which the meter should have been
measuring the flow of water.
If the test results show that the meter is running accurately or running slow
according to AWWA standards, the Village will retain the one hundred dollar
($100.00) deposit. If the tested meter is found to be running accurately, the
Village at its discretion will either leave the new meter in place or service
and reinstall the old meter. If the tested meter is found to be running slowly,
the Village will leave the newly installed meter in place and will adjust the
water bill for the current billing cycle to reflect the accurate rate at which
the meter should have been measuring the flow of water.
If for any reason the customer is not satisfied with the test results from the
Village, the Village will, at the customer's option, send the meter out to be
tested by an outside contractor at the customer's expense.
All compound meters will be tested at the Village's expense, except when a test
is specifically requested by an owner or customer. If an owner or customer
requests a meter test for a compound meter, the cost for the test will be
charged to that owner or customer, and the charge will equal the total cost to
the Village to have the meter tested. (Ord. 2009-0-093, 11-23-09)
26-2-7: FINAL AND INITIAL METER READINGS REQUIRED:
Any person who shall vacate any premises or any person who shall enter upon or
occupy any premises, shall immediately, before vacating or occupying such
premises, notify the Water Division and secure a reading of the meter. (Ord.
2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-2-8: TWO OR MORE METERS ON ONE SERVICE:
Property owners may have, at the option of the Water Division, more than one
meter installed in one building, on one service and controlled by a single
round way in the parkway; provided, the meters are not connected in tandem.
Nothing less than the minimum charge will be made for each meter so installed,
and the bills for the whole supply furnished through such service shall be made
to the owner of the premises. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-2-9: LIEN ON REAL ESTATE SERVED FROM VILLAGE WATER SYSTEM:
A lien may be declared and recorded on the real estate of every owner whose
property is served with water where the payments therefrom are delinquent as
provided in section 26-2-10 of this article. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-2-10: PROCEDURES TO ENFORCE COLLECTION OF WATER CHARGES:
The following remedies may be applied severally or cumulatively to enforce
collections of water charges:
   A.   By shutting off, in whole or in part, the water supply to such
property; provided, however, water service shall only be shut off in accordance
with the notice and hearing procedures set forth in section
26-2-4 of this article.
   B.   By suits at law for the recovery of amounts due, and to enforce
judgments by levy and making the same a lien on real estate.
   C.   By recording a notice or declaration of lien on the specific property
with the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, Illinois.
   D.   By foreclosure of the lien. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
ARTICLE 3
METERS GENERALLY
SECTION:
26-3-1: All Water To Be Metered
26-3-2: Purchase Of Meters; Only Approved Meters To Be Used
26-3-3: Meter Placement
26-3-4: Removal Or Repair Restrictions
26-3-5: Round-Ways Required
26-3-6: Cost Paid By Applicant Or Owner
26-3-7: Responsibility For Repairs, Damage And Theft
26-3-8: Interference With Meters; Notice Of Defective Meters
26-3-9: Access To Meters; Obstructing Access Prohibited
26-3-1: ALL WATER TO BE METERED:
All water consumers supplied by the Village shall be supplied through meters
only and shall pay for the water at the rates and in the manner specified in
this Chapter. Effective July 1, 2000, the installation of irrigation meters
shall be prohibited. All existing irrigation meters shall be removed no later
than January 1, 2009. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-3-2: PURCHASE OF METERS; ONLY APPROVED METERS TO BE USED:
All meters must be purchased from the Village and the kind and pattern of such
water meters shall be as determined by the Board of Trustees; no other kind of
meter shall be installed or used. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-3-3: METER PLACEMENT:
All meters shall be placed in the basement of buildings where service pipes
enter the same and so as to afford easy access for examining and reading. Where
there is no basement the meter shall be placed in an approved meter vault
inside the curb line not more than one foot (1') distant from the round-way.
The box shall be so constructed as to amply protect the meter against frost,
and must be easily accessible to the employees of the Village. (Ord. 2000-0-32,
6-19-00)
26-3-4: REMOVAL OR REPAIR RESTRICTIONS:
After the meter is placed, only authorized officers, employees or agents of the
Village shall be allowed to repair, remove or in any manner interfere with the
same. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-3-5: ROUND-WAYS REQUIRED:
A round-way or valve shall be placed on each side of every meter. (Ord. 2000-0-
32, 6-19-00)
26-3-6: COST PAID BY APPLICANT OR OWNER:
The cost of each meter and the installation thereof shall be paid by the
applicant or the owner of the premises where the same is placed. (Ord. 2000-0-
32, 6-19-00)
26-3-7: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPAIRS, DAMAGE AND THEFT:
Except as provided in Section
26-3-6 of this Article, all repairs and replacement of meters shall be at the
expense of the Village, except that the owner of or applicant for such meter
shall at all times be responsible for any damage done to such meter, including
that done by freezing, heat or breakage, and also for theft thereof. (Ord.
2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-3-8: INTERFERENCE WITH METERS; NOTICE OF DEFECTIVE METERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface, mar, destroy or in any
manner interfere with any meter. It shall be the duty of the owner of the
premises or applicant for such meter to promptly notify the Water Division of
all defects in any such meter or its failure to properly register the quantity
of water used. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-3-9: ACCESS TO METERS; OBSTRUCTING ACCESS PROHIBITED:
The Director of Finance and every person authorized by him and all meter
inspectors shall have ready access to the premises, places or buildings where
meters are located for the purpose of reading, examining, testing and repairing
the same, and examining and testing the consumption, use and flow of water. It
shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, prevent or obstruct any
such person or inspector in his work. Every consumer of water shall take the
same upon the conditions prescribed in this Chapter. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
ARTICLE 4
SERVICE INSTALLATION RULES, REGULATIONS AND FEES
SECTION:
26-4-1: Permit Prerequisite To Opening Streets; Exception
26-4-2: Tapping Mains; Charges For Connections
26-4-3: Specifications For Connections From Main To Round-Way
26-4-4: Round-Ways And Appurtenances Generally
26-4-5: Approval Of Service Pipes And Connections
26-4-6: Plumbers Not To Allow Use Of Name By Others To Obtain Permits
26-4-1: PERMIT PREREQUISITE TO OPENING STREETS; EXCEPTION:
No street, alley, public ground or place shall be disturbed or opened for the
purpose of laying water pipes or making connections with water pipes unless a
permit to do so is first obtained from the Department of Public Works as
provided in Section
26-1-2 of this Chapter. Such permits shall be granted only to licensed
plumbers. The provisions of this Section are not intended to apply to the Water
Division of the Village. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-4-2: TAPPING MAINS; CHARGES FOR CONNECTIONS:
Whenever any permit for a connection is issued, under the provisions of this
Article the Director of Public Works or some person authorized by him, shall
tap the main of the water system or plant where such connection is to be made
and shall insert the Village stop. All applicants shall be charged the cost
thereof as determined by the Director of Public Works based upon current labor
and material rates. Such cost shall be paid by the applicant at the time the
application herein provided for is made. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-4-3: SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONNECTIONS FROM MAIN TO ROUND-WAY:
The connections from the main to the round-way shall be placed at least five
feet (5') below the level of the ground, the copper pipe shall be laid
sufficiently waving so that it shall be at least one foot (1') longer than if
laid straight and placed in such a manner as to prevent rupture or breakage
from settling of the ground.
The services shall be type K copper, sizes one inch (1") through two inch (2"),
or ductile iron water main, sizes three inch (3") through sixteen inch (16").
(Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-4-4: ROUND-WAYS AND APPURTENANCES GENERALLY:
A curbstop to be known as a "round-way", shall be inserted in each connection
at a convenient point in street, alley, public ground or place through which
such connection passes and whenever there are curb lines established, the
round-way shall be placed not less than one foot (1') nor more than three feet
(3') inside of such curb line with cast-iron stop box to grade. In all cases it
shall be located under the direction of the Director of Public Works, and a
record of the exact location thereof shall be kept.
All round-ways used in connection with the waterworks system or plant shall be
made of good brass, and shall be of a quality known as "standard". They shall
be strong enough to stand a pressure of three hundred (300) pounds per square
inch. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
26-4-5: APPROVAL OF SERVICE PIPES AND CONNECTIONS:
All service pipes and connections shall be inspected and approved by the
Director of Public Works or other persons under his direction and no such
service pipes shall be covered until they have been so inspected. (Ord. 2000-0-
32, 6-19-00)
26-4-6: PLUMBERS NOT TO ALLOW USE OF NAME BY OTHERS TO OBTAIN PERMITS:
No plumber shall allow his name to be used by any other person or party
directly or indirectly for the purpose of obtaining permits or doing any work
under his license. (Ord. 2000-0-32, 6-19-00)
ARTICLE 5
CONSERVATION MEASURES
SECTION:
26-5-1: Meters Required
26-5-2: Water Saving Plumbing Fixtures
26-5-3: Fixtures For Public Use
26-5-4: Car Wash Facilities
26-5-5: Air Conditioning Systems
26-5-6: Outdoor Water Use
26-5-1: METERS REQUIRED:
All water consumers supplied by the waterworks system of the Village shall be
supplied water through water meters only. Such meters shall be as required by
the Village, and shall be kept in proper operating condition at all times, and
it shall be unlawful to tamper with such water meters or damage the same in any
manner. (1981 Code)
26-5-2: WATER SAVING PLUMBING FIXTURES:
The following water saving plumbing fixtures shall be required in all new
construction and in all repairs and/or replacement of fixtures or trim; only
fixtures and trim not exceeding the following flow rates and/or water usage
shall be installed (ratings are based on a pressure at the fixture of 40 to 50
pounds per square inch):
 
Water closets, tank type        3.5 gallons per flush
Water closets, flushometer type 3.0 gallons per flush
Urinals, tank type              3.0 gallons per flush
Urinals, flushometer type       3.0 gallons per flush
Showerheads                     3.0 gallons per minute
Lavatory, sink faucets          3.0 gallons per minute
 
(1981 Code)
26-5-3: FIXTURES FOR PUBLIC USE:
In addition to the requirements in section
26-5-2 of this article, in all new construction and in all repairs and/or
replacement of fixtures in lavatories intended for public use, the faucets of
such lavatories located in restrooms intended for public use shall be of
metering or self-closing type. (1981 Code)
26-5-4: CAR WASH FACILITIES:
In all new construction and/or replacement of fixtures in car wash facilities,
car wash installations shall be equipped with a water recycling system. (1981
Code)
26-5-5: AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEMS:
All water cooled air conditioning systems which are installed in new
construction and/or remodeling shall be closed air conditioning systems. (Ord.
1983-0-14, 11-7-1983)
26-5-6: OUTDOOR WATER USE:
   A.   The outdoor use of water from and after May 15 of each year to and
including September 15 of each year shall be limited on Monday through Friday
of each week to real property with even numbered street addresses on even
numbered days of the month and to real property with odd numbered street
addresses on odd numbered days of the month. In instances where a corner
property possesses a street address for both the north-south street and the
east-west street adjacent to the property, the address for the north-south
street shall determine the property's even or odd street address designation
for purposes of this section. Any parcel of property not possessing a street
address shall be designated as odd or even in accordance with the street
addresses of other Village properties fronting on the same side of the same
street as the parcel without a designated street address. No person shall
conduct lawn sprinkling between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. through
four o'clock (4:00) P.M. when evapotranspiration is at its highest. A newly
seeded or sodded lawn or area of lawn that is less than three (3) months old is
exempt from the consecutive day prohibition and the prohibition regarding
sprinkling between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. through four o'clock
(4:00) P.M. "Outdoor use" shall include, but not be limited to, the water
sprinkling of lawns, gardens, trees, shrubs and plants and the washing of
vehicles by means of a direct water hose connection to the Village water
supply, but shall specifically exclude water sprinkling by means of sprinkling
cans and other handheld water containers not directly connected to the Village
water supply; the use of water by means of a direct hose connection to the
Village water supply for the sprinkling of new grass seed, sod, trees and
shrubs for the first thirty (30) days after planting; the use of water for
authorized building construction; and the recycling of water in pools and
fountains.
This section shall in no way limit the Village Manager and/or Director of
Public Works from further restricting the use of the Village's water supply at
such time as the state or the Village may declare an emergency with regard to
the water supply.
   B.   No person shall use or permit the use of any Village water in violation
of subsection
26-5-6A of this section on any premises of which such person is the legal or
beneficial owner, tenant, custodian, manager or for which such person is the
registered applicant for the Village water meter or service. Any person in
violation of this section shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provisions set forth in section
1-1-5 of this code. The continued or repeated violation of this section
following the issuance of a complaint of violation by the Village shall
constitute a separate offense. The repeated violation of this section shall
constitute a nuisance and the Village may seek abatement of said nuisance in
accordance with the provisions set forth in chapter 16 of this code.
   C.   The Director of Public Works and Chief of Police shall be responsible
for the enforcement of the provisions of this section. The Village Manager may,
however, assign the enforcement responsibility for this section to such other
Village employees as the Manager may from time to time determine to be
appropriate. (Ord. 15-179, 11-16-2015)
ARTICLE 6
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
26-6-1: Purpose
26-6-2: Scope
26-6-3: Policy
26-6-4: Definitions
26-6-5: Cross Connection Survey
26-6-6: Inspections And Maintenance
26-6-7: Violations
26-6-1: PURPOSE:
To provide an effective means for protecting the public potable water supply
system from contamination due to backflow of contaminants through the customer
water service connection on to the public water system.
To promote the elimination or the control of existing cross connections, actual
or potential, between the public, and consumer's potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety.
To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection
control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public and
consumer's potable water systems. (Ord. 2010-0-62, 10-4-2010)
26-6-2: SCOPE:
This article shall apply to all buildings, premises, and properties served by
the public potable water supply system of the Village of Oak Park. (Ord. 2010-
0-62, 10-4-2010)
26-6-3: POLICY:
The owner/official custodian shall be responsible for protection of the public
water supply system from contamination due to backflow or back siphonage of
contaminants through the customer's water service connection. If, in the
judgment of the responsible operator in charge or his/her authorized
representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the
safety of the public water supply system, the customer shall be given notice to
install such approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to
the premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved device at
his own expense; failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to
install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for
discontinuing the water service to the premises until such device or devices
have been installed.
The customer shall retain the records of installation, maintenance, testing,
and repair for a period of at least five (5) years. The owner/official
custodian may require the customer to submit a cross connection inspection
report to assist in determining whether or not service line protection will be
required.
All cross connection inspections shall be performed by a certified cross
connection control device inspector (CCCDI) by the state of Illinois
environmental protection agency. (Ord. 2010-0-62, 10-4-2010)
26-6-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby defined
as follows:
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public potable water supply system including the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from sources such as wells,
lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used/recycled water. These waters may
be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the purveyor does not have control.
CROSS CONNECTION: As defined in the state of Illinois plumbing code.
   Direct Cross Connection: A cross connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
   Indirect Cross Connection: A cross connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
CUSTOMER: The owner, occupant, official custodian or person in control of any
premises supplied by or in any manner connected to the public water system.
CUSTOMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located on the customer's premises. A
building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system.
DOUBLE CHECK DETECTOR ASSEMBLY: An assembly designed to prevent contamination
of the potable water system by backflow from the fire protection system
containing nontoxic substances.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly which is effective against backflow
caused by back pressure and back siphonage, which is used to protect the
potable water system from pollutants that would not constitute an actual health
hazard, but might be objectionable to the water system. The double check valve
assembly is used to isolate nonhealth hazards.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well
being of customers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means
a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
IEPA: Illinois environmental protection agency.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping, and appurtenances, appliances and installation of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois plumbing
code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890.
OWNER/OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN: The person in charge of the public water system who
is invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an
effective cross connection control program and for the enforcement of the
provisions of this article.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute, reduce or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTENTIAL CROSS CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
PROCESS FLUIDS: Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or
otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollution or system hazard if introduced into the public
or customer's potable water system. This includes, but is not limited to:
   A.   Polluted or contaminated waters;
   B.   Process waters;
   C.   Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may
have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
   D.   Cooling waters;
   E.   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams, or irrigation systems;
   F.   Chemicals in solution or suspension; and
   G.   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid and gaseous fluids in
industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
RESPONSIBLE OPERATOR IN CHARGE: The person who is registered with the Illinois
environmental protection agency as the operator in charge of the treatment and
distribution of the public water supply system for the Village.
SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system
regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and
must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of
all cross connection control devices and methods located within that customer's
piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual
plumbing inspection.
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a customer's water supply system.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a customer's
water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no
longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
VILLAGE: Village of Oak Park.
WATER OPERATOR: The Village's IEPA Licensed Water Operator.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water supply. (Ord.
2010-0-62, 10-4-2010)
26-6-5: CROSS CONNECTION SURVEY:
This section establishes an active cross connection survey, investigation and
records control program which includes, without limitation:
   A.   A cross connection control survey of the distribution system shall be
conducted every two (2) years by the owner/official custodian or an authorized
delegate. The purpose of the survey is to compile and update an inventory of
devices.
   B.   The survey shall consist of a pencil and paper collection of
information, conducted by telephone, mail, or personal site visit to the
customer, tenant, occupant, or manager of a specific property.
   C.   The customer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
responsible operator in charge or his/her designee for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross connections within the customer's premises,
testing, repair, and maintenance of cross connection control devices within the
customer's premises.
   D.   It shall be the responsibility of the customer to arrange periodic
surveys of water use practices on the premises to determine whether there are
actual or potential cross connections to the water supply system through which
contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the private or public water
system. All cross connection inspections must be conducted by a certified
CCCDI. These surveys shall be done at the customer's expense. (Ord. 2010-0-62,
10-4-2010)
26-6-6: INSPECTIONS AND MAINTENANCE:
It shall be the duty of the customer to install and maintain backflow
prevention devices in accordance with the state of Illinois plumbing code at
any premises on which backflow prevention devices are required by this article
and to have inspections, tests, maintenance, and repairs of all such installed
backflow prevention devices made in accordance with the following schedule or
more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in manufacturer's
instructions. All such inspections, maintenance, repairs and replacement costs
shall be the sole responsibility of the customer.
   A.   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that a
proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the
service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or
bypassed air gaps shall be made within twenty four (24) hours.
   B.   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at the time
of installations and at least annually thereafter, and required service within
fifteen (15) days.
   C.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices (RPZ) shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five (5)
days.
Testing shall be performed by a certified CCCDI who has been approved by the
IEPA. Proof of certification shall be in writing and submitted to the Village
before testing. The customer shall forward test results to the responsible
operator in charge within thirty (30) days of testing.
Each backflow prevention device shall have a tag attached listing the date of
the most recent test or visual inspection, name of the CCCDI, and type and date
of repairs.
A maintenance log shall be maintained and include the following:
   A.   Date of each test or visual inspection;
   B.   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
   C.   Test results;
   D.   Repairs or servicing required;
   E.   Repairs and date completed; and
   F.   Service performed and date completed.
Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this article are found to be
defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the customer
within the time frame noted above.
Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed or
otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the responsible
operator in charge or his/her designee. (Ord. 2010-0-62, 10-4-2010)
26-6-7: VIOLATIONS:
The Village shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants
thereof, in the same manner as for a delinquent water bill, the water service
to any property wherein any backflow prevention device required by this article
is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the
responsible operator in charge or his/her designee or if it is found that the
backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected
cross connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure cutoff required
by this article is not installed and maintained in working order.
Water service to such premises shall not be restored until such conditions have
been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this article,
and until the reconnection fee is paid. Immediate disconnection with verbal
notice can be effected when the Village is assured that imminent danger of
harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action
shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection.
Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent
actual or anticipated contamination of the public water supply, provided that
in the reasonable opinion of the responsible operator in charge, or the IEPA,
such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination of
pollution of the public water supply.
Neither the Village, the responsible operator in charge or their designees
shall be liable to any customer for injury, damages, or lost revenues which may
result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the
terms of this article, whether or not said termination was with or without
notice.
The customer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination through
backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an
illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained, or repaired
device, or a device that has been bypassed, shall bear the cost of cleanup of
the potable water supply system.
Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the customer has
corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with these
regulations and to the satisfaction of the Village, and has paid the required
reconnection fee.
The property owner, tenant, or occupant of any premises who knowingly permits a
violation to remain in place and/or uncorrected after the expiration of the
time set by the Village shall, upon conviction by a court of competent
jurisdiction, be required to pay a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation continues to exist uncorrected shall be
considered to be a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-0-62, 10-4-2010)
ARTICLE 7
SEWER CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
26-7-1: Repairs From Building Sewer To Curb Line
26-7-2: Repairs From Curb Line To Connection With Street Sewer Mains
26-7-3: Rodding Of Building Sewers
26-7-1: REPAIRS FROM BUILDING SEWER TO CURB LINE:
Repairs to building sewers and to that portion of the building sewer from the
building drain to the curb line shall be at the expense of the owner or tenant
of the premises. (Ord. 2012-0-61, 11-5-2012)
26-7-2: REPAIRS FROM CURB LINE TO CONNECTION WITH STREET SEWER MAINS:
Repairs to a building sewer from the curb line to the connection with the
street sewer mains shall be at the expense of the Village only when in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works a street opening is necessary to
perform such repairs. The person requesting the repair shall notify the
Director of Public Works and shall include the plumber's name, the measured
distance to the obstruction, a descriptive statement of conditions found and
the date the investigation was performed. (Ord. 2012-0-61, 11-5-2012)
26-7-3: RODDING OF BUILDING SEWERS:
The owner or tenant of a building is responsible to rod the building sewer to
the point of connection with the street main at their own expense. (Ord. 2012-
0-61, 11-5-2012)
CHAPTER 27
WEAPONS
Firearm Sale Or Rental   1
Possession And Carrying Of Weapons   2
Firing Of Weapons   3
Penalties   4
Miscellaneous Provisions   5
ARTICLE 1
FIREARM SALE OR RENTAL
SECTION:
27-1-1: Definitions
27-1-2: Sale or Rental of Firearms
27-1-3: License to Deal in Firearms; Required
27-1-4: License to Deal in Firearms; Application
27-1-5: License to Deal in Firearms; Fee and Issuance
27-1-6: Register of Sales and Rentals
27-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes set forth in Chapter 27 of the Village Code, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby defined, as follows:
            Any self-contained cartridge, shot, bullet or projectile by whatever name known,
AMMUNITION: which is designed to be used, or adaptable to use, in a weapon and shot or
            discharged therefrom.
            Any firearm manufactured on or before 1898 or any replica thereof, if such replica
            is not designed or redesigned for using and discharging ammunition, and any other
ANTIQUE     firearm which, although designed as a weapon, the Department of Law Enforcement of
FIREARM:    the State of Illinois finds, by reason of the date of its manufacture, value, design
            and other characteristics is primarily a collector's item that is not likely to be
            used as a weapon.
ASSAULT     A.   Any magazine, belt, drum, feed strip or similar device that has a capacity of,
AMMUNITION  or can be readily restored or converted to accept, more than ten (10) rounds of
FEEDING     ammunition; or
DEVICE:     B.   Any combination of parts from which a device described in the above clause can
            be assembled.
            A.   Any of the weapons (or types, replicas, or duplicates in any caliber of the
            weapons, regardless of manufacturer) known as:
               A.A. Arms AP-9
               Algimec Agmi
               Armalite AR-180
               Australian Automatic Arms SAP Pistol
               Australian Automatic Arms SAR
               Auto-Ordinance Thompson type
               Avtomat Kalashnikov AK-47 type (including all models of the Norinco, Mitchell and
            PolyTech)
               Barrett Light-Fifty model 82A1
               Beretta AR-70 (SC-70)
               Beretta BM-59
               Bushmaster Auto Rifle and Auto Pistol
               Calico models M-900, M-950 and 100-P
               Chartered Industries of Singapore SR-88
               Claridge High Tech
               Colt AR-15 and Sporter
               Daewoo K-1, K-2, Max-1 and Max-2
               Encom MK-IV, MP-9 and MP-45
               Fabrique Nationale FN/FAL, FN/LAR or FN/FNC
               FAMAS MAS 223
               Feather AT-9 and Mini-AT
               Federal XC-900 and XC-450
               Franchi SPAS-12 and LAW-12
               Galil AR and ARM
               Heckler & Koch HK-91, HK-93, HK-94, PSG-1, SP-89
               Holmes Mp-83
               Intratec TEC-9, TEC-DC-9, TEC-22 and Scorpion
               Iver Johnson Enforce Model 3000
               Iver Johnson PM30 Paratrooper
               M14S type
               MAC 10, M-10, MAC-11 and MAC-11 Carbine type
               Ruger Mini-14/5F (folding stock only) and Mini-14/5RF
               Scarab Skorpion
               SIG 57 AMT, SIG 550SP, SIG 551SP, SIG PE-57 types and 500 series
ASSAULT        Spectre Auto Carbine and Auto Pistol
WEAPON:        Springfield Armory BM59, SAR-48 and G-3
               Sterling MK-6 and MK-7 and SAR types
               Stevr AUG
               Street Sweeper and Striker 12 revolving cylinder shotguns
               SWD M-10, M-11, M-11/9, M-12
               Valmet M63, M71S, M76 or M78
               USAS-12
               UZI Carbine, Mini-Carbine and Pistol
               Weaver Arms Nighthawk
               Wilkinson "Linda" Pistol
            B.   Any semi-automatic rifle that has a fixed magazine that can hold more than
            eight (8) rounds or an ability to accept a detachable magazine and has at least two
            (2) of the following:
               1.   A folding or telescoping stock;
               2.   A pistol grip that protrudes beneath the action of the weapon and which is
            separate and apart from the stock;
               3.   A bayonet mount;
               4.   A flash suppressor;
               5.   A barrel with a threaded muzzle;
               6.   A grenade launcher.
            C.   Any semi-automatic pistol that has an ability to accept a detachable magazine
            and has at least two (2) of the following:
               1.   An ammunition magazine that attaches to the pistol outside of the pistol
            grip;
               2.   A barrel having a threaded muzzle;
               3.   A shroud that is attached to, or partially or completely encircles the
            barrel and which permits the shooter to hold the firearm with the no-trigger hand
            without being burned;
               4.   A manufactured weight of fifty (50) ounces or more when the pistol is
            unloaded;
               5.   A semi-automatic version of an automatic firearm.
            D.   Any semi-automatic shotgun that has either a fixed magazine with a capacity in
            excess of five (5) rounds or an ability to accept a detachable magazine and, in
            addition, has at least one of the following:
               1.   A folding or telescoping stock;
               2.   A pistol grip that protrudes beneath the action of the firearm and which is
            separate and apart from the stock.
AUTHORIZED  The owner of a firearm or a person who possess a firearm with permission from the
USER:       owner who is not otherwise prohibited by Illinois law.
            For the purpose of this Article firearms are: pistols, revolvers, guns and small
FIREARMS:   arms of a size and character that may be concealed on or about the person, commonly
            known as handguns.
LICENSED    Any person licensed as a collector by the Secretary of the Treasury of the United
FIREARM     States under and by virtue of title 18, United States Code, section 923; provided
COLLECTOR:  however, that a copy of said license is filed with the Chief of Police.
LICENSED    Any person engaged in the business of selling or renting firearms who is licensed as
GUN DEALER: such pursuant to Section 27-1-5 of this Article.
            A feature of a firearm or an external device that renders the firearm inaccessible,
LOCKING     inoperable or both. A locking device includes but is not limited to the following: a
DEVICE:     biometric lock, a trigger lock, a barrel lock, a cylinder lock, a gun vault, a
            locked cabinet, a locked box, or any other appropriate locked container where a key
            is kept separately or otherwise is not readily available to any other person.
            Any person appointed by a governmental agency on a full time basis as a law
PEACE       enforcement official who is vested by law within the said governmental jurisdiction
OFFICER:    with all the powers possessed by police officers, including the power to make
            arrests on view of or under warrants for violations of State statutes and Village
            and County ordinances.
PERSON:     An individual, corporation, organization, partnership, business or other entity.
            For the purpose of this Article weapons are: firearms, assault weapons, rifles,
WEAPONS:    shotguns or other arms designed to discharge ammunition. (Ord. 1994-0-66, 10-17-94;
            amd. Ord. 1995-0-21, 4-3-95; Ord. 23-75, 7-5-2023)
 
27-1-2: SALE OR RENTAL OF FIREARMS:
It shall be unlawful to sell, loan, rent or give away any firearms, assault
weapons or assault ammunition feeding devices in the Village, except to the
following:
   A.   Peace officers;
   B.   Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries, jails
and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted of a
criminal offense;
   C.   Sheriffs and deputy sheriffs;
   D.   Members of the organized militia. (Ord. 1994-0-66, 10-17-94)
27-1-3: LICENSE TO DEAL IN FIREARMS; REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling or
renting, or for any dealer to sell, exchange, rent, loan or give away, or for
any individual to sell, exchange, rent or loan to any person, any "firearm" as
defined in Section
27-1-1 of this Code, without securing a license for said dealings. (Ord. 1984-
0-10, 4-16-84)
27-1-4: LICENSE TO DEAL IN FIREARMS; APPLICATION:
Any dealer, desiring a license to sell or rent firearms, shall make annual
application to the Village Clerk providing the following information:
   A.   The full name and address of the applicant; or if a corporation, the
name thereof and its principal officers and their addresses;
   B.   The location(s) at which business shall be conducted;
   C.   The Federal firearms license number issued to said dealer;
   D.   A certification that no owner, officer or employee of the applicant has
been convicted of a felony. (Ord. 1984-0-10, 4-16-84)
27-1-5: LICENSE TO DEAL IN FIREARMS; FEE AND ISSUANCE:
Upon receipt of a completed application for license to deal in firearms, and
with the approval of both the Chief of Police and the Village Manager endorsed
thereon, it shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to issue a license to the
applicant dealer or private citizen authorized by law to possess a firearm upon
payment to the Clerk of a license fee as provided in Chapter 8 for either a
person engaged in the business of selling or renting firearms, or a single, one
time sale transaction to a person authorized by law to possess a firearm. (Ord.
1984-0-10, 4-16-84)
27-1-6: REGISTER OF SALES AND RENTALS:
Each dealer in firearms shall be required to furnish a report to the Chief of
Police of the Village each week, of the sales, rentals or other disposition of
each firearm made by such dealer. Said report shall contain at least the
following information:
   A.   Date of sale, rental or other disposition;
   B.   Name, address and age of purchaser or recipient;
   C.   Occupation of purchaser or recipient;
   D.   Kind, description and serial number of firearms;
   E.   Purpose for which firearm was purchased or obtained;
   F.   Purchase price or rental rate of the firearms;
   G.   Evidence that the purchaser of the firearm is authorized to make such
purchase pursuant to Section
27-1-2 of this Article.
A duplicate of each such report filed shall be retained by the dealer. (Ord.
1984-0-10, 4-16-84)
ARTICLE 2
POSSESSION AND CARRYING OF WEAPONS
SECTION:
27-2-1: Unlawful To Possess Or Carry; Exceptions
27-2-2: Safe Storage Of Firearms
27-2-1: UNLAWFUL TO POSSESS OR CARRY; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or carry, or for any person to
permit another to possess or carry on his/her land or in his/her place of
business any assault weapon or assault ammunition feeding device, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to carry any rifle, shotgun, firearm, or assault
weapon or assault ammunition feeding device in any vehicle or permit same to be
carried in any vehicle to which such person is the title owner of record or
about his/her person, except that a person may carry any rifle, shotgun or
firearm when on his/her land or in his/her abode or fixed place of business;
provided that this section shall not apply to:
   A.   Peace officers or any person summoned by any such officers to assist in
making arrests or preserving the peace while he/she is actually engaged in
assisting such officer;
   B.   Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries, jails
and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted of an
offense; provided, however, that this exemption shall apply to the carrying of
a weapon only while one is engaged in the performance of his/her official duty
or while commuting between his/her home and place of employment;
   C.   Members of the armed services or reserve forces of the United States or
the Illinois national guard or organized militia; provided, however, that this
exemption shall apply to the carrying of a weapon only while one is engaged in
the performance of his/her official duty;
   D.   Special agents employed by a railroad or a public utility to perform
police functions, watchmen, security guards and "special police" appointed
under section
19-2-2 of this code; provided, however, that this exemption shall apply to the
carrying of a weapon only while one is actually engaged in the performance of
the duties of his/her employment or while commuting between his/her home and
place of employment; and provided further that said security guards are in full
compliance with appropriate provisions of subsection (a)(4) of section 24-2 of
the Illinois criminal code and other applicable laws and that said "special
police" are in full compliance with sections
19-2-1 through
19-2-4 of this code and other applicable laws;
   E.   Agents and investigators of the Illinois crime investigating commission
authorized by the commission to carry weapons; provided, however, that this
exemption shall apply to the carrying of a weapon only while one is on duty in
the course of any investigation for the commissioner;
   F.   Manufacture, transportation or sale of weapons to persons authorized
under law to possess such;
   G.   Duly authorized military or civil organizations while parading, with
the special permission of the Governor;
   H.   Licensed hunters or fishermen while commuting to or from established
game areas; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to the
possession or carrying of "firearms" as defined in section
27-1-1 of this chapter;
   I.   Transportation of weapons broken down in a nonfunctioning state or
unloaded with neither the weapon nor any ammunition readily or directly
accessible from the passenger compartment of the transporting vehicle;
provided, that in the case of a vehicle without a compartment separate from the
driver's compartment, the firearm or ammunition shall be contained in a locked
container other than the glove compartment or console; provided, however, that
the transportation of assault weapons must not originate or terminate within
the Village to qualify as an exception to this section;
   J.   Antique firearms;
   K.   Licensed firearm collectors;
   L.   Members of established theater organizations located in Oak Park and
performing a regular performance schedule to the public, utilizing only blank
ammunition in the discharge of weapons only during rehearsals, classes or
performances; provided further that said organization maintains possession and
control over these weapons in a safe place with a designated member of the
organization when the weapons are not in use.
Any weapon carried pursuant to the exemptions of subsections
27-2-1F through I of this section shall be carried unloaded, and anyone
possessing a firearm pursuant to exemptions of subsections 27-2-1J and L of
this section shall not possess or carry any ammunition therefor. (Ord. 2010-0-
47, 7-19-10)
27-2-2: SAFE STORAGE OF FIREARMS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to keep or possess any firearm in a
person’s home unless such firearm is secured by a locking device.
   B.   A firearm is not secured if a key or combination to the locking device
is readily available to a person who is not an authorized user to carry or
control the firearm, or the firearm is left unattended in a vehicle and within
view of persons outside the vehicle.
   C.   Subsection A above shall not apply if a person gains access to a
firearm and uses it in a lawful act of self-defense or defense of another.
   D.   An injured person may bring a civil action against the owner of a
firearm in a court of competent jurisdiction for a violation of this section.
(Ord. 23-75, 7-5-2023)
ARTICLE 3
FIRING OF WEAPONS
SECTION:
27-3-1: Firing Of Weapons Prohibited; Exceptions
27-3-1: FIRING OF WEAPONS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
No person, other than a peace officer, shall be permitted to fire or discharge
any firearm, rifle, shotgun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, bow or
other device which is calculated or intended to propel or project a bullet,
pellet, pointed arrow or similar projectile in the Village, except: 1) arrows
may be propelled on a range supervised by the Board of Education or Park
District of the Village; and 2) weapons utilizing only blank ammunition may be
discharged by members of established theatre organizations located in Oak Park
and performing a regular performance schedule to the public and using such
weapons only during rehearsals, classes or performances. (Ord. 1995-0-21, 4-3-
95)
ARTICLE 4
PENALTIES
SECTION:
27-4-1: Fine And/Or Imprisonment Upon Conviction; Confiscation Of Weapon
27-4-2: Voluntary Delivery To Police Department
27-4-3: Disposition Of Weapons
27-4-1: FINE AND/OR IMPRISONMENT UPON CONVICTION; CONFISCATION OF WEAPON:
   A.   Any person who violates any of the sections of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for the first offense and not more than two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) for any subsequent offense. (Ord. 1994-0-77, 11-21-1994; amd. Ord.
17-325, 12-11-2017)
   B.   In any prosecution brought to enforce the provisions of article 2 or 3
of this chapter, the prosecution need not negate any exemptions contained
therein, and the defendant shall have the burden of proving that any exemption
applies.
   C.   Upon conviction of any violation of article 2 or 3 of this chapter, any
weapon involved shall be confiscated by the Trial Court and, when no longer
needed for evidentiary purposes, the court may transfer such weapon to the Oak
Park Police Department which shall destroy them in accordance with section
27-4-3 of this article. (Ord. 1994-0-77, 11-21-1994)
27-4-2: VOLUNTARY DELIVERY TO POLICE DEPARTMENT:
If a person voluntarily and peaceably delivers and abandons to the Oak Park
Police Department any weapon, such delivery shall preclude the arrest and
prosecution of such person on a charge of violating any provision of this
chapter with respect to the weapon voluntarily delivered. Delivery under this
section may be made at the headquarters of the Police Department or by
summoning a police officer to the person's residence or place of business.
Every weapon to be delivered and abandoned to the Police Department under this
paragraph shall be unloaded and securely wrapped in a package and in the case
of delivery to the police headquarters, the package shall be carried in open
view. No person who delivers and abandons a weapon under this section shall be
required to furnish identification, photographs or fingerprints. Whenever any
weapon is surrendered under this section, the Police Department shall inquire
of all law enforcement agencies whether such weapon is needed as evidence and
if the same is not needed as evidence, it shall be destroyed in accordance with
section
27-4-3 of this article. (Ord. 1984-0-10, 4-16-1984; amd. Ord. 23-75, 7-5-2023)
27-4-3: DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS:
All weapons ordered confiscated by the court under the provisions of section
27-4-1 of this article and all weapons received by the Oak Park Police
Department under and by virtue of section
27-4-2 of this article, shall be held and identified as to owner, where
possible, by the Oak Park Police Department for a period of two (2) years prior
to their being destroyed. (Ord. 1984-0-10, 4-16-1984)
ARTICLE 5
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
27-5-1: Construction
27-5-2: Rules and Regulations
27-5-3: Severability
27-5-1: CONSTRUCTION:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed or applied to necessarily require or
excuse noncompliance with any provisions of the laws of the State of Illinois
or the laws of the United States. This Chapter and the penalties prescribed for
violation hereof, shall not supersede, but shall supplement all Statutes of the
State of Illinois or of the United States in which similar conduct may be
prohibited or regulated. (Ord. 1984-0-10, 4-16-84)
27-5-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to promulgate rules and
regulations necessary or appropriate to carry out the provisions of this
Chapter and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1984-0-10,
4-16-84)
27-5-3: SEVERABILITY:
If any provisions of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Chapter and the
applicability of such provision to any other persons not similarly situated or
to other circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1984-0-10, 4-16-84)
CHAPTER 28
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Generally   1
Inspector Of Weights And Measures      2
Public Weighmasters   3
Solid Fuels   4
ARTICLE 1
GENERALLY
SECTION:
28-1-1: Village To Procure And Use Correct And Approved Standards
28-1-2: Inspections Are Compulsory
28-1-3: Peddlers
28-1-4: Certificate Required
28-1-5: Use Of Incorrect Or Faulty Measures Or Scales
28-1-6: Refusal To Exhibit For Examination
28-1-7: Sale Of Products To Be By Net Weight Or Numerical Count
28-1-8: Sale Of Berries And Other Fruits
28-1-1: VILLAGE TO PROCURE AND USE CORRECT AND APPROVED STANDARDS:
The Village shall authorize the state department of agriculture to use their
correct and approved standards of weights and measures, of the standard adopted
by the state, with their necessary subdivisions, together with the proper beams
and scales for the purpose of testing and proving the weights and measures of
the standard used in the Village. (Ord. 2009-0-059, 9-8-09)
28-1-2: INSPECTIONS ARE COMPULSORY:
Every person using weights, measures, scale beams, patent balances, steelyards
or any instrument in weighing or measuring any article intended to be purchased
or sold in the Village, or any article weighed or measured for shipping or
receiving purposes, or in weighing or measuring any person or animal, for hire
or reward, shall cause the same to be inspected and sealed by the state
department of agriculture in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(See section 28-2-1 of this chapter for appointment of inspector of Weights and
Measures.) (Ord. 2009-0-059, 9-8-09)
28-1-3: PEDDLERS:
All peddlers using scales, balances, weights or measures within the Village
shall obtain required certificates from the state department of agriculture,
before any use is made thereof, and have the same sealed and adjusted annually.
Any such person failing to comply with the provisions of this section shall be
punished as provided by state statute for each offense, and a separate and
distinct offense shall be regarded as having been committed each and every day
such person shall use such scales, balances, weights or measures without having
the same adjusted and sealed as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2009-0-059, 9-8-09)
28-1-4: CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
Any person who shall, in weighing or measuring any article for purchase or
sale, or for weighing in or weighing out, within the Village, use any weight,
measure, scale beam, patent balance, steelyard or other instrument, or who
shall maintain or operate any weight, measure, scale beam, patent balance,
steelyard or other instrument, whether automatic or otherwise, used for the
purpose of weighing or measuring any person or animal, for hire or reward which
has not been sealed or for which the aforesaid certificate has not been
obtained from the state department of agriculture as required by this chapter
shall be punished as provided by state statute. (Ord. 2009-0-059, 9-8-09)
28-1-5: USE OF INCORRECT OR FAULTY MEASURES OR SCALES:
If any person shall use, maintain or operate in the Village in weighing or
measuring as aforesaid, any weight, measure, scale beam, patent balance,
steelyard or other instrument, which shall not be in conformity to the standard
of this state, or shall use in weighing, as aforesaid, any scale beam, patent
balance, steelyard or other instrument, which shall be out of order or
incorrect, or which shall not balance, he shall be punished as provided by
state statute. (Ord. 2009-0-059, 9-8-09)
28-1-6: REFUSAL TO EXHIBIT FOR EXAMINATION:
No person shall refuse to exhibit any weight, measure, scale beam, patent
balance, steelyard or other instrument, to the state department of agriculture
for the purpose of being inspected and examined. (Ord. 2009-0-059, 9-8-09)
28-1-7: SALE OF PRODUCTS TO BE BY NET WEIGHT OR NUMERICAL COUNT:
All vegetables, vegetable products, meats and nonliquid animal products,
butter, cheese and other similar dairy products, sold or offered for sale
within the Village for delivery within the Village shall, in the absence of a
contract or agreement in writing to the contrary signed by the parties thereto,
be sold by standard avoirdupois net weight or by numerical count; provided,
however, that seeds, grain, flour, meal and other cereals or cereal products
and vegetable roots, which by common custom in the Village are sold by the
bunch, and commodities in original packages shall not be included in the
provisions of this section.
The term "original packages" as herein used, shall be taken to mean packages in
which commodities have been packed before shipping by the grower, producer or
original packer thereof, and the contents of which have not been disturbed or
diminished, except for the purpose of ripening or of replacing spoiled goods.
(Ord. 2009-0-059, 9-8-09)
28-1-8: SALE OF BERRIES AND OTHER FRUITS:
All fresh berries, cherries, currants and other small fruits sold or offered
for sale in the Village shall, in the absence of a special agreement in writing
signed by the parties thereto to the contrary, be sold by standard avoirdupois
net weight, numerical count or uniform size baskets, boxes or other receptacles
containing one quart, one pint or one-half (1/2) pint standard dry measures, or
multiples thereof, and in no other way. Such receptacles shall be uniformly and
evenly filled throughout. Baskets, boxes or other receptacles in which or out
of which, such berries, cherries, currants or other small fruits are sold or
offered for sale shall not be required to be tested and sealed, but the
Inspector of Weights and Measures or any of his deputies may at any time test
the capacity of a sample basket, box or other receptacle in which, or out of
which, such berries, cherries, currants or other small fruits are sold or
offered for sale. (Ord. 2009-0-059, 9-8-09)
ARTICLE 2
INSPECTOR OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
SECTION:
28-2-1: Duties Performed By Village Clerk
28-2-2: Annual Inspection; Seal And Certificate Of Accuracy; Table Of
Tolerances
28-2-3: Register To Be Kept
28-2-4: Reports Of Violation Of Chapter
28-2-5: Sale Of Weights And Measures Prohibited
28-2-6: Police Powers Generally; Right Of Entry
28-2-7: Power To Arrest And Seize Property
28-2-8: Condemnation, Adjustment And Seizure Of Incorrect Weights And Measures
28-2-9: Inspection Fees; Schedule
28-2-10: Inspection Fees; Limitation
28-2-11: Inspection Fees; Disposition, Report To The Village Manager
28-2-12: Resignation Or Removal From Office
28-2-13: Interference, Impersonation Prohibited
28-2-1: DUTIES PERFORMED BY VILLAGE CLERK:
The Village Clerk is made the Inspector of Weights and Measures and shall be
responsible for all duties required by this chapter, the statutes of the state
and the regulations of the director of insurance of the state. Deputy
inspectors may be appointed by the Clerk to perform the duties set forth in
this article. (1981 Code)
28-2-2: ANNUAL INSPECTION; SEAL AND CERTIFICATE OF ACCURACY; TABLE OF
TOLERANCES:
It shall be the duty of the Inspector of Weights and Measures to inspect and
examine not less than once in each year all weights, measures, scale beams,
patent balances, steelyards and other instruments used for weighing and
measuring in the Village and to stamp with a suitable seal all weights, scales,
measures and weighing and measuring devices so used which are found accurate,
and deliver to the owner thereof a certificate of their accuracy. The Inspector
shall also provide a table of tolerances and specifications in conformity with
those approved by the national bureau of standards. Any person who shall
wilfully remove, destroy or in any manner erase any stamp or seal of inspection
from any scale, weight or measure shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-
5 of this code. (1981 Code)
28-2-3: REGISTER TO BE KEPT:
It shall be the duty of the Inspector of Weights and Measures to make a
register of all the weights, measures, scale beams, patent balances, steelyards
and other instruments used for weighing, inspected and sealed by him, in which
shall be stated the names of the owners of the same, and whether they are in
conformity to the standards of the State.
28-2-4: REPORTS OF VIOLATION OF CHAPTER:
It shall be the duty of the Inspector of Weights and Measures to report
forthwith to the Corporation Counsel the names and places of business of all
persons violating any of the provisions of this Chapter, and of all persons
making use of any fraudulent or unsealed weights or measures, gauges or
balances.
28-2-5: SALE OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the Inspector of Weights and Measures to vend any
weights, measures, scale beams, patent balances, steelyards or other
instruments to be used for weighing, or to offer or expose the same for sale,
or be interested directly or indirectly in the sale of the same in the Village.
28-2-6: POLICE POWERS GENERALLY; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The Inspector of Weights and Measures and any authorized deputies are hereby
made Special Police (allowed under Section
19-2-1 of this Code) and shall have the power to, and shall from time to time,
weigh or measure and inspect packages or amounts of commodities of whatsoever
kind kept for the purpose of sale, offered or exposed for sale, or sold or in
the process of delivery in order to determine whether the same contain the
amounts represented, and whether they be offered for sale or sold in accordance
with the laws in relation to weights and measures, and may, for the purposes
above mentioned, and in the general performance of their official duties, enter
and go into or upon any stand, place, building or premises, or stop any vendor,
peddler, junk dealer, coal wagon, ice wagon, delivery wagon or conveyance of
any kind, or any person whatsoever, and require him, if necessary, to go to
some convenient place which the Inspector of Weights and Measures or any of his
deputies may specify, for the purpose of making proper tests.
28-2-7: POWER TO ARREST AND SEIZE PROPERTY:
The Inspector of Weights and Measures and any authorized deputies shall have
the same powers as are now held by, or may from time to time be conferred on,
regular police to arrest, with or without formal warrant, any violator of this
Chapter in relation to weights and measures, and to seize for use as evidence,
with or without formal warrant, any false or unsealed weight, measure or
weighing or measuring device or package or amounts of commodities found to be
used, retained or offered or exposed for sale or sold in violation of this
Chapter.
28-2-8: CONDEMNATION, ADJUSTMENT AND SEIZURE OF INCORRECT WEIGHTS AND MEASURES:
the Inspector shall examine, inspect and seal all weights, measures, scale
beams, patent balances, steelyards and other instruments used for weighing at
the stores and places where the same may be used. In case they, or any of them,
shall not be in conformity to the standard of the State, they shall be marked
"condemned", and the owner thereof shall within ten (10) days thereafter have
the same properly adjusted and sealed; the Inspector may, at any time after the
expiration of the time aforesaid, seize and destroy any and all such condemned
weights, measures, scale beams, patent balances, steelyards and other
instruments used for weighing which may be found in use.
28-2-9: INSPECTION FEES; SCHEDULE:
The Inspector of Weights and Measures shall receive and collect fees for the
use of the Village for service at the following rates, which shall be due and
payable at the time of such inspection:
For testing scales of the capacity of 240 to 2,000         $3.00
pounds, except hopper scales   
For testing scales of less capacity than 240 pounds     2.00
For testing liquid measures of the capacity of one         .50
quart and upwards, each   
For testing yard measures, each                         .50
For testing linear measure, for each 3' length          .50
For testing any tape line exceeding 50' in length, each  2.00
For testing any automatic machine used for linear          2.00
measuring, each   
For testing any automatic device used for measuring        3.00
or dispensing liquids at retail, into vehicle tanks   
 
28-2-10: INSPECTION FEES; LIMITATION:
It shall be unlawful for the Inspector of Weights and Measures to make charges
for inspecting and examining weights, measures, scale beams, patent balances,
steelyards or other instruments used for weighing more than once in each year,
except charges for inspecting and examining truck scales and scales of a
capacity of three (3) tons or more, which shall not be made more than once in
every six (6) months, unless such weights, measures, scale beams, patent
balances, steelyards or other instruments used in weighing and measuring shall
be found to be not in conformity to the State standard.
28-2-11: INSPECTION FEES; DISPOSITION, REPORT TO THE VILLAGE MANAGER:
The Inspector of Weights and Measures shall pay over to the Village Treasurer
daily all fees, charges, moneys, emoluments or valuable considerations of any
kind whatsoever collected or received by him by reason of, for or on account of
the performance by him of the duties of his office; and each such payment shall
be accompanied by such documentation as may be required by the Village
Treasurer. Each month the Inspector of Weights and Measures shall make a report
in writing to the Village Manager which report shall show in detail the number
and type of inspections made by the Inspector of Weights and Measures during
the month preceding the day of such report.
28-2-12: RESIGNATION OR REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
Whenever the Inspector of Weights and Measures shall resign, be removed from
office or leave the Village all the standard beams, weights and measures held
or used in the performance of his duties shall be delivered to the office of
the Village Clerk.
28-2-13: INTERFERENCE, IMPERSONATION PROHIBITED:
No person shall in any way or manner obstruct, hinder or molest the Inspector
of Weights and Measures in the performance of the prescribed duties of the
office, or refuse to weigh or measure any article of merchandise or any other
commodity whatsoever in order that the Inspector of Weights and Measures may
ascertain the weight or measure of said article of merchandise, or any other
commodity whatsoever, which may be sold or offered for sale.
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent that he is a Village
Inspector or Deputy Village Inspector of Weights and Measures, or to falsely
represent that he is authorized to inspect weights and measures by any public
officer when not so authorized, or to demand of any person that his weights or
measures shall be produced for inspection when not duly authorized by law to
make such inspection, or to use a seal in imitation of the Inspector's seal on
weights or measures not officially tested. It shall further be unlawful to
persuade persons that it is necessary for them to have additional inspections
made that are not required by law, either by making misrepresentations
concerning the official inspections required by this Chapter or by any other
means.
Any persons violating any of the provisions of this Section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Section
1-1-5 of this Code.
ARTICLE 3
PUBLIC WEIGHMASTERS
SECTION:
28-3-1: Eligibility for Appointment
28-3-2: Application for License
28-3-3: Contents of License; Penalty for Violation of Conditions of License
28-3-4: Bond; Issuance of License
28-3-5: Deputy Weighmasters
28-3-6: Duty to Provide Own Scales; Inspections
28-3-7: Change of Location and New Scales
28-3-8: Duty to Weigh Articles Tendered
28-3-9: Attendance at Scales; Compensation for Sunday or Holiday Weighing
28-3-10: Charges for Weighing Generally
28-3-11: Seal Required; Design
28-3-12: Scales to be Used by Deputy
28-3-13: Weight Certificates; Issuance, Contents
28-3-14: Weight Certificates; Recordation
28-3-15: Weight Certificates; Delivery or Posting Before Unloading
28-3-16: Weight Certificates; Alteration
28-3-17: Weight Certificates; Issuance of False Weight Certificates; Penalty
28-3-18: Weight Certificates; Requesting False Weight Certificate; Penalty
28-3-19: Reweighing; Where Weighmaster Weighs Own Commodities
28-3-20: Reweighing; Where Commodities are Not Owned by Weighmaster
28-3-21: Reweighing; Obstructing Prohibited
28-3-22: Meaning of Net Weight
28-3-23: Weighing After License Has Expired
28-3-24: Every Load of Merchandise to be Weighed
28-3-25: Weighing by Others Prohibited
28-3-26: Street Scales
28-3-27: Ice Excluded
28-3-28: Penalty for Violation
28-3-1: ELIGIBILITY FOR APPOINTMENT:
Any person owning a scale suitable for weighing any commodity, produce or
articles of merchandise in load lots, when contained in any wagon, truck or
other vehicle, or in any quantity less than load lots when not contained in any
wagon, truck or other vehicle, shall be eligible for appointment as a public
weighmaster in the Village upon complying with the requirements of this Article
and the regulations of the Director of Public Health.
28-3-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person owning a scale suitable for weighing as provided in the preceding
Section, desiring to be licensed as a public weighmaster, shall file an
application in writing therefor which shall conform to the general requirements
of Chapter 8 of this Code relating to applications for licenses, and shall set
forth the location of the place of business for which such license is
requested. Such application shall contain, plainly printed thereon the
following form of agreement, which shall be subscribed to by the applicant
before any license shall be issued thereunder:
"The applicant hereby agrees and consents, as a condition for the issuance of a
license hereunder, that in case the applicant as a public weighmaster weighs
any load lot of any commodity, produce or articles of merchandise sold in load
lots by weight, sold or delivered by the applicant or any person directly or
indirectly interested with the applicant in the operation of the public scale
of the applicant, the Inspector of Weights and Measures of the Village, or any
deputies acting under his orders, or the purchaser or consignee shall have the
right to reweigh or cause to be reweighed, as provided in this Article, any
such load lot of commodity, produce or articles of merchandise. This condition
is accepted by the applicant with the understanding that the same shall, upon
the issuance of a license hereunder, at once become binding on him."
28-3-3: CONTENTS OF LICENSE; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
The license issued under the provisions of this Article shall contain apt words
indicating that the same is issued and accepted subject to the conditions and
agreements hereinbefore set forth and contained in the application for same and
subscribed by the licensees, when application for such license is made; and the
conditions shall upon the issuance of the license at once become binding on the
licensee, his agents and employees, who shall conform to the requirements of
the same. Any person or corporation who fails to comply with or violates any of
the provisions of this Article, or having received a license under the terms
and conditions imposed by this Article, fails to observe the conditions so
imposed, shall be liable in addition to any other penalty prescribed by law, to
be punished as provided in Section
1-1-5 of this Code.
28-3-4: BOND; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
All public weighmasters shall execute a bond in favor of the Village in the sum
of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), with such sureties as may be approved by
the Director of Finance, conditioned for the faithful performance of such
applicant's duties as a public weighmaster, and for the payment by such public
weighmaster of any fine which may be imposed upon him for any violation of such
applicant's duties as such public weighmaster.
Upon compliance with the conditions above stated and upon payment of the sum
provided in Section
8-2-1 of this Code, the Village Clerk may issue a license authorizing such
applicant to act as a public weighmaster.
28-3-5: DEPUTY WEIGHMASTERS:
Each public weighmaster shall have the power to appoint all necessary deputies
to tend to the scales, but each such deputy weighmaster shall furnish a bond in
the same sum and conditioned in the same manner as that furnished by the public
weighmaster. Each such deputy weighmaster or the public weighmaster appointing
him, shall pay the sum specified in Section
8-2-1 of this Code for an annual license as such deputy weighmaster. Each
public weighmaster appointing any deputy weighmaster shall be answerable for
any and all acts of such deputy weighmaster in connection with the weighing of
any commodity over the scale of such weighmaster; provided, that such
responsibility on the part of the public weighmaster shall not relieve the
deputy weighmaster of liability for his own acts. Any public weighmaster shall
have the right, at any time after the appointment of a deputy by him, to cancel
such appointment, and upon cancelling such appointment, it shall be the duty of
such public weighmaster to immediately notify the Inspector of Weights and
Measures that the appointment of such deputy has been cancelled, and thereupon
such deputy shall cease to have any authority to weigh any commodity on the
scales of such weighmaster.
28-3-6: DUTY TO PROVIDE OWN SCALES; INSPECTIONS:
Each public weighmaster licensed under the provisions of this Article shall
provide his own scales, which shall be of a kind or pattern approved by the
Inspector of Weights and Measures, and each such public weighmaster shall keep
his scales properly adjusted and repaired at his own expense. It shall be the
duty of each public weighmaster to have such scales inspected by the Inspector
of Weights and Measures at least once every six (6) months and oftener if
required.
28-3-7: CHANGE OF LOCATION AND NEW SCALES:
Public weighmasters or deputy weighmasters shall by virtue of their licenses,
be entitled to weigh only over the scale designated in any such license. Every
public weighmaster acquiring a new scale after the issuance of his public
weighmaster's license and desiring to weigh over such scale shall notify the
Village Clerk of the location of such additional scale and thereupon such new
location shall be entered by the Village Clerk on the original application for
public weighmaster, and the Inspector of Weights and Measures shall be notified
by the Village Clerk of such additional scale. If any public weighmaster
changes the location of any scale, he shall immediately notify the Inspector of
Weights and Measures and secure a transfer of such license for such new
location, which transfer shall be issued for the regular transfer fee and
without further bond or license fee; provided, however, that any public
weighmaster shall have the right, at any time after the appointment of a deputy
weighmaster by him, to assign such deputy to weigh over any scale owned by him,
the location of which is set forth in his license application or his
supplementary license application.
28-3-8: DUTY TO WEIGH ARTICLES TENDERED:
Public weighmasters owning scales suitable for weighing commodities loaded in
wagons, trucks or other vehicles shall weigh any commodity, produce or articles
of merchandise loaded in any wagon, truck or other vehicle when requested to do
so by the person bringing the same to the scale of such weighmaster; public
weighmasters owning scales suitable for weighing commodities in amounts or
quantities less than load lots when not contained in any wagon, truck or other
vehicle, shall weigh any such, commodity when requested to do so by any person
bringing the same to the scale of such weighmaster.
28-3-9: ATTENDANCE AT SCALES; COMPENSATION FOR SUNDAY OR HOLIDAY WEIGHING:
Each public weighmaster shall be present at his scale, either in person or by
deputy, at all reasonable times during each day, except Sundays and public
holidays; provided, however, that if requested to do so upon any day preceding
any such Sunday or public holiday, the public weighmaster shall be present or
cause a deputy weighmaster to be present at such scale on the succeeding Sunday
or public holiday; provided further, that the person requesting such
weighmaster to be present at his scales on any Sunday or legal holiday shall be
required to deposit with such public weighmaster the sum of ten dollars
($10.00), which sum shall be the minimum reimbursement to such weighmaster for
his services in weighing commodities on his scale on any Sunday or public
holiday.
28-3-10: CHARGES FOR WEIGHING GENERALLY:
Public weighmasters, when not the owners or sellers of the articles,
commodities or produce weighed by them, shall be entitled to charge and receive
a sum not in excess of twenty five cents ($.25) for each and every load or part
of a load (or lesser quantity when not contained in any wagon, truck or other
vehicle), of any commodity, produce or articles of merchandise weighed by them
over the scales of the public weighmasters.
28-3-11: SEAL REQUIRED; DESIGN:
Each public and deputy weighmaster shall procure a seal, at his own expense,
which seal shall be round in form not to exceed one and one-quarter inch (11/
4") in diameter of a type similar to a notary public's seal. The seal of a
public weighmaster shall show his name around the upper half (1/2) of the dies
and his title around the lower half (1/2) of the dies. The seal of a deputy
public weighmaster shall have the name of the weighmaster who appointed him
around the upper half (1/2) of the dies, with his own name across the center of
the dies and his title around the lower half (1/2) of the dies. Such seal shall
be stamped over the weights set forth therein upon each certificate issued by
such public or deputy weighmaster. No deputy weighmaster shall use his seal on
any weight certificate other than the one of the public weighmaster by whom he
has been appointed.
28-3-12: SCALES TO BE USED BY DEPUTY:
No deputy weighmaster shall be authorized to weigh or issue certificates for
any weighing done on any scale other than those the location of which appear on
the license of the public weighmaster appointing him or such additional ones as
may be installed after the application has been made, as provided for in this
Article; provided, however, that in a case of an emergency caused by the
breaking down or getting out of order of the scale of the public weighmaster,
he shall, pending the repairing and resealing of such scale be authorized to
weigh on another different scale upon the public weighmaster appointing him
assuming responsibility for the accuracy of the scale so used.
28-3-13: WEIGHT CERTIFICATES; ISSUANCE, CONTENTS:
Each public weighmaster shall issue a weight certificate, signed by him or his
deputy, under his official seal, which certificate shall state thereon the
following: The commodity, produce or articles weighed; the date; the name of
the weighmaster or deputy weighmaster who did the weighing; the name and
address of the person for whom the weighing was done; the name of the driver of
the vehicle bringing such commodity, produce or articles to the scales, or if
the same is not contained in a vehicle, the name and address of the person
bringing the same to the scales; where contained in a vehicle, the kind of
vehicle and the name and address of the purchaser or consignee of the commodity
weighed; when the commodity is loaded in a vehicle, the total or gross weight
of the commodity weighed and the conveyance in which it is loaded, together
with the driver and any other person who may be on the vehicle when weighed,
the tare weight or the weight of the vehicle, including the driver and any
other person who may have been on the vehicle when weighed while loading; the
net weight of the commodity, produce or article contained in such vehicle, or
the net weight of the commodity, produce or article when not contained in a
vehicle at the time of weighing. In no case shall any public weighmaster state
in his certificate the tare weight of any vehicle until after he shall have
weighed the vehicle in such a manner as to secure the weight as specified
herein; provided, however, that in the case of a divided load, by which is
meant a load containing more than one order for the same or different
purchasers or consignees, no penalty shall be imposed under this Article by
reason of the fact that the tare weight shown on the weight certificates is
only the original tare weight of the vehicle and equipment before loading if in
such case each order has been weighed separately and the net weight of each
separate order or delivery is correctly shown on the weight certificate and
such correct net weight is delivered.
28-3-14: WEIGHT CERTIFICATES; RECORDATION:
Each public weighmaster shall keep and preserve a carbon copy of each weight
certificate issued which collectively shall be an accurate record of all
weighing performed by him or his deputies. Such weight certificates shall be
numbered and all certificates must be accounted for, and the records shall be
retained and preserved by such public weighmaster for a period of at least two
(2) years after the weighing is performed. Such records shall be open to
inspection by the Inspector of Weights and Measures and any deputies and to
members of the Police Department.
28-3-15: WEIGHT CERTIFICATES; DELIVERY OR POSTING BEFORE UNLOADING:
A certificate of weight for each load of any commodity, produce or articles of
merchandise issued by such public weighmaster, shall be delivered by the driver
or person in charge of the wagon, truck or other vehicle used in the delivery,
to the purchaser or consignee of such load, or to his agent, at the time of the
delivery, and before any of the commodity, produce or other article of
merchandise is removed from the vehicle, or such certificates shall be
delivered to the Inspector of Weights and Measures, or any deputies upon
demand. When delivery is made, in case no person is present to receive such
commodity, produce or article of merchandise, and if the purchaser or
consignee, or his agent, cannot be located, then the memorandum or certificate
of weight hereinbefore provided for shall be posted conspicuously at the place
of delivery, before any of the commodity, produce or article of merchandise is
removed from the vehicle.
28-3-16: WEIGHT CERTIFICATES; ALTERATION:
No person shall alter any certificate of any Village weigher, or use or attempt
to use the same for any other load or parcel than the one for which the same
was given, nor after the weighing and before the sale and delivery of any load
or parcel, diminish the quantity thereof.
28-3-17: WEIGHT CERTIFICATES; ISSUANCE OF FALSE WEIGHT CERTIFICATES; PENALTY:
Any public weighmaster or any deputy public weighmaster who shall issue a
certificate of weight giving a false weight of any article or commodity weighed
by him, to any person shall be punished as provided in Section
1-1-5 of this Code, and upon conviction hereunder, the Board of Trustees, in
its discretion may cancel the license of such weighmaster or deputy
weighmaster, and may thereafter, in its discretion, refuse to issue a license
to such weighmaster or deputy weighmaster in the same or succeeding year. Any
fine imposed against such public weighmaster or deputy weighmaster may be
enforced against his surety under the bond furnished by such weighmaster or
deputy weighmaster.
28-3-18: WEIGHT CERTIFICATES; REQUESTING FALSE WEIGHT CERTIFICATE; PENALTY:
Any person that shall request any public weighmaster or deputy weighmaster to
weigh any commodity, produce or articles of merchandise falsely or incorrectly,
or that shall request a false or incorrect certificate of weight, shall be
punished as provided in Section
1-1-5 of this Code.
28-3-19: REWEIGHING; WHERE WEIGHMASTER WEIGHS OWN COMMODITIES:
In any case where a person as a public weighmaster has weighed any load lot of
any commodity, produce or articles of merchandise sold in load lots by weight
which has been or will be sold or delivered by such same person or by any
person directly or indirectly interested with such person in the operation of
his public scale, it shall be the duty of such person delivering such load and
of the driver or person in charge of the vehicle used in the delivery thereof,
upon the request of the Inspector of Weights and Measures or of any of his
deputies, or the consignee or purchaser, to convey such load to some scale
selected by the Inspector of Weights and Measures or such deputy or such
consignee or purchaser and permit the weighing of the gross weight of such
load, and after the delivery of such load to return forthwith with the vehicle
and equipment used in the delivery thereof to the same scale and permit the
ascertaining of the tare weight for the purpose of verifying the net weight of
such load as shown by the weight certificate but only on the following
conditions:
   A.   That the scale thus selected shall be some public or private scale
which has been duly inspected and sealed by the Inspector of Weights and
Measures in the Village where the delivery is to be made or the demand for
reweighing is made and in no case farther than one mile therefrom unless there
is no adequate scale available for the purpose within one mile.
   B.   That if such person delivering such load, or such driver or other
person in charge of the vehicle used in the delivery thereof so demands, such
load, in addition to being weighed on the scale thus selected as aforesaid,
shall be weighed on the scale of the public weighmaster where it was originally
weighed or on any scale, public or private, which has been duly inspected and
sealed by the Inspector of Weights and Measures, other than that so selected,
in the particular locality where the request is to be made and in no case
farther than one mile therefrom.
28-3-20: REWEIGHING; WHERE COMMODITIES ARE NOT OWNED BY WEIGHMASTER:
In any case where the person selling or delivering any load lot of any
commodity, produce or articles of merchandise sold in load lots by weight has
not as a public weighmaster, weighed such load lot, and has caused such load
lot to be weighed by another person licensed as a public weighmaster, and is
not interested directly or indirectly with such other public weighmaster in the
operation of such public weighmaster's scale, it shall be the duty of the
person delivering such load and of the driver or person in charge of the
vehicle used in the delivery thereof, upon the request of the purchaser or
consignee, or the Inspector of Weights and Measures or of any deputies, to
convey such load to some scale selected by such purchaser or consignee, or by
the Inspector of Weights and Measures or such deputy, and permit the weighing
of the gross weight of such load, and after the delivery of such load, to
return forthwith with the vehicle and equipment used in the delivery thereof to
the same scale and permit the ascertaining of the tare weight for the purpose
of verifying the net weight of such load as shown by the weight certificate but
only on the following conditions:
   A.   That the Inspector of Weights and Measures or deputy, the purchaser or
consignee making such request shall have followed such load or shall have kept
it in view from the location of the scale where such load was originally
weighed by the public weighmaster to the point where such request is made.
   B.   That the scale thus selected shall be some public or private scale
which has been duly inspected and sealed by the Inspector of Weights and
Measures and shall be located in the vicinity of the point where such request
is made, and in no case farther than one mile therefrom unless there is no
adequate scale available for the purpose within one mile.
   C.   That if such person delivering such load or such driver or other person
in charge of the vehicle used in the delivery thereof so demands, such load, in
lieu of being weighed on the scale thus selected as aforesaid, shall be weighed
on the scale of the public weighmaster where it was originally weighed, or on
any scale, public or private, which has been duly inspected and sealed by the
Inspector of Weights and Measures other than that so selected, located in the
vicinity of the point where such request is made, and in no case farther than
one mile therefrom.
28-3-21: REWEIGHING; OBSTRUCTING PROHIBITED:
Any person selling and delivering or attempting to deliver any load lot of any
commodity, produce or articles of merchandise that has been reweighed on the
scale of the public weighmaster on which it was originally weighed at his
request, who shall refuse or fail to allow such load to be delivered to the
destination it was originally billed or sent to, or who shall fail or refuse to
have the load removed from the vehicle used in the delivery thereof, or who
shall hinder or obstruct the Inspector of Weights and Measures, or any
deputies, from obtaining and ascertaining the net weight of the commodity,
produce or articles of merchandise delivered or attempted to be delivered
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Section
1-1-5 of this Code.
28-3-22: MEANING OF NET WEIGHT:
When any commodity, produce or articles is or are sold subject to public
weighmaster's weights, the net weight shown in the weight certificate issued by
such public weighmaster shall be taken to be the true net weight of the same,
subject to the right of reweighing as herein provided. Net weight, within the
meaning of this Article, shall be the actual weight of the commodity, produce
or articles excluding the weight of the vehicle, if any, in which it is loaded,
and excluding the weight of the driver of such vehicle, if such driver be
weighed as part of the tare weight.
28-3-23: WEIGHING AFTER LICENSE HAS EXPIRED:
No public weighmaster whose license shall have expired shall weigh any
commodity for fee or reward, or shall issue any weight certificate, until he
shall have secured a new license.
28-3-24: EVERY LOAD OF MERCHANDISE TO BE WEIGHED:
Every load of any commodity, produce or other articles of merchandise sold in
load lots by weight, delivered by wagon, truck or other vehicle within the
Village shall be weighed by a public weighmaster.
28-3-25: WEIGHING BY OTHERS PROHIBITED:
No person shall use or keep any scale within the Village for weighing any
commodity, produce or articles of merchandise of any kind whatsoever for fee or
reward, except public weighmasters who shall have complied with the provisions
of this Article.
28-3-26: STREET SCALES:
No person shall use or keep any scale in any public place, street or alley
within the Village unless duly authorized to do so by the Board of Trustees.
28-3-27: ICE EXCLUDED:
Ice sold in load lots by weight is exempted from all the provisions of this
Article.
28-3-28: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person selling and delivering or attempting to deliver any load lot of
anycommodity, produce or articles of merchandise sold in load lot by weight,
delivered by wagon, truck or other vehicle within the Village, of a quantity
less than that called for by the delivery ticket, or any public weighmaster or
deputy who shall provide the driver or person in charge of the vehicle used in
the delivery thereof, or the person making or attempting to make delivery
thereof, with a certificate or memorandum which does not give the result of the
actual weighing of such load lot, and any driver or person in charge of such
delivery who shall fail, neglect or refuse to deliver to the Inspector of
Weights and Measures or any deputies upon demand, the aforesaid public
weighmaster's certificate before such load or any part thereof is removed from
the vehicle, or who shall refuse to comply with a lawful request to reweigh the
same in order that the weights stated in such certificate may be verified
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Section
1-1-5 of this Code; provided, that whenever the reweighing is done on a scale
other than the scale on which the weighing was originally done a variance of
one percent (1%) or less in the net weight of a load lot between the net weight
as set forth in the public weighmaster's certificate and the net weight as
ascertained by reweighing such load shall not be considered a violation of this
Article.
ARTICLE 4
SOLID FUELS
SECTION:
28-4-1: Definitions
28-4-2: Sale by Avoirdupois Weight Required
28-4-3: Delivery Tickets; Required; Contents; Delivery to Purchaser
28-4-4: Delivery Tickets; Required of Peddlers; Delivery to Purchaser or
Village Inspector
28-4-5: Delivery Tickets; Production Required on Demand
28-4-6: Verification of Weight
28-4-7: Mixing Solid Fuel
28-4-8: Penalty for Violation
28-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
AVOIRDUPOIS: The ordinary system of weights of the U.S. in which sixteen (16)
ounces avoirdupois make a pound.
SOLID FUEL: Solid fuel shall mean any anthracite, semianthracite, bituminous,
semibituminous or lignite coal, briquettes, boulets, coke, gashouse coke,
petroleum coke, petroleum carbon or any other manufactured or patented fuel not
sold by liquid or metered measure.
HUNDRED WEIGHT: Hundred weight shall mean one hundred (100) pounds avoirdupois.
TON: Ton shall mean twenty (20) hundred weights.
28-4-2: SALE BY AVOIRDUPOIS WEIGHT REQUIRED:
Every person selling or offering for sale solid fuel in the Village shall sell
the same by avoirdupois weight, except where otherwise provided by contract.
28-4-3: DELIVERY TICKETS; REQUIRED; CONTENTS; DELIVERY TO PURCHASER:
Any person engaged in the business of selling or selling and delivering solid
fuel in the Village shall provide the driver of the wagon, truck or other
conveyance with one separate delivery ticket for each kind, grade and size of
solid fuel contained on the wagon, truck or other conveyance. Such ticket shall
bear the name of the person selling such solid fuel, the gross weight, the tare
and the net weight of each kind, grade or size of solid fuel, and the name and
address of the purchaser of such solid fuel, or the person to whom same is to
be delivered, which delivery ticket shall be delivered by the driver in charge
of the wagon, truck or other conveyance to each purchaser, his agent or
representative, or to the person to whom delivery is be made, at the time of
the delivery of the fuel and before such fuel or any part thereof is removed
from such wagon, truck or other conveyance.
28-4-4: DELIVERY TICKETS; REQUIRED OF PEDDLERS; DELIVERY TO PURCHASER OR
VILLAGE INSPECTOR:
In the event that solid fuel is sold or offered for sale by a peddler, or by a
dealer making sale or delivery in any other manner than by wagon, truck or
other conveyance, such peddler or dealer, shall deliver to the purchaser or
intending purchaser, or his agent or representative, or the person to whom
delivery is to be made, before the delivery of such fuel or any part thereof,
or to the Inspector of Weights and Measures of the Village upon his demand, a
delivery ticket bearing the name of such peddler or dealer, his license number
if a peddler or name and address if a dealer, and showing the net weight, and
the kind, grade and size of the fuel sold or offered for sale.
28-4-5: DELIVERY TICKETS; PRODUCTION REQUIRED ON DEMAND:
Every such person shall, on demand of the Inspector of Weights and Measures of
the Village, or any deputies, or the purchaser or intended purchaser or his
agent or representative, or the person to whom the delivery is to be made,
produce and deliver such ticket to such officer, or to the purchaser or
intended purchaser, or his agent or representative, or to the person to whom
delivery is to be made.
28-4-6: VERIFICATION OF WEIGHT:
Whenever such officer or any deputies, or the purchaser or intended purchaser,
or his agent or representative, or the person to whom delivery is to be made,
shall demand that the weights shown by such ticket be verified, it shall
thereupon become the duty of the person delivering such fuel to convey the same
forthwith to some public scale selected by the Inspector of Weights and
Measures of the Village or any deputies, or the purchaser or intended purchaser
of the fuel being delivered, or his agent or representative, or the person to
whom delivery is to be made, in the village where the solid fuel is to be
delivered, or to any private scale if the particular locality where the owner
thereof shall consent to such use, and permit the weighing of the solid fuel,
together with conveyance and equipment, for the purpose of ascertaining the
gross weight thereof, and shall, after the delivery of such fuel, return
forthwith with the conveyance and equipment used in the delivery of such solid
fuel to the same scale and permit the weighing of the conveyance and equipment
for the purpose of verifying the net weight of the solid fuel, as shown by the
ticket; provided, however, that if such person requests the privilege of
reweighing such solid fuel conveyance and equipment on another and different
scale from that selected by the Inspector of Weights and Measures of the
Village or any deputies, or the purchaser or intended purchaser or his agent,
or representative, or the person to whom delivery is to be made, the Inspector
of Weights and Measures or deputy, or the purchaser or intended purchaser or
his agent or representative, or the person to whom the delivery is to be made,
shall consent to such weighing on some other scale in the particular locality.
28-4-7: MIXING SOLID FUEL:
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any two
(2) or more different kinds, grades or sizes of solid fuel which have been
mixed in such manner as to prevent purchasers, or intended purchasers, or the
Inspector of Weights and Measures of the Village, or any deputy, from
reweighing separately each kind, size and grade to determine the weight of each
kind, size and grade.
If two (2) or more different kinds, grades or sizes of solid fuel are loaded on
the same wagon, truck or other conveyance, each kind, grade and size of solid
fuel shall be weighed and loaded separately, and shall be placed in bags,
separated by partitions, or placed in closed containers, which shall have
legibly stamped upon their sides the actual net weight and the kind, grade and
size of each type of solid fuel contained therein. Such loading shall be in
such a manner so that any time during the selling or delivery of such solid
fuel, each kind, grade and size of solid fuel may be weighed separately. Such
person selling or delivering such solid fuel shall provide the driver of the
wagon, truck or other conveyance in which the same is transported, with a
delivery ticket made out in conformity with the provisions of this Article and
shall also show on all invoices, bills and statements rendered the purchaser,
the weight of each separate kind, grade or size of solid fuel so delivered.
28-4-8: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person selling and delivering or attempting to deliver solid fuel within
the Village, who shall provide the driver or person in charge of the wagon,
truck or other conveyance used in the carrying thereof, or the person making or
attempting to make the delivery thereof, with a ticket or memorandum which does
not correctly give the information required to be given by virtue of this
Article, or with a ticket or memorandum which does not give the result of the
actual weighing of such solid fuel, and any such driver and any such persons
making or attempting to make delivery of any solid fuel, who shall produce,
deliver, offer or tender any ticket or memorandum which does not correctly give
the information aforesaid, or does not give the result of the actual weighing
of such solid fuel, and any person delivering or attempting to deliver solid
fuel within the Village of a quantity less than that called for by the delivery
ticket, as provided for in this Article, and any person selling and delivering
or attempting to deliver solid fuel within the Village who shall fail to
deliver by the person in charge of the wagon, truck or other conveyance used in
the carrying thereof the ticket or memorandum giving the information required
to be given in this Article and any such driver or persons, making or
attempting to make delivery of any solid fuel who shall fail, neglect or refuse
to deliver to the purchaser or intended purchaser, or his agent or
representative, or to the person to whom delivery is to be made, or to the
Inspector of Weights and Measures of the Village or any deputy, the ticket or
memorandum as aforesaid, before such solid fuel or any part thereof is removed
from the wagon, truck or other conveyance, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished as provided in Section
1-1-5 of this Code.
CHAPTER 29
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
Administrative Adjudication System   1
Administrative Adjudication Of Parking Violations   2
ARTICLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEM
SECTION:
29-1-1: Creation
29-1-2: Purpose
29-1-3: Jurisdiction
29-1-4: Office Of Adjudication
29-1-5: Office Of Adjudication Director; Powers And Duties
29-1-6: Rules And Regulations
29-1-7: Administrative Law Judges
29-1-8: Administrative Law Judge Qualifications
29-1-9: Scope Of Authority Of Administrative Law Judges
29-1-10: Subpoenas
29-1-11: Administrative Hearings
29-1-12: Notice Of Violation; Notice Of Hearing; Service
29-1-13: Representation At Hearings
29-1-14: Violations Of Orders; Contempt
29-1-15: Default
29-1-16: Fines; Compliance Bond
29-1-17: Enforcement Of Administrative Law Judge's Order
29-1-18: Election Of Remedies
29-1-19: Administrative Adjudication Procedures Not Exclusive
29-1-20: Severability
29-1-1: CREATION:
   A.   Pursuant to the authority of section 5/1-2.1-1 et seq., of the Illinois
Municipal Code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-1, which authorizes a
municipality to implement a system of administrative adjudication for code
violations, and pursuant to section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 et seq., which authorizes a municipality
to provide a system of administrative adjudication for vehicular standing,
parking and compliance violations, there is hereby created a system of
administrative adjudication of charges of code violations, including vehicular
standing, parking and compliance violations for the Village of Oak Park.
   B.   The Village adopts 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-1 et seq., as
it may be amended from time to time, and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
208.3, as it may be amended from time to time. In the event of a conflict
between either of those statutes and this chapter, this chapter shall prevail.
   C.   The adoption of this chapter does not preclude the Village from using
other lawful methods to enforce the provisions of this code. (Ord. 2003-0-42,
10-7-03)
29-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the system of administrative adjudication of charges of code
violations is to provide a procedure by which charges of code violations can be
administratively adjudicated equitably and efficiently by Administrative Law
Judges. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-1-3: JURISDICTION:
Those matters subject to the administrative adjudication system provided for by
this chapter are charges of violation of any ordinance (alternatively, "Village
Code", "Code" of the Village of Oak Park), except the following: a) any offense
under the Illinois Vehicle Code or this code governing the movement of
vehicles; b) any reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, 5/6-204; c) violations punishable by a
penalty of incarceration; d) violations punishable by a fine in excess of fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per violation excluding allowable costs,
provided, however, that the maximum fine amount of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) does not apply to cases brought to enforce the collection of any
tax imposed and collected by the Village.
Cases instituted by a Village Department shall be subject to the Administrative
Adjudication System upon written notice by the Department Director to the
Director of the Office of Adjudication. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-1-4: OFFICE OF ADJUDICATION:
There is hereby established an Office of Adjudication, the function of which is
to administer the system of administrative adjudication provided for in this
chapter. The Office of Adjudication is authorized to administer, manage and
conduct administrative adjudication proceedings in the manner provided for in
this chapter. The Office will consist of a Director and such other persons as
the Director appoints to assist with the administrative adjudication system
provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-1-5: OFFICE OF ADJUDICATION DIRECTOR; POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Village Manager shall appoint a Director of the Office of Adjudication
(referred to in this chapter as "the Director"). The Director's
responsibilities shall include:
   A.   Operating and managing the administration adjudication system;
   B.   Appointing and removing Administrative Law Judges, as necessary;
   C.   Promulgating rules and regulations for the conduct of administrative
adjudication proceedings in accordance with this chapter;
   D.   Monitoring the performance of Administrative Law Judges for adherence
to applicable provisions of this code;
   E.   Collecting monies paid as fines, penalties, and/or costs assessed by
Administrative Law Judges;
   F.   Certifying copies of final determinations of Administrative Law Judges;
   G.   Keeping accurate records of the proceedings, including, but not limited
to, appearances, nonappearances, pleas entered, and fines and penalties
assessed and paid;
   H.   Performing the functions of the Traffic Compliance Administrator as
described in 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code;
   I.   Establishing any other necessary rules and regulations and performing
any other duties and functions as may be required or appropriate to establish
and administer the Village's administrative adjudication system. (Ord. 2003-0-
42, 10-7-03)
29-1-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Rules and Regulations promulgated for the conduct of administrative
adjudication hearings shall be published and kept on file in the Office of the
Village Clerk where they shall be available to the public for inspection and
copying at standard fees during business hours. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-1-7: ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGES:
Charges of violations of this code and any other code or ordinance adopted by
the Village which falls within the jurisdiction of the administrative
adjudication system shall be heard and adjudicated by an Administrative Law
Judge(s) appointed by the Director. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-1-8: ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE QUALIFICATIONS:
Any person appointed as Administrative Law Judge shall:
   A.   Be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state for not less than
three (3) years;
   B.   Prior to conducting any administrative adjudication hearing hereunder,
have successfully completed a formal training program approved by the Director
which includes the following:
      1.   Instruction on ethical considerations and rules of procedure of the
administrative hearings to be conducted;
      2.   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations to be
adjudicated;
      3.   Observation of administrative hearings; and
      4.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence
and issuing final orders. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-1-9: SCOPE OF AUTHORITY OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGES:
Administrative Law Judges shall preside over adjudicatory hearings.
Administrative Law Judges shall have the authority to perform all acts
necessary to conduct a fair and impartial adjudicatory hearing, including, but
not limited to:
   A.   Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to
determining the existence of a code violation.
   B.   Asking questions of the parties and witnesses, if necessary, to ensure
the clarity and completeness of the testimony and the record.
   C.   Administering oaths and affirmations to witnesses.
   D.   Subject to section
29-1-10 of this article, at the request of any party or on the Administrative
Law Judge's own motion, issuing subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and
give relevant testimony at the hearing, or directing the production of relevant
books, records, or other information.
   E.   Preserving and authenticating a record of the hearing, including all
exhibits and evidence admitted into the record at the hearing.
   F.   Ruling upon motions, objections, and the admissibility of evidence.
   G.   Regulating the course of the hearing in accordance with this chapter,
the rules adopted by the Director for the conduct of administrative hearings,
and other applicable law.
   H.   Issuing a determination based upon a review of the notice of violation,
citation, other charging document (hereinafter "charging document") and the
evidence admitted. The determination shall be in writing and shall be signed by
the Administrative Law Judge. The determination shall set forth the
Administrative Law Judge's finding(s), decision, and order, including fines and
penalties assessed and any action ordered to correct the code violation at
issue. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-2003)
   I.   1. Upon determining that a respondent has violated one or more charged
code provisions, imposing fines and penalties, including supervision and/or
community service, and/or the completion of a community based education,
counseling or treatment program and such other actions that the Administrative
Law Judge determines to be necessary and appropriate for the correction of the
violation of the specific code provision(s) found to have been violated.
However, in no event shall an Administrative Law Judge have authority to: a)
impose a penalty of incarceration, or b) impose a fine in excess of fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) exclusive of costs of enforcement or costs
imposed to secure compliance with this code, except, however, that the maximum
fine amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) does not apply to cases
brought to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the
Village.
When applicable, each day a code provision is found to have been violated by
the respondent shall constitute a separate offense, and each separate offense
subjects the respondent to the fine and penalty provided by the governing
penalty provision.
      2.   The Village recognizes the critical role families play in the
rehabilitation of troubled minors. Therefore, Administrative Law Judges shall
have the authority to order parents, guardians and legal custodians to
participate in any community based education, counseling or treatment program
which their minor child or minor ward has been ordered to attend to assist the
minor in recognizing and accepting responsibility for his or her behavior.
Administrative Law Judges may also order the parents, guardian or legal
custodian to take certain actions or to refrain from certain actions to serve
public safety, to develop competency of the minor, and to promote
accountability by the minor for his or her actions. (Ord. 2012-0-29, 6-4-2012)
   J.   Imposing, in addition to fines and penalties provided by the governing
penalty provision, administrative and/or enforcement costs, and when
applicable, costs related to the enforcement of Village code provisions for
which a respondent has been found liable.
   K.   Ordering, notwithstanding fines imposed or costs assessed, the
respondent to comply with code provision(s) found to have been violated, and,
if appropriate, ordering the respondent to post a compliance bond as provided
by subsection
29-1-16B1 of this article.
   L.   Granting equitable relief as otherwise authorized by law or local
ordinance.
   M.   Ordering, regardless of fines imposed or costs assessed, the respondent
to perform a term of community service.
   N.   Adhering to the policies, procedures, and legislation set forth in this
code, except where discretion is specifically vested in the Administrative Law
Judge, provided, however, that an Administrative Law Judge is authorized to
waive the fine and/or costs that otherwise would be imposed upon finding a
respondent liable for one or more code violations, other than violations of
chapter 15 of this code, when the Administrative Law Judge specifically finds
as a matter of fact that the violation(s) occurred under such circumstances as
to a reasonable person would constitute an excuse for the violation(s). (Ord.
2003-0-42, 10-7-2003)
29-1-10: SUBPOENAS:
   A.   Issuance: Subpoenas shall only be enforceable for the attendance of
persons or the production of books, records or other documents that have a
relevant evidentiary connection with the: 1) subject matter, and 2) facts which
are relevant to the case and relate to a contested issue in the case. A party's
request to an Administrative Law Judge for a subpoena must be timely. Service
of subpoenas shall be made in the same manner as summons in a civil action.
   B.   Content: A subpoena issued under this chapter shall identify:
      1.   The person to whom it is directed;
      2.   The documents or other items sought by the subpoena, if any; and
      3.   The date, time, and place for the appearance of the witnesses and
the production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena.
   C.   Appearance: The date identified for the appearance of the witnesses or
the production of the documents or other items shall not be less than seven (7)
days after service of the subpoena.
   D.   Contesting A Subpoena: Within three (3) business days of being served
with a subpoena issued in accordance with this chapter, the person or entity to
whom the subpoena is directed may contest the issuance of the subpoena by
filing a written motion with the Office of Adjudication, and with proper notice
to all parties. The motion shall specify the grounds therefor, and shall be
heard by an Administrative Law Judge on the return date indicated on the
subpoena, or at the next hearing date scheduled for the case, whichever occurs
earlier. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-1-11: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
   A.   All administrative hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be
open to the public and shall be presided over by a duly appointed
Administrative Law Judge who is charged with providing the parties a full and
fair opportunity to be heard.
   B.   All administrative hearings shall be conducted on the date set for
hearing. For good cause shown, a case may be continued at the discretion of the
Administrative Law Judge. The purpose of administrative hearings is to provide
a prompt resolution of alleged code violations. Accordingly, the grant of
continuances shall be limited. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a
continuance.
   C.   In-Person, Mail, Online Or Remote Hearings:
      1.   The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the
conduct of the hearing. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it
is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct
of their affairs.
      2.   Hearings may be conducted on an in-person basis, by remote
electronic means or by mail or online pursuant to section
29-2-7 of this Code, as amended. Remote electronic hearings shall be conducted
pursuant to rules and regulations promulgated by the Director of the Office of
Adjudication. Notice of a remote electronic hearing shall be provided to the
respondent as required by this article.
      3.   Upon the request of any party to a proceeding or by an
Administrative Law Judge, the Administrative Law Judge may order that
proceeding designated to be conducted by remote electronic means shall be
conducted in-person when doing so is necessary or efficient to protect the
rights of any party and can be accomplished without compromising the safety of
the proceedings and its participants.
   D.   No violation may be established except upon proof by a preponderance of
the evidence, provided, however, that the original or a legible copy of the
charging document, issued in accordance with the applicable provisions of this
code, shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts specified
therein.
   E.   No agent or employee of the Office of Adjudication shall represent the
Village or present evidence or testimony at an adjudicatory hearing. Provided,
however, documentary evidence, prepared by another Department of the Village
and submitted to the Office of Adjudication, may be presented at the hearing by
the Administrative Law Judge. This section does not preclude employees or
agents of the Village of Oak Park, other than employees of the Office of
Adjudication, from appearing at a hearing or presenting evidence.
   F.   Parties to an adjudicatory hearing may be represented by an attorney,
present witnesses, and cross examine opposing witnesses. Parties may request
the Administrative Law Judge to issue subpoenas as provided for in section
29-1-10 of this article.
   G.   The Administrative Law Judge may question witnesses and elicit
testimony in order to determine whether the respondent is liable for the
charged violation.
   H.   A record of all hearings shall be kept. The record shall be preserved
in such form and manner as determined by the Director. Such preservation may be
made by tape recording or other appropriate means. Recording by any means by
any member of the public is prohibited unless expressly authorized by the
Director. The record of all hearings before an Administrative Law Judge shall
include: 1) a record of the testimony presented at the hearing; 2) all
documents, exhibits, and other physical evidence presented at the hearing and
admitted into evidence; 3) a copy of the notice of violation and notice of
hearing; and 4) a copy of the Administrative Law Judge's findings, decision,
and order. Any party may request that the proceedings be taken and transcribed
by a certified court reporter. The cost of the court reporter shall be borne by
the party requesting the court reporter. If the Village makes a tape recording
of the proceedings, the respondent may obtain a transcript at his or her own
cost.
   I.   At the conclusion of a hearing, the Administrative Law Judge shall
issue a final determination. If the Administrative Law Judge determines that
the respondent is liable for the violation, he or she may impose fines, assess
costs, and make all orders authorized by section
29-1-9 of this article.
   J.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Administrative Law Judge shall
inform the parties orally and in writing of the determination, which
determination shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial
review. The Administrative Law Judge also may dismiss the case with or without
prejudice on a properly made motion by the Village.
   K.   Final determinations of an Administrative Law Judge are subject to
review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03;
amd. Ord. 20-171, 7-6-2020)
29-1-12: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; NOTICE OF HEARING; SERVICE:
All matters to be adjudicated by the Office of Adjudication shall be commenced
against the party alleged to have violated one or more code provision(s) by
issuing and serving upon that party a charging document in accordance with the
following procedures:
   A.   The form and manner of service of a charging document for a vehicular
parking, compliance or standing violation shall be as provided in article 2 of
this chapter.
   B.   1. The charging document for a violation of any provision of this code
subject to the system of administrative adjudication provided in this chapter,
other than vehicular standing, parking and compliance violations, shall be
issued by a Village officer or employee authorized to exercise code enforcement
authority, and served as provided for in subsection
29-1-12C of this section.
The charging document shall contain the following information:
         a.   The name, Village Department, and identification number, if
applicable, of the person issuing the charging instrument;
         b.   The name and address of the person or entity being charged with
the violation;
         c.   The name and address of the person to whom the charging document
is given if that person is not the respondent;
         d.   The section(s) of the code alleged to have been violated;
         e.   The date, time, and place of the alleged violation(s);
         f.   A legally sufficient description of the activity or conduct
alleged to constitute a violation of each code section set forth in the
charging document or a legally sufficient description of the facts giving rise
to the allegations set forth in the charging document;
         g.   The complaining witness's name may be included if the violation
is witnessed by someone other than a Village officer or employee.
The Village officer or employee shall certify the correctness of the
information required by this subsection
29-1-12B1 by signing his or her name to the charging document to be issued.
Charging documents which comply with this subsection
29-1-12B1 will be sufficient to establish a prima facie case of liability for
the code violation charged.
      2.   A charging document issued pursuant to subsection
29-1-12B1 of this section also shall set forth: a) the date, time and place of
the adjudication hearing to be held with respect to the violation, and b) the
legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing will be held.
   C.   1. The respondent named in a charging document shall be served with
notice of the violation, and with any other notices required in this article in
one of the following ways: a) by first class mail, overnight or two (2) day
commercial delivery service at the respondent's last known address or if the
respondent is a business entity, at any address identified for its registered
agent or at its principal place of business; b) by personal service; c) by
posting notice upon the property that is the site of the alleged violation(s)
when the respondent is the owner or person in control of the property; or d) by
any other means permitted by law for service of civil summons.
      2.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, service of
a notice of violation and notice of a hearing for a violation(s) of chapter 15
of this code shall be as prescribed in article 2 of this chapter.
   D.   Hearings shall be scheduled with reasonable promptness, provided, that
for hearings scheduled in all nonemergency situations, unless otherwise
specified by other legislation or rule, the hearing shall be held no sooner
than fifteen (15) days after service of notice on the respondent. For purposes
of this subsection, "nonemergency situation" means any situation that does not
reasonably constitute a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare. If
service is provided by first class mail or by overnight or two (2) day
commercial delivery service, the fifteen (15) day period shall begin to run on
the day that the notice is deposited in the mail or given to the commercial
delivery service, as applicable.
   E.   The original or a legible copy of the notice of violation, citation, or
other charging document shall be filed with the Office of Adjudication as soon
as practicable at the place and in the manner as the Director specifies. Upon
receiving the original or a legible copy of a charging document which does not
set forth the date, time and location of the hearing, the Office of
Adjudication shall select a hearing date and give the respondent notice of the
date, time, and place of the hearing in the manner set forth in subsection
29-1-12C1 of this section. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-1-13: REPRESENTATION AT HEARINGS:
   A.   Village Representation: The Village may be represented at the hearing
by an attorney designated by the Village Attorney, or by a Village employee,
except that no employee or other representative of the Office of Adjudication
shall present the case, or offer testimony, except as allowed by subsection
29-1-11E of this article.
   B.   Respondent Representation: The case for the respondent may be presented
by the respondent or by an attorney. An attorney appearing at an adjudicatory
hearing on behalf of a respondent shall present the Administrative Law Judge
with a signed appearance form stating, on oath or affirmation, that he or she
has been authorized by the respondent to represent the respondent at the
hearing. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-1-14: VIOLATIONS OF ORDERS; CONTEMPT:
Any person, having received notice and an opportunity for a hearing as provided
in this chapter, who knowingly fails to comply with an order issued by an
Administrative Law Judge under this chapter, including the issuance of a
subpoena, shall, if the order is not stayed by a court of competent
jurisdiction prior to its effective date, be guilty of contempt. Contempt shall
be enforceable only by the Cook County judicial system and shall be punishable
by applicable law. Each day that the violation continues shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense. In a prosecution under this section, it shall
not be a defense that a person came into compliance with an order, sought
judicial review of it, or made efforts to comply with an order, subsequent to
its effective date. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-1-15: DEFAULT:
   A.   If at the time set for hearing, the respondent, or his or her attorney,
fails to appear, the Administrative Law Judge may enter a default judgment of
liability against the respondent and impose fines, assess costs, and make any
other lawful order. A copy of the default judgment shall be served in the same
manner as the service of a notice of violation permitted by this article and
applicable to the violation. A copy of the default judgment, which is a final
determination, shall be mailed to the respondent along with a notice apprising
the respondent of the procedure for setting aside the default judgment and also
shall apprise the respondent of the availability of an appeal of the default
judgment to the Circuit Court of Cook County. The default judgment and notice
of judgment shall be promptly served on the respondent as provided by
subsection
29-1-12C1 of this article.
   B.   A respondent against whom a default judgment has been entered may file
a motion with the Office of Adjudication to set aside the default judgment and
for a new hearing. A motion to set aside a default judgment may be filed at any
time if the respondent alleges lack of subject matter or personal jurisdiction;
in all other cases, the motion must be filed within twenty one (21) days of
entry of the default judgment, provided however, that if the twenty first day
falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the time for filing a motion
will expire on the next business day. A motion to set aside a default judgment
shall set forth the reason(s) the respondent failed to appear on the hearing
date at which the default judgment was entered. An Administrative Law Judge
shall hear and rule on the motion. If the Administrative Law Judge grants the
motion, a hearing will be held immediately on the alleged code violation(s) set
forth in notice of violation, citation, or other charging document unless the
respondent requests another hearing date and presents good cause for continuing
the hearing. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing to the contrary, a motion to
set aside a default judgment entered on a notice of violation of parking,
standing, or vehicle compliance shall be subject to the provisions of article 2
of this chapter.
   C.   If any default judgment is set aside pursuant to this section, the
Administrative Law Judge shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing
any lien which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the Village as a
result of the default judgment. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-1-16: FINES; COMPLIANCE BOND:
   A.   All fines and other monies to be paid to the Village in accordance with
this chapter shall be remitted to the Village and deposited in the appropriate
Village account as designated by the Village Manager.
   B.   1. In order to ensure that code violations are remedied in a timely
manner, upon the issuance of a determination of liability that includes an
order of compliance, an Administrative Law Judge may order the respondent in
the case to obtain a bond to ensure respondent's timely compliance with the
code provision(s) found to have been violated. Any bond ordered pursuant to
this subsection
29-1-16B1 shall name the Village as beneficiary and shall be in the amount
specified by the Administrative Law Judge, provided that the amount of the bond
shall be reasonably related to the cost of compliance. Any bond issued as a
result of an Administrative Law Judge's order is subject to review and
modification by the Village Manager as to form and amount. If the respondent
fails to remedy in a timely manner the code violation(s) for which a bond has
been ordered and issued and the Village undertakes remediation or otherwise
expends funds related to the code violation(s) for which a bond has been
ordered and issued, the Administrative Law Judge, after giving the parties
notice and opportunity to be heard, may issue an order permitting the Village
to draw against the bond in an appropriate amount. The Administrative Law Judge
shall order the bond amount, less the reasonable costs incurred by the Village,
returned to the respondent upon proof of compliance with the code provision(s)
found to have been violated.
      2.   In the event a respondent ordered to secure a bond as provided by
subsection
29-1-16B1 of this section seeks judicial review of that portion of the
Administrative Law Judge's order requiring a bond and prevails on that issue,
the Village shall release the bond, and if the Village has drawn against the
bond, the Village shall refund to the respondent the total amount drawn within
thirty (30) days of receiving a copy of the reviewing court's mandate. (Ord.
2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-1-17: ENFORCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE'S ORDER:
   A.   Any fine and any administrative, enforcement, or compliance costs
imposed by an Administrative Law Judge's order that remain unpaid after the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures, unless
stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be a debt due and owing the
Village and may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
   B.   After the expiration of the period for which judicial review may be
sought, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the determination
of liability of an Administrative Law Judge may be enforced in the same manner
as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   C.   In any case in which a respondent fails to comply with an
Administrative Law Judge's order to correct a code violation, any expenses
incurred by the Village to enforce the Administrative Law Judge's order,
including, but not limited to, the cost of demolition, repair, and/or enclosure
of dangerous or unsafe buildings or uncompleted and abandoned buildings, and
costs for the removal of garbage, debris, and other hazardous, noxious, or
unhealthy substances or materials from buildings or other real property, and
including attorney fees after they are fixed by an Administrative Law Judge,
shall be a debt due and owing the Village. Prior to any expenses being fixed by
an Administrative Law Judge pursuant to this subsection, the respondent shall
be provided with notice that directs the respondent to appear at a hearing
before an Administrative Law Judge to determine whether the respondent has
failed to comply with the Administrative Law Judge's order. The notice shall
set the date, time and place for the hearing, which shall not be less than
seven (7) days from the date the notice is served. Notice may be served by
personal service, first class mail or by an overnight commercial delivery
service and the seven (7) day period shall begin to run on the date that the
notice was personally served, deposited in the mail or placed for delivery with
the overnight commercial delivery service.
   D.   If any fine, penalty, and/or cost is owing and unpaid after a
determination of liability under this chapter has become final and the
respondent has exhausted or failed to exhaust judicial procedures for review,
the Director of the Office of Adjudication shall cause a notice of debt due and
owing to be sent to the respondent in the manner provided in subsection
29-1-12C1 of this article.
   E.   Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article XII of the Code
of Civil Procedure or by the Uniform Commercial Code, a lien shall be imposed
on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the respondent in the amount
of a debt due and owing the Village. The lien may be enforced in the same
manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   F.   If respondent fails to pay such debt within fourteen (14) days after
service of the notice of debt, the Village may take the following actions in
addition to any debt collection authorized by law:
      1.   Decline to issue, renew or provide any license, permit, zoning
variance, or permission applied for or requested by respondent under this code
or under any other code or ordinance of the Village until respondent pays such
fine or penalty; or
      2.   Decline to issue or renew residential parking permits, temporary
residential parking permits or passes, or any other permit required and applied
for by respondent under this code or any other code or ordinance of the
Village, until respondent pays such fine or penalty.
   G.   1. When the Director becomes aware that a respondent has failed to pay
such fine or penalty within the prescribed fourteen (14) day period, he or she
shall notify the departments responsible for issuing licenses and permits as
described above that the respondent has a delinquent debt, and that no licenses
or permits may be issued to the respondent until the debt has been fully
satisfied.
      2.   At or prior to the time when a respondent applies for a license or
permit, or for a renewal of such license or permit, the department that is
responsible for issuing the license or permit shall notify the respondent that
he or she is ineligible for such license or permit issuance or renewal due to
the outstanding debt. The notice shall inform the respondent that he or she may
request a description of the outstanding debt from the Finance Department, and
shall inform the respondent of his or her right to appeal the denial of the
license or permit under this section. If notice is provided by mail, it shall
be sufficient to mail the notice to the last address the respondent provided to
the issuing department. The date of notice shall be the date the notice was
deposited in the mail, if served by first class mail; the date of delivery, if
served by personal service; or the date of service if served by any other
manner.
      3.   Upon the respondent's request, the Finance Department shall provide
the respondent with a written description of his or her outstanding debt. A
respondent shall have ten (10) business days from the date of notice to appeal
the Department's denial by requesting a hearing by the Director of
Adjudication, or his or her designee.
      4.   Requests for hearing shall be made in writing to the Director's
office. A request for hearing shall include: the full name, address and
telephone number of the respondent; a written statement signed by the
respondent setting forth facts, law or other information relevant to
establishing a defense to the Department's denial; a copy of the notice
provided to the respondent by the license/permit issuing department under this
subsection
29-1-17G; and, any documentary evidence that supports the respondent's appeal,
including receipts for the payment of an alleged debt. Upon receipt of a timely
and proper request for a hearing, the Director or his or her designee shall
assign a hearing date no later than fifteen (15) business days after the date
of request. The hearing shall not be continued without the consent of the
respondent. The Director, or his or her designee, shall determine whether or
not the respondent is ineligible for a license/permit pursuant to this section.
The hearing shall comply with the following provisions:
         a.   The Director, or his or her designee, shall abide by any prior
determination that a debt exists and the scope of review shall be limited to
whether the debt has been satisfied and whether the determination that a debt
exists was issued against the respondent. The petitioner shall not be entitled
to raise any defenses related to his or her liability for the underlying debt.
         b.   The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the
conduct of the hearing. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it
is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct
of their affairs.
         c.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Director or his or her
designee shall issue a final order that the respondent is either eligible or
ineligible for issuance or renewal of the license/permit. If the respondent is
found to be ineligible, the petitioner's license/permit may not be issued or
renewed prior to the payment of the outstanding debt. The Director, or his or
her designee, shall issue a final order no more than fifteen (15) business days
after the conclusion of the hearing.
   H.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
29-1-17G of this section, the Village may issue an initial or renewal license
or permit to a respondent if the Director of the issuing Department or other
appropriate Village Department or agency determines that:
      1.   The respondent has entered into an agreement with a court of
competent jurisdiction, the Department of Finance, or other appropriate Village
Department or agency, for the payment of all debts owed and the respondent is
in compliance with the agreement; or
      2.   The respondent is contesting liability for or the amount of the debt
in a pending administrative or judicial proceeding; or
      3.   The respondent has filed a petition in bankruptcy and the debts owed
are dischargeable in bankruptcy;
      4.   The overriding interests of public safety and welfare require the
issuance of the permit or license.
   I.   When the holder of a license or permit is notified in accordance with
subsection
29-1-17G2 of this section that such license or permit will not be renewed
unless an outstanding judgment is paid, the license or permit shall remain in
effect during the pendency of any properly filed appeal as described in
subsection
29-1-17G of this section. When a license or permit is found to be ineligible
for renewal through the appeal process, it shall expire at such time as the
license or permit holder has exhausted or failed to exhaust the appeal
procedures described in subsection
29-1-17G of this section.
   J.   Nothing in this section shall prevent the Village from enforcing or
seeking to enforce any order of an Administrative Law Judge in any manner
provided by law. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-1-18: ELECTION OF REMEDIES:
In no case may the Office of Adjudication conduct an adjudication hearing for
an alleged code violation where the remedy provided for is a punishment of
imprisonment. Nothing in this chapter, however, shall preclude the Village from
petitioning a court of competent jurisdiction to adjudicate an ordinance
violation or an ordinance violation which provides the remedy of imprisonment,
or from petitioning a court of competent jurisdiction to impose the remedy of
imprisonment for failure to comply with an order of an Administrative Law
Judge. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-1-19: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The adoption by the Village of a system of administrative adjudication does not
preclude the Village from using other lawful methods to enforce municipal
ordinances. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-1-20: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted so as not to be in conflict
with the laws of the State or any other limitations imposed by law. In the
event, however, that any section, provision, sentence, or clause of this
chapter is declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, that
determination will not affect the other remaining provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
ARTICLE 2
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF PARKING VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
29-2-1: Purpose; Scope; Adoption Of Rules And Regulations
29-2-2: Distribution Of Notices And Keeping Of Records
29-2-3: Violation; Penalty
29-2-4: Prima Facie Responsibility For Violation And Penalty
29-2-5: Notice Of Violation; Issuance Of Notice
29-2-6: Adjudication Hearings
29-2-7: Adjudication By Mail Or Online
29-2-8: Response To A Notice Of Violation; Failure To Respond; Default
29-2-9: Final Determination Of Parking Liability
29-2-10: Additional Penalty For Failure To Pay Fines And Penalties Imposed By A
Final Determination Of Liability
29-2-11: Setting Aside A Final Determination Of Liability
29-2-12: Service And Mailing Of Notices
29-2-13: Immobilization Program
29-2-14: Driver's License Suspension
29-2-15: Lessor Of Vehicle Not Liable For Violations; When
29-2-16: Effective Date
29-2-17: Installment Payment Plans
29-2-18: Early Payment Installment Plans
29-2-1: PURPOSE; SCOPE; ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   The purpose of this article is to provide for the administrative
adjudication of violations of the ordinances enumerated in subsection
29-2-3B of this article regulating motor vehicular (hereinafter, "vehicular",
"vehicle") standing, parking, and compliance within the Village (collectively,
"parking") and to establish a fair, equitable, and efficient system for the
enforcement of such ordinances. For purposes of this article, the term
"compliance violation" means a violation of a Code provision governing the
condition or use of equipment on a vehicle or governing the display of a
Municipal Wheel Tax license. The administrative adjudication system set forth
in this article is established pursuant to section 11-208.3 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, which authorizes any
municipality to provide by ordinance for a system of administrative
adjudication of vehicular standing, parking and compliance violations, and
pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1 et seq., which authorizes
home rule municipalities to enact a system of administrative adjudication of
municipal code violations.
   B.   The Director of the Office of Adjudication, or his designee, shall
perform the following enumerated duties of the Village Traffic Compliance
Administrator for the purpose of administering the adjudication program:
      1.   Adopt, distribute, and process parking violation notices and
additional notices;
      2.   Collect money paid as fines and penalties for violations of parking
ordinances;
      3.   Establish procedures in accordance with this chapter necessary for
the prompt, fair and efficient operation of the administrative adjudication
system; and
      4.   Adopt rules and regulations pertaining to the hearing process, the
selection and appointment of Administrative Law Judges, the content of forms
and procedures, and the daily operation of the administrative adjudication of
parking violations program. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-2-2: DISTRIBUTION OF NOTICES AND KEEPING OF RECORDS:
   A.   The Director or his designee shall distribute parking violation notices
to parking enforcement officers, other persons authorized to issue parking
violation notices and the Police Department for issuance pursuant to section
29-2-5 of this article. Notices shall be distributed either in paper, or
electronic or other computerized form in a manner which assures the maintenance
of a record for each set of notices issued to all persons authorized to issue
parking violation notices.
   B.   The Director or his designee shall compile and maintain complete and
accurate records relating to all parking violation notices issued pursuant to
section
29-2-5 of this article and the dispositions thereof. Notwithstanding any of the
foregoing, the Director shall compile and maintain records of adjudicated
parking violation notices. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-2-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation of subsection
29-2-3B of this section prohibiting or restricting vehicular standing or
parking, shall be a civil offense punishable by applicable fines and penalties,
provided for in chapter 15, article 5 of this code, and no criminal penalty, or
civil sanction other than that prescribed in said chapter 15, article 5 of this
code shall be imposed.
This section shall not be construed to limit the Village's power to enforce
orders of an Administrative Law Judge in accordance with the procedures set
forth in section
29-1-17 of this chapter.
   B.   Determination of liability for notices of violation issued for
violations of chapter 15 of this code, and no other chapter of this code, shall
be pursuant to the administrative adjudication provisions of this article.
However, the system of administrative adjudication of code violations
established in article 1 of this chapter shall apply to the adjudication of
parking, standing and compliance violations unless specifically excluded
therein or unless a contrary provision is specifically set forth in this
article. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-2-4: PRIMA FACIE RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Whenever any vehicle is in violation of any provision of this code regulating
vehicular parking, standing, or compliance, any person, whether owner in whose
name the vehicle is registered with the Secretary of State of Illinois or other
state's registry of motor vehicles or lessee shall be prima facie responsible
for the violation and subject to the applicable fine or penalty. (Ord. 2003-0-
42, 10-7-03)
29-2-5: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; ISSUANCE OF NOTICE:
   A.   Whenever any vehicle exhibits a violation of any provision of this code
regulating vehicular parking, standing, or compliance, any police officer,
parking enforcement officer, or other person authorized by the Village to issue
parking violation notices who observes such violation may issue a notice of
parking violation in the form set forth in subsection
29-2-5B of this section and shall serve the notice on the registered owner of
the vehicle by handing it to the operator of the vehicle, if he or she is
present, or by affixing it to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. The issuer of
the notice shall specify on the notice his or her identification number, the
particular ordinance allegedly violated, the make and State registration number
or the vehicle identification number (VIN) of the cited vehicle, and the place,
date, time and nature of the alleged violation. The issuer shall certify the
correctness of the specified information by signing his or her name at the time
of service as provided in section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or, in
the case of a computer generated notice, by signing a single certificate to be
kept by the Village Parking Services Manager or his/her designee attesting to
the correctness of all notices produced by the device while it was under his or
her control.
   B.   In addition to the information specified in subsection
29-2-5A of this section, parking violation notices shall state the applicable
fine, the monetary penalty which shall be automatically assessed for late
payment, that payment of the stated fine and of any applicable penalty for late
payment shall operate as a final disposition of the violation, information as
to the availability of a hearing in which the violation may be contested on its
merits, and the time and manner in which a hearing may be requested.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the registered owner of
the vehicle or his designee, to remove from a vehicle a parking violation
notice affixed pursuant to this chapter. The fine for a first time violation of
this section shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Subsequent
violations shall be penalized by imposition of a five hundred dollar ($500.00)
fine. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-2-6: ADJUDICATION HEARINGS:
   A.   Administrative Law Judges: Administrative hearings for the in person
adjudication of notices of parking violations, or hearings to review materials
submitted in writing for the adjudication of parking violations shall be held
by an Administrative Law Judge appointed by the Director of the Office of
Adjudication and conducted in accordance with article 1 of this chapter.
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, in the event of a conflict between
article 1 of this chapter and this article, the latter shall be controlling.
   B.   Manner Of Requesting Hearing: A respondent served with a notice of
violation in accordance with this article may request an administrative
adjudication hearing within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice of
violation in the manner provided on the notice of violation.
   C.   Time For Holding Hearing: Hearings shall be held with reasonable
promptness after a request is received; provided, that the respondent shall
have at least seven (7) days' prior notice of the date, time and place of an in
person adjudication.
   D.   Notice Of Adjudication Hearing: Where a respondent makes a timely
request for an administrative adjudication hearing to contest the cited
violation, the Director shall cause a notice of hearing to be sent to the
respondent indicating the date, time and location of the hearing. The notice of
hearing shall be sent to the respondent in the manner set forth in section
29-2-12 of this article.
   E.   Standard Of Proof: No violation may be established except upon proof by
a preponderance of the evidence, however, a violation notice executed and
served in the form and manner set forth in this article shall be prima facie
evidence of the facts set forth therein.
   F.   Grounds For Contesting Violation: A respondent may contest a parking
violation on its merits limited to one or more of the following grounds with
appropriate evidence to support:
      1.   The respondent was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle at
the time of the violation;
      2.   The cited vehicle or its state registration plates were stolen at
the time the violation occurred;
      3.   The relevant required signs prohibiting or restricting parking were
missing or obscured;
      4.   The subject parking meter was inoperable or malfunctioned through no
fault of the respondent;
      5.   The facts alleged in the parking violation notice are not correct,
are materially inconsistent or do not support a finding that the specified
regulation was violated.
   G.   Testimony At Hearings: All testimony shall be under oath or
affirmation, which oath shall be administered by the Administrative Law Judge.
A respondent who appears by an attorney shall not be compelled to attend the
hearing and may submit his or her testimony, if any, by affidavit. Witnesses
who have not been subpoenaed to appear at the hearing may submit testimony by
affidavit.
   H.   Determination Of Liability Or Of No Liability: Upon the conclusion of a
hearing conducted in accordance with this article, the Administrative Law Judge
shall issue a determination of no liability or of liability in the amount of
the fine and any applicable penalty for the subject violation as provided in
chapter 15, article 5 of this code. Upon issuance, the determination shall
constitute a Final Determination for purposes of judicial review under the
Administrative Review Law of Illinois. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-2-7: ADJUDICATION BY MAIL OR ONLINE:
   A.   A respondent may submit written materials to contest a parking
violation based on one or more of the grounds provided in subsection
29-2-6F of this article, by mailing, personally delivering, or submitting
online to the Office of Adjudication the following documents, materials and
information: the notice of violation, the full name, address, and telephone
number(s) of the respondent; the make, model, and year of the vehicle; any
documentary evidence to rebut the charge; and a written statement signed by the
respondent setting forth facts relevant to establishing a defense to the
charge. A legible photocopy of any documentary evidence submitted by any party
shall be accepted as the equivalent of the original document.
   B.   An Administrative Law Judge appointed by the Director of the Office of
Adjudication shall adjudicate notices of parking violations issued pursuant to
section
29-2-5 of this article, by reviewing the written materials submitted pursuant
to this section and issuing a written determination. The hearing shall be held
and conducted in accordance with article 1 of this chapter. Notwithstanding any
of the foregoing, in the event of a conflict between article 1 of this chapter
and this article, the latter shall be controlling.
   C.   No violation shall be established except upon proof by a preponderance
of the evidence; provided, however, that a parking violation notice, or a copy
thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts
specified therein.
   D.   Upon review of the materials submitted in accordance with subsection
29-2-7A of this section, the Administrative Law Judge shall enter a
determination of no liability or liability in the amount of the fine and any
applicable penalty or costs for the subject violation. Upon issuance, such
determination shall constitute a Final Determination for purposes of judicial
review under the Administrative Review Law.
   E.   Upon the Administrative Law Judge's issuance of a determination after a
hearing had in accordance with this section, the Director of the Office of
Adjudication shall cause a Notice of Determination to be sent to the respondent
in the manner provided in section
29-2-12 of this article. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-2-8: RESPONSE TO A NOTICE OF VIOLATION; FAILURE TO RESPOND; DEFAULT:
   A.   A person served with a parking violation notice pursuant to section
29-2-5 of this article shall, within fourteen (14) days from the date of the
notice: 1) pay the indicated fine, or, in the manner indicated on the notice,
either 2) submit the materials set forth in section
29-2-7 of this article to obtain an adjudication in writing; or 3) request an
administrative hearing as set forth in section
29-2-6 of this article to contest the charged violation. A response by mail or
online shall be deemed timely if postmarked or posted online within fourteen
(14) days of the issuance of the notice of violation.
   B.   If none of the actions set forth in subsection
29-2-8A of this section are taken within fourteen (14) days of the notice of
violation, then an order of default will be entered against the respondent.
Upon the issuance of an order of default, the Director shall cause a notice of
default to be sent to the respondent in the manner set forth in section
29-2-12 of this article.
   C.   The Notice of Default shall specify the date and location of the
underlying violation, the make and state registration number of the cited
vehicle, the code provision violated, the applicable fine and penalty for late
payment, the deadline date to either:
      1.   Contest the citation in writing or online; or
      2.   To request an in person or remote hearing in which the default may
be vacated and the violation contested on its merits.
The Notice of Default shall also state that failure to either pay the indicated
fine and any applicable penalty, or to appear at a hearing on the merits, will
result in a Final Determination of Liability for the cited violation in the
amount of the fine and/or penalty indicated, and that, upon the occurrence of a
Final Determination of violation liability, and the exhaustion of, or failure
to exhaust, available judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or
penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the Village of Oak Park. (Ord.
2003-0-42, 10-7-03; amd. Ord. 21-93, 12-6-2021)
29-2-9: FINAL DETERMINATION OF PARKING LIABILITY:
   A.   A Final Determination of Liability will be issued in one of the
following instances:
      1.   Where a respondent fails to pay the fine and applicable late penalty
and fails to appear at a hearing on the merits at the date, time and place set
for hearing, either after respondent's request for a hearing, or as set by a
Notice of Default served upon the respondent in the manner provided in section
29-2-12 of this article; or
      2.   Where a respondent has been adjudged liable after a hearing on the
merits.
   B.   The Final Determination of Liability will be entered in the amount of
the applicable fine or penalty, plus any applicable late fee as provided in
chapter 15 of this code.
   C.   A Final Determination of Liability will be considered final for
purposes of judicial review under the Administrative Review Law upon the denial
of, or the expiration of the time in which to file, a timely petition to set
aside a determination as provided in section
29-2-11 of this article.
   D.   Upon the issuance of a Final Determination of Liability after failure
to appear at a hearing or pay the applicable fine, the Director shall cause a
Notice of Final Determination of Liability to be served on the registered owner
of the vehicle, in the manner set forth in section
29-2-12 of this article. The Notice of Final Determination shall state that the
unpaid fine or penalty is a debt due and owing the Village and shall contain
warnings that the failure to pay any fine or penalty due and owing within
thirty five (35) days of the date of the Notice may result in the Village
seeking to enforce the judgment in the Circuit Court of Cook County, the
suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to pay fines or
penalties for ten (10) or more parking violations under section 6-306.5 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, or the immobilization of the person's vehicle for
failure to pay fines and penalties for five (5) or more unpaid parking
violations as provided in this chapter.
   E.   Any fine and penalty remaining unpaid after the Notice of Final
Determination of Liability is sent shall constitute a debt due and owing the
Village. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-2003)
29-2-10: ADDITIONAL PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO PAY FINES AND PENALTIES IMPOSED BY A
FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
Where a respondent fails to pay the fine or penalty and any applicable late fee
for a parking violation within fourteen (14) days of being notified of the
issuance of a Final Determination of Liability, an additional late penalty will
automatically be imposed in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00). (Ord. 2003-
0-42, 10-7-2003; amd. Ord. 21-33, 3-15-2021)
29-2-11: SETTING ASIDE A FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
   A.   Within fourteen (14) days after the issuance of Notice of Final
Determination of Liability, the respondent may file a Petition to Set Aside a
Determination of Liability. The petition must be in writing and filed with the
Director of the Office of Adjudication in person or by mail. A petition will be
deemed timely filed if it is postmarked or received by the Director within
fourteen (14) days after the date of the Notice of Final Determination of
Liability.
   B.   Upon receipt of a timely filed Petition to Set Aside, the Director will
assign a hearing date and cause a Notice of Hearing to be sent to the
petitioner. The notice shall inform the petitioner of the date, time and place
of the hearing on the Petition to Set Aside the Final Determination of
Liability.
   C.   A Petition to Set Aside a Final Determination of Liability shall be
limited to the following grounds:
      1.   The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the
date of the violation;
      2.   The person has already paid the fine or penalty for the parking
violation in question;
      3.   Excusable failure, based upon criteria established by the Director
of Administrative Adjudication, to appear at or request a date for a hearing.
   D.   A hearing on a Petition to Set Aside a Final Determination of Liability
shall be conducted by an Administrative Law Judge. If the petition is granted,
a hearing on the merits of the original violation shall be held immediately
thereafter. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-2003)
29-2-12: SERVICE AND MAILING OF NOTICES:
The manner of serving a Notice of Default, Final Determination of Liability,
Notice of Determination, Notice of Hearing, Notice of Impending Vehicle
Immobilization, Notice of Impending Driver's License Suspension, and any other
notices generated pursuant to this article, shall be by first class mail,
postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the vehicle as
recorded with the Secretary of State of Illinois or, if the vehicle is
registered in a state other than Illinois, as recorded in such other state's
registry of motor vehicles. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-2003)
29-2-13: IMMOBILIZATION PROGRAM:
   A.   The Village Manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized to direct
and supervise a program of vehicle immobilization for the purpose of enforcing
the parking ordinances of the Traffic Code. The program of vehicle
immobilization shall provide for immobilizing any eligible vehicle located on
the public way or any Village owned property by placement of a restraint in
such a manner as to prevent its operation. Only vehicles with State
registration numbers set forth on a vehicle immobilization eligibility list may
be immobilized.
   B.   When the registered owner of one or more vehicles has accumulated five
(5) or more final determinations of parking violation liability on any and all
vehicles registered to that owner, in any combination, for which the fines and
applicable penalties, if applicable, have not been paid in full, the Village
Manager and/or his/her designee shall cause a notice of impending vehicle
immobilization to be sent to the owner of such vehicle(s) in accordance with
section
29-2-12 of this article or placed on the owner's vehicle when the owner cannot
be reached by mail. The notice of impending vehicle immobilization shall state
the name and address of the registered owner, the State registration number of
the vehicle or vehicles registered to such owner, and a list detailing serial
numbers of the parking violation notices which have resulted in a final
determination of liability for which fines and/or penalties remain unpaid.
Except as provided in section
29-2-17 of this article, failure to pay the total amount of the fines and
penalties owed within twenty one (21) days from the date of the notice will
result in the inclusion of the State registration number of all vehicles of
such owner on a vehicle immobilization eligibility list; a person will not be
removed from the immobilization eligibility list unless all outstanding tickets
are paid in full. A person may challenge the validity of the notice of
impending vehicle immobilization by requesting a hearing and appearing in
person to submit evidence which would disprove liability within twenty one (21)
days of the date of the notice. All of the above information shall also appear
in the notice. Documentary evidence which disproves liability shall be based on
the following grounds:
      1.   That all fines and penalties for the violations cited in the notice
have been paid in full; or
      2.   That the registered owner has not accumulated five (5) or more final
determinations of parking violation liability which were unpaid at the time the
notice of impending vehicle immobilization was issued.
   C.   Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a notice shall be affixed
to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. Such notice shall warn that the vehicle
is immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its
damage. The notice shall also state that the unauthorized removal of or damage
to the immobilizing restraint is a violation of subsection
29-2-13H of this section. The notice shall also state the manner in which the
immobilization device may be released, and the manner in which the registered
owner may obtain an immobilization hearing. If the owner of the vehicle has not
caused the immobilization device to be released in accordance with the
procedures established in this article within twenty four (24) hours of its
placement, the Village may release the device and may tow and impound the
vehicle.
   D.   The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other authorized person may
secure the release of the vehicle by paying the immobilization, towing and
storage fees provided in subsection
29-2-13G of this section, and all fines and penalties remaining due on each
final determination of liability issued to such person.
   E.   The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall have the right to a hearing
to determine whether the immobilization or any subsequent towing was erroneous,
if the owner files a written request with the Office of Adjudication for a
hearing with the Village Manager and/or his/her designee within fourteen (14)
days after immobilization or fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice sent
pursuant to subsection
29-2-13F of this section, whichever is later. Hearings requested pursuant to
this subsection shall be conducted by the Village Manager and/or his/her
designee upon receipt of a written request for a hearing. The determination
made by the Village Manager and/or his/her designee regarding the validity of
the immobilization shall become final.
   F.   Within ten (10) days after a vehicle has been impounded, a notice of
impoundment shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
address of the registered owner as listed with the Secretary of State. The
notice shall state that the owner has the right to request a postimmobilization
and posttow hearing as provided in subsection
29-2-13E of this section, and that if the vehicle is not claimed within thirty
(30) days from the date of the notice, the vehicle may be sold or otherwise
disposed of in accordance with sections 4-208(b) and 4-209 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code.
   G.   The fee for removal of immobilization device shall be one hundred fifty
three dollars ($153.00). Fees for towing and storage will be the current year's
Village contract price for said services.
   H.   It shall be unlawful for any person other than a Village employee or
authorized representative to remove or damage the immobilization device or to
relocate or tow any vehicle restrained by an immobilization device without the
prior approval of the Village Manager or his or her designee. Any person who
violates this section shall be subject to a penalty of seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each such violation. (Ord. 18-402, 9-17-2018, eff. 1-1-
2019)
29-2-14: DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION:
   A.   When the registered owner of a vehicle has failed to pay any fine or
penalty due and owing pursuant to this chapter on ten (10) or more parking
violations on any and all vehicles registered to that owner, the Director of
Adjudication shall cause a notice of impending driver's license suspension to
be sent to the registered owner, in accordance with section
29-2-12 of this article. The notice shall state that failure to pay the amount
owing within forty five (45) days of the date of the notice will result in the
Village sending a certified report to the Secretary of State that the person
has unpaid fines and penalties as a result of ten (10) or more parking
violations and is eligible for driver's license suspension pursuant to section
6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   B.   Except as provided in section
29-2-17 of this article, if a person sent a notice pursuant to subsection
29-2-14A of this section fails to pay the amount owing within the time stated
on the notice, the Director of Adjudication may file with the Secretary of
State a certified report, in accordance with section 6-306.5(c) of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, that the person has unpaid fines and penalties as a result of ten
(10) or more parking violations and is eligible for driver's license suspension
pursuant to section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. The Director of
Adjudication shall assess a thirty dollar ($30.00) filing fee against the
person named in the certified report with the Secretary of State.
   C.   A person named in a certified report filed pursuant to subsection
29-2-14B of this section may, within twenty one (21) days of the date of the
notice sent by the Secretary of State pursuant to section 6-306.5(b) of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, file with the Director of Adjudication a written request
for a hearing to contest the certified report. The grounds for such a challenge
shall be limited to: 1) the person not having been the owner or lessee of the
vehicle or vehicles receiving ten (10) or more parking violation notices on the
date or dates such notices were issued; or 2) the person having already paid
the fine and penalty for the ten (10) or more violations indicated on the
notice or report. Hearings pursuant to this subsection shall be conducted by an
Administrative Law Judge appointed pursuant to this chapter.
   D.   If a person named in a certified report has paid the previously
reported fines and/or penalties or if the report is determined by the Director
of Adjudication to be in error, the Director of Adjudication shall notify the
Secretary of State in accordance with section 6-306.5(d) of the Illinois
Vehicle Code. A certified copy of such notification shall be given, upon
request and at no charge, to the person named therein. (Ord. 18-359, 3-19-2018,
eff. 4-1-2018)
29-2-15: LESSOR OF VEHICLE NOT LIABLE FOR VIOLATIONS; WHEN:
   A.   In accordance with section 11-1306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, no
person who is the lessor of a vehicle pursuant to a written lease agreement
shall be liable for a violation of any standing or parking regulation involving
such vehicle during the period of the lease, if, upon receipt of a notice of
violation sent within one hundred twenty (120) days of the violation, he shall,
within sixty (60) days thereafter, provide to the Director of Adjudication, the
name and address of the lessee.
   B.   Upon receipt of a lessor's notification of the name and address of the
lessor's lessee, provided pursuant to section 11-1305 or 11-1306 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, the Director of Adjudication shall cause a notice of
violation to be sent to the lessee as provided for in section 29-2-12 of this
article. The lessee of the vehicle shall be afforded the same opportunities to
contest the notice of violation as are afforded to the registered owner. (Ord.
2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-2-16: EFFECTIVE DATE:
All notices of violations of chapter 15 of this Code issued after December 31,
2003, shall be subject to the administrative adjudication procedures provided
for herein. (Ord. 2003-0-42, 10-7-03)
29-2-17: INSTALLMENT PAYMENT PLANS:
   A.   Program Established: A program is established pursuant to this section
to allow the payment of parking, standing or compliance penalties,
administrative fees, and related collection costs in installments when payment
is overdue.
   B.   Definitions: The following words and phrases as set forth in this
section shall have the meanings, and are hereby defined, as follows:
   ACTIVE MILITARY DUTY: The period beginning on the date of entering active
military duty and ending one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of
discharge from active duty.
   ADMINISTRATIVE FEE: A fee of two dollars ($2.00) for each individual payment
of an installment payment plan to reimburse the Village for the expenses and
time incurred by the Village or its agents to administer or monitor a vehicle
owner's installment plan.
   COLLECTION COSTS: The expenses and time incurred by the Village or its
agents to collect any debt due and owing for a parking, standing or compliance
violation, including attorneys' fees.
   DEBT DUE AND OWING: A specified sum of money owed to the Village for fines
and penalties for a parking, standing or compliance violation after: 1) the
period granted for payment has expired; or 2) the exhaustion of, or the failure
to exhaust, judicial review procedures.
   DIRECTOR: The Director of the Office of Adjudication.
   FINANCIAL CIRCUMSTANCES: Wages, savings, credit, monthly expenditures,
likelihood to default, and any other factors that the Director finds relevant
to a person's ability to pay parking, standing or compliance fines and
penalties.
   NOTICE OF FORECLOSURE: A notice of foreclosure shall be as defined in
section 15-1211 of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, 735 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/15-1211.
   PRIMARY RESIDENCE: A residential dwelling unit which is owner-occupied.
   QUALIFYING HARDSHIP PARTICIPANT: A person who is: 1) a participant in one of
the following programs: the Illinois Low- Income Home Energy Assistance Program
(LIHEAP); the Housing Subsidy Program for Renters, administered by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development under the Federal Housing
Act of 1937, as amended (Section 8 Program); the Supplemental Security Income
Program administered by the United States Social Security Administration (SSI);
the Medicaid Program administered by the Illinois Department of Public Aid; the
Nutrition Assistance Program administered by the United States Department of
Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service (food stamps); the Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families (TANF) program administered by the United States Department
of Health and Human Services, the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for
Women, Infants, and Children (WIC); and any Federal or State unemployment
compensation system, including, but not limited to, the system of unemployment
compensation established under the Illinois Unemployment Insurance Act, as
amended; or 2) a high school, college, vocational school or trade school
student with a valid school identification card; a person sixty five (65) years
of age or older; a person who has claimed the Earned Income Tax Credit on his
State or Federal individual Income Tax return for the most recent tax year; a
person receiving workers' compensation income benefits; an active military duty
service member, a Reservist or a member of the National Guard while on active
duty; a person whose liability for fines and penalties remains after obtaining
a bankruptcy discharge; or a person who has received a notice of foreclosure,
entered into a consent foreclosure, gave a deed in lieu of foreclosure, or had
a judgment of foreclosure entered, on his primary residence within three (3)
years prior to the date of the application for an installment plan pursuant to
this section.
   STUDENT: A person who is: 1) enrolled attendees of a high school, college,
vocational school or trade school; or 2) who has graduated from a high school,
college, vocational school or trade school no more than one hundred eighty
(180) days prior to applying for an installment plan.
   C.   Scheduled Duration: Except as provided in subsection
29-2-17D of this section, an installment plan may not have a scheduled duration
of more than six (6) months, and shall require one payment due per month on a
day specified in the executed plan.
   D.   Exceeding The Duration: Except as otherwise provided in subsections
29-2-17E and F of this section, the duration may exceed six (6) months but may
not exceed twelve (12) months for installment plans negotiated and executed
for: 1) vehicle owners whose maximum amount of combined liability for fines and
penalties, administrative fees, and any related collection costs exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00); or 2) vehicle owners who are qualifying hardship
participants.
   E.   Installations Exceeding One Hundred Dollars: If the monthly
installments during a twelve (12) month period would exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00) per month and the Director or the Director's designee determines that
the registered owner's financial circumstances warrant extending the plan, the
Director may negotiate and execute plans up to twenty four (24) months;
   F.   Installations Exceeding Two Hundred Dollars: If the monthly
installments during a twelve (12) month period would exceed two hundred dollars
($200.00) per month and the Director or the Director's designee determines that
the registered owner's financial circumstances warrant extending the plan, the
Director may negotiate and execute plans up to thirty six (36) months.
   G.   Administrative Fee: An administrative fee as defined in this section
shall be charged to the vehicle owner; provided that such administrative fee
shall be waived if the vehicle owner: 1) is a qualifying hardship participant;
or 2) has been assessed collection costs.
   H.   Minimum Initial Payment: The minimum initial payment under any
installment plan for vehicle owners prior to: 1) the vehicle being immobilized
or impounded; or 2) the vehicle owner's driver's license being suspended
pursuant to section 5/6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5, shall be an amount which the Director deems
appropriate for the vehicle owner's combined liability for fines and penalties,
plus accrued penalties and fees under and for immobilization, impoundment,
towing and storage to date.
   I.   Required Installment Payments: Required installment payments after the
initial payment shall be substantially equal, unless the Director determines,
based on a review of the vehicle owner's finances that installments in
different amounts will be more effective in paying off the total indebtedness.
   J.   Failure To Pay Penalties: If the vehicle owner fails to make all
required payments in a timely manner, the vehicle owner's motor vehicle shall
be subject to immobilization or impoundment, the vehicle owner's driver's
license shall be subject to suspension pursuant to section 5/6-306.5 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5, if applicable,
and the vehicle owner shall be liable for the outstanding balance plus an
additional penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   K.   Installment Plan Form: Every installment plan shall be in a form
prescribed by the Village Attorney, and shall state the total indebtedness, the
amount of the initial installment, the amount of each subsequent installment
and the date each is due, the penalty for delinquency under the installment
plan, and such other provisions as the Director may determine. The installment
plan shall also require the vehicle owner to pay every parking, standing, or
compliance fine that becomes final during the term of the installment plan. The
initial installment shall be paid when the plan is executed. Upon execution of
the agreement and payment of the initial installment, and as long as the
vehicle owner is in compliance with the installment plan, the vehicle owner's
vehicles shall not be subject to immobilization and impoundment for failure to
pay the fines and penalties described in the installment.
   L.   Vehicle Owners Not Eligible: The following vehicle owners are not
eligible for an installment plan under subsection
29-2-17A of this section:
      1.   An owner whose vehicle is impounded by the Village under any other
provision of this Code;
      2.   An owner whose driver's license has been suspended pursuant to
section 5/6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/6-306.5, or whose vehicle has been immobilized; or
      3.   An owner who has negotiated an installment plan and has not
performed every act required by the owner under the plan.
   M.   Paying More Than The Minimum: Nothing in this section shall be
construed as prohibiting a vehicle owner from voluntarily making an initial
minimum payment or monthly installment payment in an amount greater than
provided in this section.
   N.   Director Establishing Payment Plan Duration: Notwithstanding
subsections
29-2-17C and D of this section, as part of an installment payment plan entered
into under this section, for any vehicle owner who is a qualifying hardship
participant, the Director is authorized to establish the installment plan's
duration and the amount of any initial minimum payment which the Director deems
appropriate for the payment of such owner's combined liability for parking,
standing and compliance fines and penalties, plus accrued penalties and fees
for immobilization, impoundment, towing and storage to date. (Ord. 18-359, 3-
19-2018, eff. 4-1-2018)
29-2-18: EARLY PAYMENT INSTALLMENT PLANS:
   A.   Program Established: A program is established pursuant to this section
for early payment installment plans for the payment of eligible violation fines
by eligible participants prior to the time a payment has become overdue.
   B.   Definitions: The following words and phrases as set forth in this
section shall have the meanings, and are hereby defined, as follows:
   DEFAULT: The non-payment or underpayment of a monthly amount due from an
eligible participant under an early payment installment plan.
   DIRECTOR: The Director of the Office of Adjudication.
   ELIGIBLE PARTICIPANT: A person who was issued a notice under section
29-2-5 of this article or a default notice for a parking, standing or
compliance violation under section
29-2-8 of this article, but has not been issued a notice of final determination
for such violation pursuant to section
29-2-9 of this article.
   ELIGIBLE VIOLATION: A parking, standing, or compliance violation.
   C.   Early Payment Installment Plan Conditions: The early payment
installment plan shall include the following conditions:
      1.   The plan has a scheduled duration of ninety (90) days or less;
      2.   The plan requires one payment per month on a day specified in the
executed plan and the monthly payments are in equal amounts; and
      3.   The down payment is equal to the first monthly installment payment.
   D.   Upon Defaulting On Early Payment Installments: Upon defaulting on an
early payment installment plan, the eligible participant shall not be eligible
to enter into an early payment installment plan for any other eligible
violation for a period of twelve (12) months after the default.
   E.   Determination Of Liability: In the event an eligible participant
defaults on an early payment installment plan, including any underpayment of
the monthly amount due, the Director shall, no earlier than twenty five (25)
days after the default, issue a determination of liability or a notice of final
determination, whichever is applicable, in accordance with this article. (Ord.
18-359, 3-19-2018, eff. 4-1-2018)
CHAPTER 30
SPECIAL EVENTS
General Regulations   1
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
30-1-1: Definitions
30-1-2: Requirements
30-1-3: Policies And Procedures
30-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply:
APPLICANT: An individual, resident, or organization that both sponsors the
special event and applies for the permit to hold the special event in the
Village.
APPLICATION: A form or booklet prepared by the Village containing this article,
a questionnaire gathering necessary details on the nature, size, location and
requirements of the proposed special event which must be returned to the
Village, as well as imparting information about requisite evidence of
appropriate insurance.
EVENT SPONSOR: The holder of a special event permit issued by the Village.
GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF THE VILLAGE: Roughly the equivalent of one police post. The
entire Village is evenly divided into eighteen (18) police posts of relatively
equal size as set forth in the Police Post Map attached to the ordinance
codified herein.
PERMIT: The special event "permit" shall be defined as an official Village
document, signed and dated by the Village Clerk issued to and carried by the
applicant, which will indicate to any person seeking verification that this
applicant has achieved the necessary approvals and paid the necessary fees to
stage a special event in the Village.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or parking lot owned,
controlled or managed by the Village.
RESIDENTIAL BLOCK EVENT OR RESIDENTIAL PARADE (Which Are Not Considered Special
Events): Any event designed, promoted and/or conducted in order to encourage a
gathering or assembly of residents of a block or a geographic area of the
Village upon a local street or the sidewalks or parkways abutting a local
street at a specified location within an area zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-
5 where the sponsors of such event reside in the block or geographic area of
the Village where such gathering takes place. A "residential block event" may
also include activity in a Village park or on school grounds abutting the local
street.
SPECIAL EVENT: An organized, non-permanent, public gathering or assembly on
public property that is not Village sponsored or cosponsored and includes,
except as set forth in subsection C of this definition, the following:
   A.   Gatherings or assemblies that are conducted entirely or partially on
public property at a specified location for activities such as, but not limited
to, markets, ceremonies, celebrations, shows, festivals, exhibitions, pageants,
circuses, entertainment, theatrical productions, sidewalk sales, sporting
events, games or similar activity.
      1.   A public gathering or assembly shall be considered to be partially
conducted on public property only if some portion of the core activity of the
gathering or assembly occurs on or is planned to occur on public property or a
structure or structures are temporarily placed, or planned to be placed, on
public property to be part of or to serve the gathering or assembly. Temporary
signage identifying the gathering or assembly which does not damage public
property or create a public nuisance or hazard shall be permitted on the day of
the event and shall not be considered a structure for purposes of enforcing
this subsection.
   B.   Parades, or processions of any kind, which move from place to place
upon public property along a specified route and include marches, races, walks,
walk-a-thons, runs, marathons, bicycle runs, bike-a-thons, demonstrations or
similar activities that do not comply with the normal or usual traffic
regulations or controls or are likely to impede, obstruct, impair or interfere
with the free flow of vehicular traffic and/or other normal activities.
   C.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following public gatherings or
assemblies shall not be considered a special event for purposes of this
section:
      1.   Residential block events or residential parades.
      2.   Organized, non-permanent, public gatherings or assemblies which are
regulated by other Village ordinances such as, but not limited to, the Oak Park
farmers' market, the Village sponsored Fourth of July fireworks display and the
special use permit authorizing Oak Park and River Forest High School's Friday
night football games.
      3.   Organized, non-permanent, public gatherings or assemblies which only
involve normal vehicular or pedestrian use of the public way to travel from one
point to another without impeding other pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
other normal activities.
      4.   Organized, non-permanent public gatherings or assemblies which take
place only on private property or properties and only use the public way for
normal vehicular or pedestrian travel from one location to another without
impeding other vehicular or pedestrian traffic or other normal activity. The
use of volunteers to gather pedestrians at intersections to cross streets in
groups when natural breaks in traffic occur or the use of vehicles to transport
persons from one location to another, shall be considered as assisting and not
impeding, the normal flow of traffic for the purposes of this section.
      5.   Organized, nonpermanent outdoor musical performance(s) which takes
place only on private property or properties on a residential block that
require the closure of vehicular traffic at each end of the block in north and
south directions for one (1) day only with said musical performance(s) to
conclude on or before ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. All Village requirements for the
closure of the residential block for vehicular traffic shall be met by the
organizer of the musical performance(s) and the organizer of the musical
performance(s) provides the Village with the written consent of the residents
on the block for the conduct of the musical performance(s) prior to the
proposed date.
SPECIAL EVENTS COMMITTEE: A standing, internal committee appointed by the
Village Manager and formed for the purpose of reviewing, approving or denying
special events applications. The Village Clerk shall serve as Chairperson of
the committee until April 1, 2019 or until the application and permit process
is fully automated. The composition of the committee shall otherwise be at the
discretion of the Village Manager, and may include Village staff
representatives from the Police, Fire, Development Customer Services, Public
Works, Public Health.
SPONSOR: The person who applies for the special event permit and the person to
whom a special event permit is issued following successful application. (Ord.
18-439, 10-15-2018; amd. Ord. 20-008, 1-13-2020) 
30-1-2: REQUIREMENTS:
The following requirements shall be observed by special events applicants:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall knowingly or publicly promote or
advertise, sponsor, engage in, conduct or participate in, any special event
unless a permit therefor has first been obtained consistent with this section,
except that the sponsor of any annual special event which has taken place
during at least the two (2) previous consecutive years, shall be permitted at
their own risk, to publicly promote or advertise the special event for the
third and subsequent years prior to obtaining the special event permit for such
third or subsequent years.
   B.   Recurring Special Events: For recurring special events that take place
on a daily, weekly or monthly basis during a specified period of time, only one
permit shall be required per calendar year. This shall not apply to private
parties.
   C.   Application: The applicant shall submit the application to the Village
within the time frames specified in this section. The Village may accept late
applications, if time permits, with payment of a late fee. The Special Events
Committee may require reasonable supplementation of the information in the
application, if necessary, to determine those additional terms and conditions
to impose, if any, and whether to grant or deny the application.
      1.   Time frames for submission of applications:
         a.   If alcohol will be made available at the special event or more
than five hundred (500) people are anticipated to attend or participate in the
event, the application must be submitted at least ninety (90) days in advance
of the event date.
         b.   If no alcohol will be made available at the special event, the
application must be submitted at least sixty (60) days in advance of the event
date.
         c.   The foregoing time periods shall be counted so as to exclude the
day the application is submitted and the day the special event will begin.
      2.   The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         a.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
name, address and telephone number of the applicant's representatives who will
manage or direct the special event or party and who will be present during the
event;
         b.   The date or dates of the event or party and the hours during
which the applicant proposes to conduct the event;
         c.   The proposed location of the event or party and, if it is a
parade, the route to be followed;
         d.   A reproducible diagram showing the proposed layout of the event
or party including proposed, and if provided, restrooms, first aid facilities,
emergency vehicle access, tents or temporary structures, utility lines,
lighting and area restriction devices (including barricades or screening);
         e.   A narrative description of the event or party;
         f.   The number of persons expected to attend;
         g.   The number of vendors, merchants, exhibitors and units expected
to participate and the facilities expected to accommodate them;
         h.   Whether or not fireworks will be used and a copy of the
application for the State fireworks permit and request for Village Board
authorization;
         i.   Whether tents or other temporary structures will be used;
         j.   Whether or not electricity and water will be needed and the
manner in which they are to be provided;
         k.   A statement as to other types of licenses and permits, including
liquor licenses, that have been or will be applied for;
         l.   The number and type of sound amplification devices proposed to be
used as part of the event activities or party;
         m.   A general statement as to the number and type of musicians or
musical presentations proposed to be a part of the event or party.
   D.   Application Review: Upon receipt of a completed application for the
permit required by this section, the Special Events Committee shall immediately
forward copies thereof to the proper Village departments or divisions to
determine compliance with applicable Village ordinances, the effect of the
event on Village resources and the anticipated effect of the event on public
health or safety. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt by the Special Events
Committee, the respective departments or divisions shall report to the Special
Events Committee as to their findings. The respective departments or divisions
shall also recommend specific stipulations including, but not limited to, one
or more of the following:
      1.   Hiring a stated number of Village Police Department employees as
determined by the Village Police Department or, if none are available, provide
security service acceptable to the Chief of Police or his designee.
      2.   Erecting security fencing or approved security borders.
      3.   Providing sanitary facilities.
      4.   Providing refuse removal through Village service or outside
contractor.
      5.   Agreeing to pay for any additional or unforeseen costs associated
with the special event, including posting a cash deposit or performance bond if
required by the Village.
      6.   Applying for and receiving all other necessary Village permits and
approvals.
      7.   Taking all measures to provide for fire protection and the health,
safety and welfare of the public, consistent with this Code.
      8.   Hiring a stated number of Village Fire Department employees who are
emergency medical personnel having required certification levels and a stated
number of fire protection equipment as determined by the Village Fire
Department.
      9.   Any other requirements necessary to ensure that the temporary
special event or activity is conducted in a safe and appropriate manner.
Within twenty one (21) days after receipt of a completed application, the
Special Events Committee shall issue a committee decision regarding the
application.
   E.   Application Fee: There will be a nonrefundable fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per application for all special events.
   F.   Late Fee: There will be an additional fee of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for any late application. (Ord. 18-439, 10-15-2018)
30-1-3: POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Priority Of Applications: In reviewing the applications for a given
time and location, the Special Events Committee shall give priority to annual,
semiannual or other regularly scheduled or recurring special events. Resident
and Village entity applications shall have a priority over nonresident and non-
Village entity applications. If competing applications cannot be resolved on
this basis, the committee shall grant permits to the earliest completed
application received for the time and place requested.
   B.   Nondiscrimination: The Special Events Committee shall consider each
event permit application upon its merits and shall not discriminate based upon
race, creed, color, ethnicity, religion, ancestry, sex, age, disability,
national origin, sexual orientation, gender related identity, political party
affiliation (or lack thereof), familial status, or marital status.
   C.   Committee Decision: After deliberations, and due consideration of
recommendations from Village departments or divisions, the Special Events
Committee shall:
      1.   Approve the special event permit application contingent upon the
facts or the conditions set forth in subsection
30-1-3D of this section.
      2.   Approve the special event permit application with stipulations
contingent upon the facts or the conditions set forth in subsection
30-1-3D of this section.
      3.   Deny the special event permit application upon finding that the
event:
         a.   Will fail to comply with noise, health or safety regulations of
the Village or otherwise violate applicable ordinances or State Statutes;
         b.   Will unreasonably interfere with or restrict the delivery of
Village or emergency services or business or residential activity within the
proposed event area, on the proposed event area, on the proposed event route,
or other areas of the Village;
         c.   Will unreasonably conflict in time or location with other
permitted activities in the proposed event area or proposed event route; or
         d.   Will damage or destroy Village property.
      4.   Require a conference with the applicant to seek clarification and
offer suggestions or alternatives with the Special Events Committee, ultimately
making a decision following said conference in accordance with subsection
30-1-3C1, C2 or C3 of this section.
      5.   Deny the special event permit application if the applicant fails to
attend the conference required by subsection
30-1-3C4 of this section or has repeatedly violated the ordinances of the
Village with respect to special events within the past twelve (12) month
period.
   D.   Permit Issuance: If the Special Events Committee approves the special
event permit application pursuant to subsection
30-1-3C of this section, the permit document shall not be issued until all of
the following conditions are met:
      1.   The applicant meets all applicable Village Code and Federal and
State statutory requirements and obtains all applicable Village, State and
Federal permits.
      2.   The applicant directly responsible for the special event has
provided satisfactory evidence of suitable personal injury and property damage
insurance or such other insurance as deemed necessary by the Village.
      3.   The applicant has repaid the Village all amounts owed for calendar
year 2018 and forward pursuant to the terms and conditions of any special event
permits previously issued to the applicant.
      4.   The applicant meets any other applicable requirements detailed in
the application plus any applicable stipulations contained in the committee's
decision, that are required to be met as preconditions before permit issuance.
      5.   The applicant has paid the Village the fifty percent (50%) deposit
required in subsection
30-1-3I2 of this section. Failure to pay to the Village the fifty percent (50%)
deposit required in subsection
30-1-3I2 of this section shall prohibit the issuance of a permit.
      6.   The Village Clerk shall attest to the permit.
   E.   Revocation Or Cancellation:
      1.   In addition to the grounds for denial set forth above, the Special
Events Committee may, after issuance, revoke a special event permit in writing
for failure to comply with the provisions of this section, conditions placed on
the face of the permit, applicable codes or ordinances of the Village, or State
or Federal Statutes. Revocation is a final decision. The Village's Police Chief
and/or Fire Chief shall have the right to cancel a permit prior to an event due
to an emergency situation that threatens life, health or property such as
weather conditions. A permit holder shall cooperate with the Village to
dismantle and/or remove any equipment for the event and/or provide public
notice of the cancellation. A decision to cancel a permit by the Police Chief
and/or Fire Chief under this subsection shall not be subject to an appeal as
set forth in subsection
30-1-3F of this section. The revocation or cancellation of a permit by the
Village pursuant to this section or the cancellation of an event by a permit
holder shall not entitle the permit holder to a refund of the fifty percent
(50%) deposit made under subsection
30-1-3D5 of this section.
      2.   Notwithstanding any other provision in this Code, if in the judgment
of the Police Chief and/or Fire Chief, an emergency situation has been created
such that the continued use of public property by a sponsor will immediately
threaten life, health or property, the Police Chief and/or Fire Chief, or their
designees, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such
conclusion and without notice or hearing may immediately cancel the permit and
require the use of public property to immediately cease. No person shall
continue to use public property contrary to such order. A decision to cancel
the continued use of public property by the Police Chief and/or Fire Chief
under this subsection shall not be subject to an appeal as set forth in
subsection
30-1-3F of this section. A permit holder shall cooperate with the Village to
dismantle and/or remove any equipment for the event and/or provide public
notice of the cancellation. The cancellation of a permit pursuant to this
section shall not entitle the permit holder to a refund of the fifty percent
(50%) deposit made under subsection
30-1-3D5 of this section.
   F.   Appeal: The decision to deny or revoke a permit required by this
section shall be appealable by the sponsor to the Village Manager or his/her
designee. Such appeal shall be initiated by written notice to the Village
Manager before the close of the next regular Village business day after the
date of service of such denial or revocation, or such appeal shall be deemed
waived. The sponsor shall be given an opportunity to be heard by the Village
Manager or his/her designee upon any such denial or revocation within one
business day after receipt of any such notice of appeal. The Village Manager or
his/her designee may sustain or reverse the decision based upon the criteria
set forth in subsection
30-1-3C, D or E of this section. Such decision of the Village Manager or his/
her designee shall be made before the close of the next Village regular
business day following the conclusion of any such hearing. The sponsor shall
receive written notice of the Village Manager's or his/her designee's decision,
which decision shall be a final decision for the purposes of administrative
review. A decision to overturn a revocation of a permit pursuant to this
section shall entitle the event sponsor to proceed with the event. If the
revocation of the permit is sustained, the event sponsor shall not be entitled
to a refund of the fifty percent (50%) deposit made under subsection
30-1-3I2 of this section.
   G.   Conditions; Insurance; Permit Contents:
      1.   If a special event permit application required by this section is
approved by the Special Events Committee, the permit shall be issued to the
sponsor for activities and events as detailed in the application contingent
upon submission of required insurance by the applicant; provided, however, that
the Special Events Committee may also attach reasonable conditions to the
permit in order to prevent the denial of a permit and to provide for the use of
Village personnel or equipment reasonably necessitated by the conduct of the
event for crowd or traffic control. The use and deployment of Village personnel
and equipment shall be as directed by the Special Events Committee.
      2.   Prior to the issuance of the permit required by this section, the
applicant will provide the Special Events Committee with evidence of public
liability insurance insuring the sponsor and naming the Village as an
additional insured with the following minimum coverages: bodily injury
including death/occurrence/aggregate, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00);
property damage, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)/occurrence/aggregate and
liquor liability insurance, if applicable, with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit or one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and per aggregate. Insurance required by this
section shall be written by an admitted carrier licensed to do business in the
State and having at least a "B+" first division of ratings and a "VI" second
division of ratings as listed in "Best Insurance Guide", latest edition.
      3.   Upon approval of the application for a permit required by this
section, the permit shall include the following:
         a.   The approved application;
         b.   The conditions for the use of required Village personnel or
equipment;
         c.   Route or location, time, and date of event;
         d.   Reasonable conditions for the operation of the event; and
         e.   The signature of the sponsor acknowledging all requirements and
responsibilities, prior to the date of the event.
      4.   The Special Events Committee shall cause notice of permit issuance
to be sent to the Village Manager, the Police Department, the Public Works
Department, and the Fire Department.
   H.   Requirements Of Sponsor: In addition to applicable codes and
ordinances, the sponsor of a special event shall comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   Allow access to the area of the event without payment, except that
donations may be requested or fees charged for goods or services at individual
stands or booths and for tours of private property. In the event that a sponsor
seeks to charge admission to a special event, only the Village Board, by
resolution, may authorize a fee to be charged for admission to a special event.
      2.   Remove debris, trash or garbage resulting from the conduct of the
event from public property and private property within the vicinity of the
event within twenty four (24) hours after the end of the event; provided,
however, that the sponsor shall remove and lawfully dispose of any injurious
substance or material immediately after the deposit thereof. Such cleanup shall
also include the removal of trash, litter, garbage and debris from Village
trash receptacles and proper disposition of such trash, litter, garbage and
debris.
      3.   Keep fire lanes and one lane of the street accessible to emergency
vehicles.
      4.   Comply with any and all conditions placed upon the face of the
permit.
      5.   Comply with all applicable laws and ordinances.
      6.   Obtain prior approval of the Special Events Committee before any
changes are made in the operation or setup of the event as detailed in the
approved permit.
      7.   Conduct the event in such a manner that the Village is able to
continue to provide normal services to other portions of the Village and not
interrupt the orderly and safe movement of vehicle and pedestrian traffic
contiguous to the location of the event.
      8.   Move expeditiously and without unreasonable delays from point of
origin to point of termination if the event is a parade.
      9.   Be present at the scene of the event either personally or through
employees, agents or representatives who have been designated upon the permit
during the entire course of the event. At least one sponsor, employee, agent or
representative present at the event shall have in his or her possession a copy
of the approved permit.
      10.   If requested by the Special Events Committee, after the event has
taken place, attend a meeting relative to the conduct of the special event to
work toward future improvements in the coordination of that event.
   I.   Payment Of Village Services:
      1.   The sponsor of a special event, who applies for and accepts a
permit, thereby consents to the formation of a contract between the sponsor and
the Village through which the Village agrees to provide services and equipment
and the sponsor agrees to pay for same.
      2.   The sponsor of a special event shall deposit with the Village at
least seven (7) days prior to the date of the special event fifty percent (50%)
of the cost estimated by the Special Events Committee to be the direct and
reasonable cost which will be incurred by the Village to provide services and
equipment for the special event.
      3.   The Village shall issue the event sponsor a bill for the actual
amount of the additional police, fire, public health and public works services
incurred (not related to cleanup and compensation for loss or damage to Village
property) within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the event. Within thirty
(30) days after the Village's issuance of the bill, the event sponsor shall pay
to the Village the amount due less the fifty percent (50%) deposit paid by the
event sponsor.
      4.   The sponsor shall pay to the Village, within thirty (30) days after
the conclusion of the permitted event, the direct and reasonable costs incurred
by the Village to provide for cleanup of the public property if such service is
not performed by the sponsor as required herein. Additionally, the amount of
the payment required shall include compensation for loss or damage to Village
property.
      5.   Special events whose event sponsor is a governmental entity shall be
exempt from the requirements of subsection
30-1-3I4 of this section requiring payment for cleanup costs of public
property.
      6.   Annually, the Village shall issue a fee schedule for Village
personnel, services and equipment required for a special event pursuant to this
section as approved by the Board of Trustees. Such schedule shall be based upon
the Village's then current adopted budget, applicable employee wages and
benefits as determined by the then current applicable collective bargaining
agreement and appointee pay plan schedule for Village employees. The annual
schedule shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
         a.   Tent permit fee;
         b.   Temporary food service permit fee;
         c.   Any other applicable permit fee;
         d.   Liquor license fee;
         e.   Equipment, including, but not limited to, standard barricades,
cones, parking signage, road closure barricades, directional/road closure
signage;
         f.   Labor, including, but not limited to, emergency management, fire,
police, public health and other labor;
         g.   Waste pick-up and hauling, street sweeping, pre-event public
safety walk through and other similar services; and
         h.   Vehicle usage, including police, fire, emergency management,
public works, and public health vehicle usage due to the special event.
Right-of-way obstruction fees and related parking meter charges as adopted by
the Board of Trustees pursuant to section
7-8-1 of this Code shall not be applicable.
   J.   Liability Of Sponsor: Every act or omission whatsoever of the
provisions of this section by any officer, director, manager or other agent or
employee of any sponsor, or any act or omission of such persons in relation to
any other license or permit held by the sponsor in connection with an event
held pursuant to this section, shall be deemed to be the knowing act of such
sponsor. The sponsor shall be punishable in the same manner as if the act or
omission had been done or omitted by the sponsor.
   K.   Corrected Invoices For 2018: The Village shall issue a corrected
invoice for special events which occurred in 2018 as follows:
      1.   Any right-of-way obstruction and parking charges shall be reversed.
      2.   The Village shall issue revised invoices by November 14, 2018 with
payment due by December 14, 2018.
   L.   Discount Schedule For 2018 - 2020: The Village shall issue the
following discounts for event sponsors who sponsored an event that occurred on
or before October 15, 2018:
      1.   The Village shall waive thirty percent (30%) of fees set forth in
the 2018 special events fee schedule for events which occurred in 2018
excluding the application fee.
      2.   The Village shall waive twenty percent (20%) of fees set forth in
the special events fee schedule for 2019 excluding the application fee.
      3.   The Village shall waive ten percent (10%) of fees set forth in the
special events fee schedule for 2020 excluding the application fee.
   M.   Fee Schedule Beginning 2021: Beginning in calendar year 2021, one
hundred percent (100%) of all fees set forth in the special event schedule
shall be due and payable.
   N.   Fees For Prior Events: Special event permits shall not be issued to
event sponsors who have not paid applicable fees for prior events.
   O.   Discount Schedule for 2022-2023: The Village shall issue the following
discounts for event sponsors who sponsor an event during the calendar years set
forth below:
      1.   The Village shall waive twenty-five percent (25%) of the fees set
forth in the 2022 special event fee schedule for events which occurred in 2022
excluding the application fee.
      2.   The Village shall waive twenty-five (25%) of the fees set forth in
the 2023 special event fee schedule for events which occur in 2023 excluding
the application fee.
   P.   Fee Schedule Beginning 2024: Beginning in calendar year 2024, one
hundred percent (100%) of all fees set forth in the special event schedule
shall be due and payable.
   Q.   Public Conduct:
      1.   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere
with any special event for which a permit is in effect or with any person,
vehicle or animal participating or being used in such a special event.
      2.   No driver of a vehicle shall knowingly drive between the vehicles or
persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion, unless
directed by a police officer.
      3.   The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably
necessary, to restrict street access or to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a Village street or part thereof constituting a part of the
route or location of a permitted special event. The Chief of Police shall cause
posting of signs to that effect. No person shall drive, park or leave
unattended any vehicle in violation of such sign.
   R.   Disturbing Assemblies Prohibited: No person shall disturb any lawful
assemblage of people in the Village.
   S.   Mob Actions Prohibited: No person shall engage in mob action. Mob
action consists of any of the following:
      1.   The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two (2)
or more persons acting together and without authority of law;
      2.   The assembly of two (2) or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
      3.   The assembly of two (2) or more persons, without authority of law,
for the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of anyone alleged
to have violated law or for the purpose of exercising correctional powers or
regulatory powers over any person by violence. (Ord. 18-439, 10-15-2018; amd.
Ord. 22-85, 11-21-2022)
 
