VILLAGE CODE
of
PAWNEE, ILLINOIS
1994
Code current through:
Ord. 25-09, passed 8-25-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the Village of Pawnee, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 25-09, passed August 25, 2025.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions
of this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Ordinance No. 94-11
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF PAWNEE, ILLINOIS;
PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; AND
PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 5/1-2-3 of the Illinois Municipal Code, the
Village President may appoint persons to revise the Village's ordinances, and
the corporate authorities may enact an Ordinance adopting such revisions;
   WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 5/1-2-3 of the Illinois Municipal Code, the
Village retained the services of Sterling Codifiers, Inc. to revise the
Village's Ordinances, and Sterling Codifiers, Inc., after consultation with the
Ordinance Committee of the Village Board, has tendered to the Village a revised
Code of Ordinances for the Village's adoption;
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF PAWNEE, SANGAMON COUNTY, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
   SECTION 1: The book of revised ordinances entitled "Village Code of Pawnee,
Illinois 1994" prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., is hereby adopted and
enacted, and shall be treated and considered as a new and original
comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent
ordinances (except as provided in Section 7 hereof) passed by the President and
Board of Trustees on or before March 31, 1994. Said book shall be known as the
"Pawnee Code of Ordinances".
   SECTION 2: As provided in Section 1-2-1 of the Pawnee Code of ordinances,
all general ordinances of the Village of Pawnee enacted prior to March 31,
1994, are hereby repealed, except such as are included in the Pawnee Code of
Ordinances or are by necessary implication reserved from repeal (subject to the
saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the
following ordinances, which are not hereby repealed: the Personnel Code and
amendments thereto; tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances
relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other
ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract
ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the
issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or
vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond
ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the
transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the Village; and all special
ordinances.
   SECTION 3: All additions or amendments to the Pawnee Code of Ordinances,
when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the President and
Board of Trustees to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Pawnee Code of Ordinances"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
   SECTION 4: A copy of the Pawnee Code of Ordinances shall be kept on file in
the Office of the Clerk, preserved in looseleaf form. It shall be the duty of
the Clerk, or someone authorized by the Clerk, to insert in their designated
places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the
President and Board of Trustees to make the same a part of the Code when the
same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from the Code
all provisions which may from time to time be repealed by the President and
Board of Trustees. This copy of the Pawnee Code of ordinances shall be
available for all persons desiring to examine it and shall be considered the
official Code of ordinances of the Village of Pawnee, Illinois.
   SECTION 5: The Pawnee Code of Ordinances shall be in full force and effect,
after its passage, approval and publication, on July 15, 1994.
   SECTION 6: This Ordinance and the Pawnee Code of Ordinances shall be printed
and published in book or pamphlet form by order of the President and Board of
Trustees.
   SECTION 7: Ordinance No. 87-2, "An Ordinance Regulating Development in
Special Flood Hazard Areas in the Village of Pawnee, Illinois" was
inadvertently omitted from the Pawnee Code of Ordinances, and shall remain in
effect until its inclusion in an amendment to the Code of Ordinances.
Ordinances of general applicability passed after March 31, 1994 and before this
Ordinance shall remain in effect and shall be included in an amendment to the
Code of ordinances. Such ordinances include Ordinance 94-7, pertaining to
abandoned vehicles, and Ordinance No. 94-9, pertaining to stop signs.
   PASSED this 11th day of July, 1994.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/93ca910a25e602c3faf81fd60b5f2e2e3bb970f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1281.gif]
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the Board of Trustees, this Village Code is hereby
declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official Village Code of
Pawnee. This Village Code of Ordinances shall be known and cited as the PAWNEE
CODE OF ORDINANCES and is hereby published by authority of the Board of
Trustees and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation
of the Village as provided in Section
1-1-3  of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this Village Code by title in any legal documents. (1994 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The Village Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Title. (1994 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the Village Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Village Code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Village Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the Village Code. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways and Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this
Village Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this Village
Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
Village; and all special ordinances. (1994 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Village Code or by virtue of the
preceding Section, excepting as the Village Code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case, this Village Code shall be considered as amending
such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1994 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village
herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provisions; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this Village Code. (1994 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this Village Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The Board of Trustees
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this Village Code importing the
plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or
persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included,
although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter,
party or person is referred to in this Village Code by words importing the
singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or
persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be
included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to
any section of this Village Code which contains any express provision excluding
such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant
thereto.
   B.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the Village has
been changed in the content of this Village Code to "Title", "Chapter",
"Section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the Village's ordinances is not
meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1994
Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meaning herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CODE: The Code of Ordinances of the Village of Pawnee.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
Village of Pawnee".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the Village for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the Village, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the Village
of Pawnee".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The Village of Pawnee, County of Sangamon, State of Illinois.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark. (1994 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Village Code are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify
or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY 1 :
   A.   Code Violations: Unless specifically provided elsewhere, any person
found to have been in violation of any of the terms and provisions of this Code
shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). No imprisonment or failure to pay such
fine, penalty or cost shall exceed six (6) months for each offense. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. The court
may require that the offending party perform some reasonable public service
work such as, but not limited to, picking up litter in public parks or upon
public highways or performing maintenance of public facilities. A violation
hereof may be established by a preponderance of the evidence.
   B.   Misdemeanors: If, by the terms of an ordinance, an act that would be
consistent with the criminal laws of the State is declared to be a misdemeanor,
the penalty therefor shall be for a period of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary not to exceed six (6) months. The matter
shall be prosecuted under the rules of criminal procedure of the State, and the
Village shall be required to establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. (1994
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1 and 1-2-1.1.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Applicability: The penalty provided in this Chapter shall be applicable
to every section of this Village Code the same as though it were a part of each
and every separate section.
   B.   Multiple Penalties: In all cases where the same offense is made
punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Village Code,
the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Acts or Omissions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do
any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Village Code
and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach,
the provisions of this Chapter shall apply. (1994 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Village Code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
intention of the Board of Trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such
officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section
creating the duty. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election; Term; Vacancies
1-5-2: Meetings
1-5-3: Rules And Order Of Business
1-5-4: Ordinances And Resolutions
1-5-5: Compensation (Rep. by Ord. 03-07, 6-23-2003)
1-5-6: Expenditure Authority
1-5-7: Electronic Attendance At Meetings
1-5-8: Citizen Participation In Meetings
1-5-1: ELECTION; TERM; VACANCIES:
   A.   Election; Term: The village board of trustees shall consist of six (6)
members who shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term and until their
successors are elected and have qualified as is provided by statute 1 .
   B.   Vacancy: If any vacancy shall occur in the office of trustee by death,
resignation, removal or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled by election.
During the period of time that the vacancy occurs until a trustee is elected,
as provided in this section, and has qualified, the vacancy may be filled by
the appointment of a trustee by the president and remaining trustees, voting
jointly. If there is a failure to elect any village officer, or the person
elected fails to qualify, the person filling the office shall continue in
office until his successor has been elected and has qualified. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3-5-2.
1-5-2: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: Regular monthly meetings of the village board of
trustees shall be held at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on the second Monday and
fourth Monday of each month at the village hall; except when the second Monday
or the fourth Monday may be a public holiday, in which event, the said meeting
shall be held on the next day following at the same hour. Notice of said
meetings shall be as provided by statute 1 . (Ord. 74-9, 8-12-1974; amd. 1994
Code)
   B.   Adjourned Meetings: Adjourned regular meetings may be held for the
purpose of completing unfinished business begun at any regular meeting at such
time or times as may be allowed by the president and board of trustees.
   C.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called and held by
notification to each member of the board of trustees, in writing, signed by the
president or by any three (3) members of said board. Such notice may be served
personally by reading to each member or by leaving a copy thereof at the usual
place of abode of the members, at least one hour before the time fixed for such
meeting. The notice shall specify the object of the meeting, and no business
shall be transacted at any special meeting which was not mentioned in the
notice for such meeting. (1994 Code)
   D.   Open Meetings: All meetings shall be open to the public, except those
meetings exempted pursuant to the open meetings act 2 . Electronic attendance
at meetings shall be governed by section
1-5-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-04, 3-8-2010)
 
Notes
1 2. 5 ILCS 120/2.02.
2 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
1-5-3: RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The current edition of "Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern proceedings of
the village board and of all other boards and commissions of the village,
except as otherwise provided in the ordinance creating such board or
commission. (Ord. 93-14, 7-12-1993)
1-5-4: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: The provisions of this section shall govern
the passage of all ordinances and written resolutions at regular meetings of
the board of trustees of the village, which in accordance with other ordinances
and policies of the village, are held on the second and fourth Mondays of each
calendar month. The provisions of this section do not apply to ordinances and
written resolutions presented at special meetings of the board of trustees.
   B.   Placement On Agenda; Copies To Trustees: All ordinances and written
resolutions to be voted on at a regular meeting of the board of trustees shall
be filed with the village clerk or deputy clerk at or before twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon of the Friday before the regular meeting. The clerk or deputy
clerk shall cause copies thereof to be made and placed in each board member's
mailbox or mail receptacle at or before one o'clock (1:00) P.M. of the Friday
before the regular board meeting.
   C.   Late Filed Documents: If an ordinance or a written resolution is first
presented to the clerk or deputy clerk after twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the
Friday before the regular board meeting, then the clerk or deputy clerk shall,
if practicable, make copies thereof and place the copies in each board member's
mailbox or mail receptacle. Any such late filed ordinance or resolution shall
be acted upon at the regular meeting only upon a finding upon motion duly made,
seconded and passed by two-thirds (2/3) of the board members present, that an
emergency exists or that the interests of the village will be harmed if the
ordinance or written resolution is not promptly acted on. In the event that
such a motion fails, the ordinance or written resolution shall be tabled until
the next regular meeting or special meeting of the board of trustees. (Ord. 91-
15, 9-23-1991)
1-5-5: COMPENSATION 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 03-07, 6-23-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  1-6-2B2 of this title.
1-5-6: EXPENDITURE AUTHORITY:
   A.   Village President And Committee Chairs: The village president and the
chairmen and chairwomen of the various committees of the village board are
authorized to sign contracts on behalf of the village and to purchase goods and
services on behalf of the village without prior approval of the full board of
trustees where:
      1.   The value of any single transaction is less than two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00); or
      2.   The transaction has been approved by a majority of the appropriate
committee, either at a committee meeting or in cases where a committee meeting
is impracticable and the need for immediate action apparent, by polling the
members of the committee.
   B.   Department Heads: Department heads are authorized to enter into
contracts on behalf of the village or to purchase goods and services on behalf
of the village where:
      1.   The value of a single transaction does not exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00); and
      2.   It is not practicable to secure the approval of the appropriate
committee prior to the transaction.
   C.   Prior Appropriation Required: Nothing in this section shall be
construed to authorize the entering into contracts or the purchase of goods and
services where the transaction is not supported by a proper prior
appropriation. (Ord. 04-10, 8-9-2004)
1-5-7: ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
   A.   Generally: "Members of the corporate authority of the village" (defined
as village trustees and the village president, and referred to in this section
as "members"), may participate in and vote electronically at public meetings of
the village board, in accordance with this section.
   B.   Conditions: A member may attend a meeting electronically if the member
meets the following conditions:
      1.   The member shall notify the village clerk at least six (6) hours
before the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary communications
equipment can be arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical
arrangements shall result in denial of a request for remote attendance.
      2.   The member shall assert one of the following three (3) reasons why
he or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
         a.   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or
disability; or
         b.   The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the
business related to their duties with the village of Pawnee; or
         c.   The member cannot attend because of a family or other major
emergency.
         d.   Personal trips, vacations, or personal convenience shall not
constitute a valid reason for electronic attendance, such actions being at
variance with the intent of the open meetings act 1 .
   C.   Authorization To Participate:
      1.   Request For Electronic Attendance: The village clerk, after
receiving the electronic attendance request, shall promptly inform the village
president or person expected to be the presiding officer at such meeting of the
request for electronic attendance.
      2.   Notice: After establishing that there is a quorum physically present
at a meeting where the member desires to attend electronically, the presiding
officer shall state and the minutes shall record that a notice was received
from the member in accordance with this section.
      3.   Authorization And Declaration: The member shall be deemed authorized
to attend the meeting electronically unless a motion objecting to the member's
electronic attendance is made, seconded, and approved by two-thirds (2/3) of
the members physically present at the meeting. If no such motion is made and
seconded, or if any such motion fails to achieve the required vote by the
members physically present at the meeting, then the request by the member to
attend the meeting electronically shall be deemed approved by the village board
and the presiding officer shall declare the requesting member present. After
such declaration by the presiding officer, the question of a member's
electronic attendance may not be reconsidered.
      4.   Adequate Equipment Required: The member participating electronically
and members participating in person must be able to communicate effectively.
Further, the village shall make a reasonable effort to ensure that members of
the audience are able to hear all communication and votes of the member. Before
allowing electronic attendance at any meeting, the village board shall provide
equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the meeting site.
      5.   Minutes: Any member attending electronically shall be considered an
off site attendee and counted as present electronically for that meeting, if
the member is allowed to attend. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and
state specifically whether each member is physically present or present by
electronic means. A member actually attending electronically shall not count
towards a quorum.
      6.   Rights Of Remote Member: A member permitted to attend electronically
shall be entitled to express his or her comments during the meeting and
participate in the same capacity as those members physically present, subject
to all general meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted and adhered
to. The member attending electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted
as to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any member attending
electronically shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her vote
counted and recorded by the village clerk and placed in the minutes for the
corresponding meeting. A member attending electronically may leave a meeting
and return as in the case of any member, provided the member attending
electronically shall announce his or her leaving and returning.
      7.   Attendance Form: The village board shall create an attendance form
for use as a request for electronic participation and/or for a record of the
member's e-mail, telefax, or telephone request. (Ord. 10-04, 3-8-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
1-5-8: CITIZEN PARTICIPATION IN MEETINGS:
The following rules shall govern citizen participation in meetings:
   A.   Persons desiring to be recognized and speak at open meetings of the
village board or other public bodies of the village are encouraged, but are not
required, to notify the village board or other public body at least one working
day prior to the meeting of the subject matter upon which they wish to speak so
that the village and its staff can better respond to the person's concerns.
   B.   Persons addressing the village board or other public body of the
village shall be recognized at the time set forth on the agenda for the
meeting.
   C.   Prior to addressing the village board or other public body of the
village, a person shall state his or her name and give a home or business
address with telephone number or e-mail address at which the person can be
reached.
   D.   Persons shall be recognized in the order determined by the village
president or other officer presiding at the meeting. A person shall have the
floor for a maximum of five (5) minutes unless that time is extended in the
discretion of the village president or other presiding officer.
   E.   If a group of persons share a particular concern, the group will be
encouraged, but not required, to appoint one or more spokespersons to speak on
behalf of the group.
   F.   The village president or other presiding officer may in his or her
discretion limit a person's remark below the five (5) minutes provided in
subsection D of this section if the person's remarks are cumulative or
duplicative of remarks already made by some other person.
   G.   Persons addressing the village board or other public body of the
village shall do so with proper decorum and respect. The village president or
other presiding officer may terminate the presentation of any person violating
this rule. Any person found by the village president or other presiding officer
to have violated this rule on three (3) separate occasions within a calendar
year shall thereafter, for a period of at least one year, be required to submit
remarks or presentations to the village only in writing.
   H.   Persons addressing the village board or other public body at a special
meeting shall limit their remarks to items on the agenda for the special
meeting.
   I.   Presentations to the village board shall be limited to a person's
business with the village or concerns regarding village business, property,
personnel or operations. The village president or other presiding officer may
terminate any presentation to the village board which includes personal attacks
or the advancement of political, social or other agendas unrelated to the
business, property, personnel or operations of the village.
   J.   Presentations to any public body other than the village board shall be
limited to matters under the jurisdiction of such public body. The presiding
officer may terminate any presentation which includes personal attacks or
matters not under the jurisdiction of the public body.
   K.   These rules are not a limit on the village president's or other
presiding officer's authority to expel persons who have breached the peace at a
meeting. (Ord. 11-3, 2-28-2011)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Terms Of Office
1-6-2: Compensation
1-6-3: Personnel Code
1-6-4: Deputy Clerk
1-6-5: Village Administrator
1-6-1: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The terms of office of elected officers of the village, consisting of the
president and trustees, shall commence upon their being sworn into office.
Elected officers shall be sworn in at the first regular or special meeting of
the board of trustees held during the month of May following the election of
the officers. (Ord. 03-07, 6-23-2003)
1-6-2: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Employees: Employee salaries are established yearly by the board by
ordinance or resolution. Benefits and terms and conditions of employment are
governed by the village personnel code as amended from time to time.
   B.   Elected Officials:
      1.   The compensation to be paid to the village president, whose term of
office commences on or after July 1, 1990, shall be four thousand eight hundred
dollars ($4,800.00) per annum.
      2.   The compensation to be paid each village trustee shall be three
thousand six hundred dollars ($3,600.00) per annum.
   C.   Appointed Officials: The compensation to be paid to the village clerk
and to the village treasurer shall be two thousand seven hundred dollars
($2,700.00) per annum.
   D.   Frequency Of Payment: Salaries of the village president, trustees,
clerk and treasurer shall be paid monthly. (Ord. 03-07, 6-23-2003; amd. Ord.
21-01, 1-11-2021)
1-6-3: PERSONNEL CODE:
The personnel code of the village is hereby adopted by reference as if fully
set forth at length herein. Said personnel code is on file in the office of the
village clerk for public use and inspection. (1994 Code)
1-6-4: DEPUTY CLERK:
   A.   Authorization: The clerk of the village is hereby authorized to appoint
one deputy clerk.
   B.   Powers And Duties: Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-10-
9 of the Illinois municipal code, the deputy clerk shall have the power and
duty to execute all documents required by any law to be executed by the
municipal clerk and affix the seal of the clerk thereto whenever required. In
signing any document, the deputy clerk shall sign the name of the clerk
following the word "By" and the deputy clerk's own name and the words "Deputy
Clerk".
(Ord. 90-9, 7-5-1990)
1-6-5: VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:
   There is hereby created the position of Village Administrator. The
Administrator shall be appointed by the Village President, with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees, and shall serve at the President's will,
subject again to the advice and consent of the Village Board. The
Administrator's salary shall be set at appointment. The Village Administrator
shall report directly to the Village President and shall be responsible for
directing the daily activities as set by the Village President, including those
pertaining to the implementation of short and long term goals, public
relations, coordination with other taxing bodies of the Village, and oversight
of the budget, including the preparation and filing of the annual appropriation
ordinance and tax levy. In the absence of a Village Treasurer, the Village
Administrator shall also fulfill the duties of Village Treasurer. Where a
document requires a signature by the Treasurer, the Village Administrator is
authorized to execute same in his or her capacity as Treasurer. Additionally,
the Village Administrator shall provide assistance, advice and guidance to the
President and Board of Trustees which shall facilitate the Board's ability to
plan for the future, develop sound policies and procedures, and respond to the
citizenry.
(Ord. 25-06, 7-28-2025)
CHAPTER 7
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Membership In Illinois Municipal League Risk Management Association
1-7-2: Depositories Designated
1-7-3: Policy On Extraterritorial Extensions Of Utilities
1-7-1: MEMBERSHIP IN ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL LEAGUE RISK MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION:
   A.   Authorization For Membership And Contract: The Village Board does
hereby authorize and approve membership in the Illinois Municipal League Risk
Management Association and directs the President and Clerk to execute an
intergovernmental cooperation contract with the Illinois Municipal League Risk
Management Association for membership for a period of one year beginning the
date the Association commences providing risk coverage to its members and each
year thereafter unless this Section is repealed.
   B.   Contributions: The Village Treasurer is hereby directed to transmit to
the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management Association contributions as
required by the Association and as are appropriate from time to time. (Ord. 80-
7, 10-13-1980; 1994 Code)
1-7-2: DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED:
   A.   The United Community Bank of Chatham and Pawnee and the First National
Bank of Raymond and Pawnee are hereby designated as depositories of the funds
of the Village.
   B.   The Treasurer is authorized and directed to deposit funds of the
Village in said depositories upon receipt by him of the last two (2) sworn
statements of resources and liabilities which the depository bank is required
to furnish to the Commissioner of Banks and Trust Companies or to the
Comptroller of the Currency, as required by section 6 of the Public Funds Act,
30 Illinois Compiled Statutes 235/6. (Ord. 93-17, 8-23-1993)
1-7-3: POLICY ON EXTRATERRITORIAL EXTENSIONS OF UTILITIES:
On and after October 15, 1995, it shall be the policy of the Village that
utility services, including but not limited to gas, water and sewer services,
shall be provided to customers who are not located within the corporate limits
of the Village only on the condition that such customers shall annex to the
Village within six (6) months of their becoming contiguous to the Village.
Customers who become contiguous to the Village and do not annex within six (6)
months thereof shall have utility services discontinued by the Village. This
policy shall apply to all new customers after October 15, 1995. Utility
customers who were customers of the Village as of October 15, 1995, and who
were contiguous as of October 15, 1995 or become contiguous on or before
October 15, 1996, shall have until October 15, 1996 or a date six (6) months
from their becoming contiguous, whichever is later, to file an annexation
petition with the Village. (Ord. 95-26, 11-27-1995)
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE INVESTMENT POLICY
SECTION:
1-8-1: Policy
1-8-2: Scope
1-8-3: Prudence
1-8-4: Objective
1-8-5: Delegation Of Authority
1-8-6: Ethics And Conflicts Of Interest
1-8-7: Authorized Financial Dealers And Institutions
1-8-8: Authorized And Suitable Investments
1-8-9: Collateralization
1-8-10: Safekeeping And Custody
1-8-11: Diversification
1-8-12: Maximum Maturities
1-8-13: Internal Control
1-8-14: Performance Standards
1-8-15: Reporting
1-8-16: Investment Policy Adoption And Modification
1-8-1: POLICY:
It is the policy of the Village to invest public funds in a manner which will
provide the highest investment return with the maximum security while meeting
the daily cash flow demands of the entity and conforming to all State and local
statutes governing the investment of public funds. (Ord. 99-4, 4-12-1999)
1-8-2: SCOPE:
This policy includes all public funds of the Village. (Ord. 99-4, 4-12-1999)
1-8-3: PRUDENCE:
Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then
prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in
the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment,
considering the probable safety of their capital, as well as the probable
income to be derived. The standard of prudence to be used by investment
officials shall be the "prudent person" standard and shall be applied in the
context of managing an overall portfolio. (Ord. 99-4, 4-12-1999)
1-8-4: OBJECTIVE:
   A.   The primary objective, in order of priority, shall be:
      1.   Legality; conformance with Federal, State and other legal
requirements.
      2.   Safety; preservation of capital and protection of investment
principal.
      3.   Liquidity; maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet operating
requirements.
      4.   Yield; attainment of market rates of return.
   B.   The portfolio should be reviewed periodically as to its effectiveness
in meeting the Village's need for safety, liquidity, rate of return,
diversification and its general performance. (Ord. 99-4, 4-12-1999)
1-8-5: DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY:
Management and administrative responsibility for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the Treasurer who, shall establish procedures for the
operation of the investment program. (Ord. 99-4, 4-12-1999)
1-8-6: ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and
management of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to
make impartial decisions. (Ord. 99-4, 4-12-1999)
1-8-7: AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS:
The Treasurer will maintain a list of financial institutions authorized to
provide investment services. In addition, a list will also be maintained of
approved security brokers/dealers selected by creditworthiness. (Ord. 99-4, 4-
12-1999)
1-8-8: AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS:
Investments may be made in any type of security allowed for in Illinois
Statutes regarding the investment of public funds. Investments shall be made
that reflect the cash flow needs of the fund type being invested. (Ord. 99-4,
4-12-1999)
1-8-9: COLLATERALIZATION:
Funds on deposit (checking accounts, certificates of deposit, etc.) in excess
of FDIC limits must be secured by some form of collateral, witnessed by a
written agreement and held at an independent third party institution in the
name of the Village. (Ord. 99-4, 4-12-1999)
1-8-10: SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY:
All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase agreements,
entered into by the Village, shall be conducted on a delivery-versus-payment
(DVP) basis. Securities will be held by an independent third party custodian
designated by the Treasurer and evidenced by safekeeping receipts and a written
custodial agreement. (Ord. 99-4, 4-12-1999)
1-8-11: DIVERSIFICATION:
The entity shall diversify its investments to the best of its ability based on
the type of funds invested and the cash flow needs of those funds.
Diversification can be by type of investment, number of institutions invested
in, and length of maturity. (Ord. 99-4, 4-12-1999)
1-8-12: MAXIMUM MATURITIES:
   A.   To the extent possible, the Village shall attempt to match its
investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a
specific cash flow, the Village will not directly invest in securities maturing
more than two (2) years from the date of purchase.
   B.   Reserve funds may be invested in securities exceeding two (2) years if
the maturity of such investments are made to coincide as nearly as practicable
with the expected use of the funds. (Ord. 99-4, 4-12-1999)
1-8-13: INTERNAL CONTROL:
   A.   The Treasurer is responsible for establishing and maintaining an
internal control structure designed to ensure that the assets of the Village
are protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control structure shall
be designed to provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met. The
internal controls shall address the following points:
      1.   Control of collusion.
      2.   Separation of transaction authority from accounting.
      3.   Custodial safekeeping.
      4.   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments and
wire transfers. (Ord. 99-4, 4-12-1999)
1-8-14: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
This investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the parameters
specified within this policy. The portfolio should obtain a comparable rate of
return during a market/economic environment of stable interest rates. Portfolio
performance should be compared to benchmarks with similar maturity, liquidity
and credit quality as the portfolio maintained by the Illinois Public
Treasurers Investment Pool (IPTIP). (Ord. 99-4, 4-12-1999)
1-8-15: REPORTING:
The Treasurer shall prepare an investment report at least monthly. The report
should be provided to the Village Board and available on request. The report
should be in a format suitable for review by the general public. An annual
report should also be provided to the Village Board. A statement of the market
value of the portfolio shall be issued to the Village Board quarterly. (Ord.
99-4, 4-12-1999)
1-8-16: INVESTMENT POLICY ADOPTION AND MODIFICATION:
The investment policy has been adopted by ordinance. The policy shall be
reviewed on an annual basis by the Treasurer, and any modifications made
thereto shall be made by ordinance. (Ord. 99-4, 4-12-1999)
CHAPTER 9
VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEE ETHICS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Definitions
1-9-2: Prohibited Political Activities
1-9-3: Gift Ban; General Rule
1-9-4: Exceptions To General Rule
1-9-5: Disposition Of Gifts
1-9-6: Ethics Advisor
1-9-7: Penalties
1-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy
in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a
regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 1 .
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
3 of the Illinois public labor relations act 2 .
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited
to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as
a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does
not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time,
compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence.
With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated
time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is
executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work
time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of
the election code 3 .
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village, whether on a full time or part time
basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and
control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is
to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or
other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a)
compensation for employment, b) service credit towards pension benefits, and c)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by
statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code 4 , but only with regard to those activities
that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
   A.   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting,
political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
   B.   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
   C.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   D.   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   E.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   F.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   G.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   H.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   I.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   J.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
   K.   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   L.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   M.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against
any referendum question.
   N.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   O.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   A.   Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer or 2) by an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   B.   Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer or 2) with
an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   C.   Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee,
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
   D.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
VILLAGE: The village of Pawnee, Illinois. (Ord. 04-05, 5-10-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
2 2. 5 ILCS 315/3.
3 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
4 2. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
1-9-2: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the village in
connection with any prohibited political activity.
   B.   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as
part of that officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment,
or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal
time off).
   C.   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   D.   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this chapter.
   E.   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or 2) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 04-05, 5-10-
2004)
1-9-3: GIFT BAN; GENERAL RULE:
Except as permitted by this chapter, no officer or employee, and no spouse of
or immediate family member living with any officer or employee (collectively
referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any
gift from any "prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is otherwise
prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer
or make a gift that violates this section. (Ord. 04-05, 5-10-2004)
1-9-4: EXCEPTIONS TO GENERAL RULE:
Section
1-9-3 of this chapter is not applicable to the following:
   A.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public.
   B.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
   C.   Any: 1) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or
2) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
   D.   Educational materials and missions.
   E.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
   F.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual
as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt,
great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather,
grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother,
stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and
including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's
spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
   G.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: 1) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; 2)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and 3) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
   H.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: 1) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or 2) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food
or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
   I.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
   J.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this
act, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee
from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means any gift
given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
   K.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
   L.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar
year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other. (Ord. 04-05, 5-10-2004)
1-9-5: DISPOSITION OF GIFTS:
An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living
with the officer or employee, does not violate this chapter if the recipient
promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to
its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate
charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the
internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or
succeeded. (Ord. 04-05, 5-10-2004)
1-9-6: ETHICS ADVISOR:
The village attorney shall be the ethics advisor for the village. As such, the
village attorney shall provide guidance to the officers and employees of the
village concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and state ethics laws. (Ord. 04-05, 5-10-2004)
1-9-7: PENALTIES:
Persons violating this chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per offense. Violations shall be prosecuted by
the village attorney at the specific request of a majority of corporate
authorities upon motion made, seconded and adopted. In any case where a member
of the corporate authority is accused of a violation of this chapter, such
member shall abstain from any such vote. In any case of an alleged violation of
this chapter by the village attorney or by a member of the corporate
authorities, the village shall obtain separate counsel to handle the
prosecution. In a case where the corporate authorities believe a criminal act
has occurred, they may direct the village attorney to refer the matter to the
state's attorney for prosecution. (Ord. 04-05, 5-10-2004)
CHAPTER 10
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION
SECTION:
1-10-1: Definitions
1-10-2: Policy
1-10-3: Individual Privacy Protected
1-10-4: Public Records Available
1-10-5: Freedom Of Information Act Officer
1-10-6: Requests To Be In Writing
1-10-7: Fees
1-10-8: Time Limit For Compliance With Request
1-10-9: Extension Of Time Limit (Noncommercial Purpose); Notice
1-10-10: Unduly Burdensome Requests
1-10-11: Certain Information Exempt From Inspection And Copying
1-10-12: Notice Of Denial Of Request; Request For Review
1-10-13: Public Access Counselor; Opinions
1-10-14: Granting Of Request; Procedure For Inspection
1-10-15: Written Request Not Required For Certain Documents
1-10-16: Special Provisions Pertaining To Certain Law Enforcement Records
1-10-17: Dissemination Of Information About Public Bodies
1-10-18: List Of Categories Of Records
1-10-19: Appendix A; Exempt Materials Per The FOIA
1-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COMMERCIAL PURPOSE: The use of any part of a public record or records, or
information derived from public records, in any form for sale, resale, or
solicitation or advertisement for sales or services. For purposes of this
definition, requests made by news media and nonprofit, scientific, or academic
organizations shall not be considered to be made for a "commercial purpose"
when the principal purpose of the request is: a) to access and disseminate
information concerning news and current or passing events, b) for articles of
opinion or features of interest to the public, or c) for the purpose of
academic, scientific, or public research or education.
COPYING: The reproduction of any public record by means of any photographic,
electronic, mechanical, or other process, device or means now known or
hereafter developed and available to the village.
EXEMPT MATERIALS: Materials which are exempt from disclosure pursuant to
sections 7 and 7.5 of the freedom of information act. See section
1-10-19 of this chapter.
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT OR FOIA: The Illinois freedom of information act, 5
Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/1.1 et seq.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, organization, or
association, acting individually or as a group.
PRIVATE INFORMATION: Unique identifiers, including a person's social security
number, driver's license number, employee identification number, biometric
identifiers, personal financial information, passwords or other access codes,
medical records, home or personal telephone numbers, and personal e-mail
addresses. Private information also includes home address and personal license
plates, except as otherwise provided by law or when compiled without
possibility of attribution to any person.
PUBLIC ACCESS COUNSELOR: An Illinois attorney general office appointee
responsible for various duties described in section 9.5 of the Illinois freedom
of information act and section 7 of the attorney general act 1 . Contact
information for the public access counselor is as follows:
   Public Access Bureau
   500 S. 2nd Street
   Springfield, IL 62706
   217-558-0486
   publicaccess@atg.state.il.us
PUBLIC RECORD: All records, reports, forms, writings, letters, memoranda,
books, papers, maps, photographs, microfilms, cards, tapes, recordings,
electronic data processing records, electronic communications, recorded
information and all other documentary materials pertaining to the transaction
of public business, regardless of physical form or characteristics, having been
prepared by or for, or having been or being used by, received by, in the
possession of, or under the control of the village.
   "Public record" also includes the following:
   A.   All records relating to the obligation, receipt, and use of public
funds.
   B.   Certified payroll records submitted to the village under section 5(a)
(2) of the prevailing wage act 2  are public records; except that contractors'
employees addresses, telephone numbers, and social security numbers must be
redacted by the village prior to disclosure.
   C.   Arrest reports (except for arrests of persons under the age of 21
subject to the juvenile court act of 1987). (See section
1-10-16 of this chapter for further provisions with respect to arrest reports.)
   D.   Criminal history records (except for arrests of persons under the age
of 21 subject to the juvenile court act of 1987), including, but not limited
to:
      1.   Court records that are public;
      2.   Records that are otherwise available under state or local law; and
      3.   Records in which the requesting party is the individual identified,
except as provided under section 7(1)(d)(vi) of the freedom of information act
3 .
VILLAGE: The village of Pawnee, Illinois. (Ord. 10-01, 1-25-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 15 ILCS 205/7.
2 2. 820 ILCS 130/5.
3 1. 5 ILCS 140/7.
1-10-2: POLICY:
It is declared to be the public policy of the village that all persons are
entitled to full and complete information regarding the affairs of the village.
The official acts and policies of the public officials and public employees of
the village shall be consistent with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 10-01, 1-
25-2010)
1-10-3: INDIVIDUAL PRIVACY PROTECTED:
This chapter is not intended to be used to violate individual privacy or to
disrupt the duly undertaken work of the village. (Ord. 10-01, 1-25-2010)
1-10-4: PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE:
The village shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all
public records, as provided in the freedom of information act. (Ord. 10-01, 1-
25-2010)
1-10-5: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT OFFICER:
The village shall designate one or more officials or employees to act as its
freedom of information act officer ("FOIA officer"). The chief of police is
hereby designated as deputy FOIA officer for FOIA requests involving the police
department and the village attorney is designated as deputy FOIA officer in the
place and stead of the FOIA officer if the FOIA officer is unavailable. Except
in instances when records are furnished immediately, the FOIA officer, or
designee, shall receive requests submitted to the village under this chapter
and issue responses accordingly. All village officers and employees who receive
an FOIA request from any source whatsoever shall notify the FOIA officer within
one working day. If the FOIA officer is not available, the village attorney
shall be notified.
Upon receiving a request for a public record, the FOIA officer shall:
   A.   Note the date the village receives the written request;
   B.   Compute the day on which the period for response will expire and make a
notation of that date on the written request;
   C.   Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request, including
all documents submitted with the request until the request has been complied
with or denied; and
   D.   Create a file for the retention of the original request, a copy of the
response, a record of written communications with the requester, and a copy of
other communications.
The village FOIA officer and deputies shall, by July 1, 2010, successfully
complete an electronic training curriculum to be developed by the public access
counselor and thereafter successfully complete an annual training program.
Thereafter, whenever a new FOIA officer is designated by the village, that
person shall successfully complete the electronic training curriculum within
thirty (30) days after assuming the position. Successful completion of the
required training curriculum within the periods provided shall be a
prerequisite to continue serving as an FOIA officer. (Ord. 10-01, 1-25-2010)
1-10-6: REQUESTS TO BE IN WRITING:
All requests for inspection or copying of public records shall be in writing
and shall be addressed to the FOIA officer. The requester shall include the
following information in any request for public records:
   A.   The requester's full name, mailing address and telephone number at
which the requester can be reached during normal business hours;
   B.   A description of the records sought, as specific as possible;
   C.   An indication of whether the records are requested for a commercial
purpose and whether the requester seeks a fee waiver; and
   D.   A statement as to whether the request is for inspection, copying, or
both.
The FOIA officer shall make available a form for use by requesters; however, no
request shall be denied for failure to use the form.
All requests for inspection and copying received by the village shall
immediately be forwarded to its FOIA officer or designee. (Ord. 10-01, 1-25-
2010)
1-10-7: FEES:
   A.   The village hereby establishes and shall charge fees reasonably
calculated to reimburse its actual cost for reproducing and certifying public
records and for the use, by any person, of the equipment of the village to copy
records. Such fees exclude the costs of any search for and review of the
record, and shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction and certification,
unless otherwise provided by state statute. The charge for copying shall be ten
cents ($0.10) per page for photocopies, five cents ($0.05) per page for
computer printouts, and two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) per audiotape, CD, or
DVD. No fees shall be charged for the first fifty (50) pages of black and
white, letter or legal sized copies requested by a requester. If the village
provides copies in color or in a size other than letter or legal, it shall
charge the actual cost for reproducing the records. In calculating the actual
cost for reproducing records or for the use of the equipment of the village to
reproduce the records, the village shall not include the costs of any search
for and review of the records or other personnel costs associated with
reproducing the records. The cost for certifying a record shall be one dollar
($1.00).
   B.   Documents shall be furnished without charge or at a reduced charge
where the village determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the
public interest because furnishing information can be considered as primarily
benefiting the general public. Waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public
interest if the principal purpose of the request is to access and disseminate
information regarding the health, safety and welfare or the legal rights of the
general public and is not for the principal purpose of personal or commercial
benefit. For purposes of this subsection, "commercial benefit" shall not apply
to requests made by news media when the principal purpose of the request is to
access and disseminate information regarding the health, safety, and welfare or
the legal rights of the general public. In setting the amount of the waiver or
reduction, the village may take into consideration the amount of materials
requested and the cost of copying them. (Ord. 10-01, 1-25-2010)
1-10-8: TIME LIMIT FOR COMPLIANCE WITH REQUEST:
   A.   Compliance With Request (Noncommercial Purpose): The village shall
either comply with or deny a request for public records within five (5)
business days after its receipt. If the village fails to respond to a request
within the requisite periods in this section but thereafter provides the
requester with copies of the requested public records, it may not impose a fee
for such copies. If the village fails to respond to a request received, it may
not treat the request as unduly burdensome under section
1-10-10 of this chapter. Denials shall be in writing and in accordance with
section
1-10-12 of this chapter.
   B.   Compliance With Request (Commercial Purpose): The village shall respond
to a request for records to be used for a commercial purpose within twenty one
(21) working days after receipt. The response shall:
      1.   Provide to the requester an estimate of the time required by the
village to provide the records requested and an estimate of the fees to be
charged, which the village may require the person to pay in full before copying
the requested documents,
      2.   Deny the request pursuant to one or more of the exemptions set out
in this chapter,
      3.   Notify the requester that the request is unduly burdensome and
extend an opportunity to the requester to attempt to reduce the request to
manageable proportions, or
      4.   Provide the records requested.
Unless the records are exempt from disclosure (see section
1-10-19 of this chapter), the village shall comply with a request within a
reasonable period considering the size and complexity of the request, and
giving priority to records requested for noncommercial purposes. No person
shall knowingly obtain a public record for a commercial purpose without
disclosing that it is for a commercial purpose, if requested to do so by the
village. (Ord. 10-01, 1-25-2010)
1-10-9: EXTENSION OF TIME LIMIT (NONCOMMERCIAL PURPOSE); NOTICE:
   A.   The time limit prescribed in subsection
1-10-8A of this chapter may be extended in each case for not more than five (5)
additional business days from the original due date for any of the following
reasons:
      1.   The requested records are stored in whole or in part at other
locations other than the office having charge of the requested records.
      2.   The request requires the collection of a substantial number of
specified records.
      3.   The request is couched in categorical terms and requires an
extensive search for the records responsive to it.
      4.   The requested records have not been located in the course of routine
search and additional efforts are being made to locate them.
      5.   The requested records require examination and evaluation by
personnel having the necessary competence and discretion to determine if they
are exempt from disclosure under the terms of the Illinois freedom of
information act or should be revealed only with appropriate deletions.
      6.   The request for records cannot be complied with by the village
within the time limits prescribed by the foregoing subsection without unduly
burdening or interfering with the operations of the village.
      7.   There is a need for consultation, which shall be conducted with all
practicable speed, with another public body or among two (2) or more components
of a public body having a substantial interest in the determination or in the
subject matter of the request.
   B.   The person making a request and the village may agree in writing to
extend the time for compliance for a period to be determined by the parties. If
the requester and the village agree to extend the period for compliance, a
failure by the village to comply with any previous deadlines shall not be
treated as a denial of the request for the records.
   C.   When additional time is required for any of the above reasons, the FOIA
officer shall notify the person making the request, by letter, within the five
(5) business days after receipt of the request, of the reasons for the delay
and the date by which the records will be made available or denial will be
forthcoming. In no instance may the delay in processing last longer than five
(5) business days. A failure to render a decision within the time permitted for
extension shall be considered a denial of the request.
   D.   If the village fails to respond to a request within the time permitted
for extension but thereafter provides the requester with copies of the
requested public records, the village may not impose a fee for those copies. If
the village requests an extension and subsequently fails to respond to the
request, it may not treat the request as unduly burdensome under section
1-10-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-01, 1-25-2010)
1-10-10: UNDULY BURDENSOME REQUESTS:
   A.   Requests calling for all records falling within a category shall be
complied with unless compliance with the request would be unduly burdensome for
the village, there is no method of narrowing the request, and the burden on the
village strongly outweighs the public interest in the information. Before
invoking this exemption, the village shall extend to the person making the
request an opportunity to confer with it in an attempt to reduce the request to
manageable proportions. If the village responds to a categorical request by
stating that compliance would unduly burden its operation and the conditions
described above are met, it shall do so in writing signed by the FOIA officer
specifying the reasons why it would be unduly burdensome and the extent to
which compliance will so burden the operation of the village. Such a response
shall be treated as a denial of the request for information.
   B.   Repeated requests for the same public records by the same person shall
be deemed unduly burdensome. Repeated requests from the same person for the
same records that are unchanged or identical to records previously provided or
properly denied under this chapter shall be deemed unduly burdensome. (Ord. 10-
01, 1-25-2010)
1-10-11: CERTAIN INFORMATION EXEMPT FROM INSPECTION AND COPYING:
Information exempted by sections 7 and 7.5 of the freedom of information act
shall be exempt from inspection and copying (see section
1-10-19 of this chapter). If a record contains both exempt and nonexempt
information, the village may elect to redact the information that is exempt and
make the remainder of the record available for inspection and copying.
Moreover, information described in items (iii) through (vi) of subsection C of
the definition for "public record" may be withheld if it is determined that
disclosure would: a) interfere with pending or actually and reasonably
contemplated law enforcement proceedings conducted by any law enforcement
agency; b) endanger the life or physical safety of law enforcement or
correctional personnel or any other person; or c) compromise the security of
any correctional facility. (Ord. 10-01, 1-25-2010)
1-10-12: NOTICE OF DENIAL OF REQUEST; REQUEST FOR REVIEW:
   A.   The FOIA officer, when denying a request for public record, shall
notify the requester, by letter, of the decision to deny the information, the
reason for the denial, including a detailed factual basis for the application
of any exemption claimed, and the names and titles or positions of each person
responsible for the denial.
   B.   Each notice of denial by the FOIA officer shall inform the person of
the right to review by the public access counselor and provide the address and
phone number for the public access counselor.
   C.   Each notice of denial shall also inform such person of his or her right
to judicial review in accordance with section 11 of the freedom of information
act.
   D.   When a request is denied on the grounds that the records are exempt
under the provisions of this chapter, the notice of denial shall specify the
exemption claimed to authorize the denial and briefly explain how the exemption
applies to the specified records withheld.
   E.   Copies of all notices of denials shall be retained by the village in a
single central office file that is open to the public and indexed according to
the type of exemption asserted and, to the extent feasible, according to the
types of records requested.
   F.   Any person making a request for public records shall be deemed to have
exhausted his or her administrative remedies with respect to that request if
the village fails to act within the time periods provided in sections
1-10-8 and
1-10-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-01, 1-25-2010)
1-10-13: PUBLIC ACCESS COUNSELOR; OPINIONS:
   A.   A person whose request to inspect or copy a public record is denied by
the village may file a request for review with the public access counselor
established in the office of the attorney general not later than sixty (60)
days after the date of the final denial. The request for review must be in
writing, signed by the requester, and include: 1) a copy of the request for
access to records and 2) any responses from the public body.
   B.   If the village receives a request for records, and asserts that the
records are exempt under general exemptions (1)(C) or (1)(F) (see section
1-10-19 of this chapter), it shall, within the time periods provided for
responding to a request, provide written notice to the requester and the public
access counselor of its intent to deny the request in whole or in part. The
notice shall include:
      1.   A copy of the request for access to records;
      2.   The proposed response from the public body; and
      3.   A detailed summary of the public body's basis for asserting the
exemption.
   C.   In accordance with FOIA, upon receipt of a notice of intent to deny
from the village, the public access counselor determines whether further
inquiry is warranted. Within five (5) working days after receipt of the notice
of intent to deny, the public access counselor notifies the village and the
requester whether further inquiry is warranted. If the public access counselor
determines that further inquiry is warranted, the procedures set out in this
section regarding the review of denials, including the production of documents,
shall also be applicable to the inquiry and resolution of a notice of intent to
deny from the village. Times for response or compliance by the village under
sections
1-10-8 and
1-10-9 of this chapter shall be tolled until the public access counselor
concludes his or her inquiry.
   D.   In accordance with FOIA, upon receipt of a request for review, the
public access counselor determines whether further action is warranted. If the
public access counselor determines that the alleged violation is unfounded, he
or she so advises the requester and the village and no further action shall be
undertaken. In all other cases, the public access counselor forwards a copy of
the request for review to the village within seven (7) working days after
receipt and specifies the records or other documents that the village shall
furnish to facilitate the review. Within seven (7) working days after receipt
of the request for review, the FOIA officer shall provide copies of records
requested and shall otherwise fully cooperate with the public access counselor.
If the FOIA officer fails to furnish specified records pursuant to this
section, or if otherwise necessary, the attorney general may issue a subpoena
to any person or public body having knowledge of or records pertaining to a
request for review of a denial of access to records under the freedom of
information act. By statute, to the extent that records or documents produced
by the village contain information that is claimed to be exempt from disclosure
under section
1-10-19 of this chapter, the public access counselor does not further disclose
that information.
   E.   In accordance with FOIA, within seven (7) working days after it
receives a copy of a request for review and request for production of records
from the public access counselor, the FOIA officer may, but is not required to,
answer the allegations of the request for review. The answer may take the form
of a letter, brief, or memorandum. The public access counselor forwards a copy
of the answer to the person submitting the request for review, with any alleged
confidential information to which the request pertains redacted from the copy.
The requester may, but is not required to, respond in writing to the answer
within seven (7) working days and shall provide a copy of the response to the
village. In addition to the request for review, and the answer and the response
thereto, if any, a requester or the village may furnish affidavits or records
concerning any matter germane to the review.
   F.   In accordance with FOIA, unless the public access counselor extends the
time by no more than twenty one (21) business days by sending written notice to
the requester and the village that includes a statement of the reasons for the
extension in the notice, or decides to address the matter without the issuance
of a binding opinion, the attorney general examines the issues and the records,
makes findings of fact and conclusions of law, and issues to the requester and
the village an opinion in response to the request for review within sixty (60)
days after its receipt. The opinion is binding upon both the requester and the
village, subject to administrative review under section 11.5 of the freedom of
information act 1 .
Upon receipt of a binding opinion concluding that a violation of FOIA has
occurred, the FOIA officer shall either take necessary action immediately to
comply with the directive of the opinion or shall initiate administrative
review under section 11.5 of FOIA. If the opinion concludes that no violation
of FOIA has occurred, the requester may initiate administrative review under
section 11.5 of FOIA. If the village discloses records in accordance with an
opinion of the attorney general, it is immune from all liabilities by reason
thereof and shall not be liable for penalties under FOIA.
   G.   In accordance with FOIA, the attorney general may also issue advisory
opinions to the village regarding compliance with FOIA. A review may be
initiated upon receipt of a written request from the village mayor or the
village attorney, which shall contain sufficient accurate facts from which a
determination can be made. The public access counselor may request additional
information from the village in order to assist in the review. If the village
relies in good faith on an advisory opinion of the attorney general in
responding to a request, it is not liable for penalties under FOIA, so long as
the facts upon which the opinion is based have been fully and fairly disclosed
to the public access counselor. (Ord. 10-01, 1-25-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/11.5.
1-10-14: GRANTING OF REQUEST; PROCEDURE FOR INSPECTION:
When a freedom of information request is granted, the documents will be made
available for inspection at the village hall during regular business hours.
Copies shall be made upon request as set forth in section
1-10-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-01, 1-25-2010)
1-10-15: WRITTEN REQUEST NOT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN DOCUMENTS:
The following documents shall be made available for inspection and copying
without a written request; however, the requester shall contact the FOIA
officer or designee in advance to set a mutually convenient time. These
documents, if copied, shall be subject to the copying fee set forth in section
1-10-7 of this chapter:
   A.   Ordinances and written resolutions.
   B.   The journal of the board of trustees, not including executive session
minutes.
   C.   Any personnel code, building code, other technical code, or any other
regulation of the village adopted by the village, whether by ordinance,
resolution or otherwise. (Ord. 10-01, 1-25-2010)
1-10-16: SPECIAL PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO CERTAIN LAW ENFORCEMENT RECORDS:
The following chronologically maintained arrest and criminal history
information maintained by the village police department shall be furnished as
soon as practical, but in no event later than seventy two (72) hours after the
arrest, notwithstanding the time limits otherwise provided for in section
1-10-8 of this chapter:
   A.   Information that identifies the individual, including the name, age,
address, and photograph, when and if available;
   B.   Information detailing any charges relating to the arrest;
   C.   The time and location of the arrest;
   D.   The name of the investigating or arresting law enforcement agency;
   E.   If the individual is incarcerated, the amount of any bail or bond; and
   F.   If the individual is incarcerated, the time and date that the
individual was received into, discharged from, or transferred from the village
police department's custody. (Ord. 10-01, 1-25-2010)
1-10-17: DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ABOUT PUBLIC BODIES:
The village shall prominently display at the village hall, make available for
inspection and copying without charge, and shall send through the mail if
requested, each of the following:
   A.   A brief description of itself, which will include, but not be limited
to, a short summary of its purpose, a block diagram giving its functional
subdivisions, the total amount of its operating budget, the number and location
of all of its separate offices, the approximate number of full and part time
employees, and the identification and membership of any board, commission,
committee, or council which operates in an advisory capacity relative to the
operation of the village, or which exercises control over its policies or
procedures, or to which the village is required to report and be answerable for
its operations;
   B.   A brief description of the methods whereby the public may request
information and public records, a directory designating for the FOIA officer or
officers, the address where requests for public records should be directed, and
any fees allowable under section
1-10-7 of this chapter; and
The village shall also post this information on its website, if one is
maintained. (Ord. 10-01, 1-25-2010)
1-10-18: LIST OF CATEGORIES OF RECORDS:
As to public records prepared or received after the effective date hereof, the
FOIA officer shall maintain and make available for inspection and copying a
reasonably current list of all types or categories of records under its
control. The list shall be reasonably detailed in order to aid persons in
obtaining access to public records pursuant to this chapter. The FOIA officer
shall furnish upon request a description of the manner in which public records
stored by means of electronic data processing may be obtained in a form
comprehensible to persons lacking knowledge of computer language or printout
format. (Ord. 10-01, 1-25-2010)
1-10-19: APPENDIX A; EXEMPT MATERIALS PER THE FOIA:
Section 7 Of FOIA:
General Exemptions
   1.   The following shall be exempt from inspection and copying:
      A.   Information specifically prohibited from disclosure by federal or
state law or rules and regulations implementing federal or state law.
      B.   Private information, unless disclosure is required by another
provision of this act, a state or federal law or a court order.
      C.   Personal information contained within public records, the disclosure
of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy,
unless the disclosure is consented to in writing by the individual subjects of
the information. "Unwarranted invasion of personal privacy" means the
disclosure of information that is highly personal or objectionable to a
reasonable person and in which the subject's right to privacy outweighs any
legitimate public interest in obtaining the information. The disclosure of
information that bears on the public duties of public employees and officials
shall not be considered an invasion of personal privacy.
      D.   Records in the possession of the village created in the course of
administrative enforcement proceedings, and any law enforcement or correctional
agency for law enforcement purposes, but only to the extent that disclosure
would:
         (i)   Interfere with pending or actually and reasonably contemplated
law enforcement proceedings conducted by any law enforcement or correctional
agency that is the recipient of the request;
         (ii)   Interfere with active administrative enforcement proceedings
conducted by the village that is the recipient of the request;
         (iii)   Create a substantial likelihood that a person will be deprived
of a fair trial or an impartial hearing;
         (iv)   Unavoidably disclose the identity of a confidential source,
confidential information furnished only by the confidential source, or persons
who file complaints with or provide information to administrative,
investigative, law enforcement, or penal agencies; except that the identities
of witnesses to traffic accidents, traffic accident reports, and rescue reports
shall be provided by agencies of local government, except when disclosure would
interfere with an active criminal investigation conducted by the agency that is
the recipient of the request;
         (v)   Disclose unique or specialized investigative techniques other
than those generally used and known or disclose internal documents of
correctional agencies related to detection, observation or investigation of
incidents of crime or misconduct, and disclosure would result in demonstrable
harm to the agency or public body that is the recipient of the request;
         (vi)   Endanger the life or physical safety of law enforcement
personnel or any other person; or
         (vii)   Obstruct an ongoing criminal investigation by the agency that
is the recipient of the request.
      E.   Records that relate to or affect the security of correctional
institutions and detention facilities.
      F.   Preliminary drafts, notes, recommendations, memoranda and other
records in which opinions are expressed, or policies or actions are formulated,
except that a specific record or relevant portion of a record shall not be
exempt when the record is publicly cited and identified by the village mayor.
      G.   Trade secrets and commercial or financial information obtained from
a person or business where the trade secrets or commercial or financial
information are furnished under a claim that they are proprietary, privileged
or confidential, and that disclosure of the trade secrets or commercial or
financial information would cause competitive harm to the person or business,
and only insofar as the claim directly applies to the records requested.
         (i)   All trade secrets and commercial or financial information
obtained by the village, including a public pension fund, from a private equity
fund or a privately held company within the investment portfolio of a private
equity fund as a result of either investing or evaluating a potential
investment of public funds in a private equity fund. The exemption contained in
this item does not apply to the aggregate financial performance information of
a private equity fund, nor to the identity of the fund's managers or general
partners. The exemption contained in this item does not apply to the identity
of a privately held company within the investment portfolio of a private equity
fund, unless the disclosure of the identity of a privately held company may
cause competitive harm.
Nothing contained in this paragraph (G) shall be construed to prevent a person
or business from consenting to disclosure.
      H.   Proposals and bids for any contract, grant, or agreement, including
information which if it were disclosed would frustrate procurement or give an
advantage to any person proposing to enter into a contractor agreement with the
village, until an award or final selection is made. Information prepared by or
for the village in preparation of a bid solicitation shall be exempt until an
award or final selection is made.
      I.   Valuable formulae, computer geographic systems, designs, drawings
and research data obtained or produced by any public body when disclosure could
reasonably be expected to produce private gain or public loss. The exemption
for "computer geographic systems" provided in this paragraph (I) does not
extend to requests made by news media as defined in section 2 of the FOIA when
the requested information is not otherwise exempt and the only purpose of the
request is to access and disseminate information regarding the health, safety,
welfare, or legal rights of the general public.
      J.   Architects' plans, engineers' technical submissions, and other
construction related technical documents for projects not constructed or
developed in whole or in part with public funds and the same for projects
constructed or developed with public funds, including but not limited to power
generating and distribution stations and other transmission and distribution
facilities, water treatment facilities, airport facilities, sport stadiums,
convention centers, and all government owned, operated, or occupied buildings,
but only to the extent that disclosure would compromise security.
      K.   Minutes of meetings of public bodies closed to the public as
provided in the open meetings act until the public body makes the minutes
available to the public under section 2.06 of the open meetings act.
      L.   Communications between the village and its attorney or auditor
representing the village that would not be subject to discovery in litigation,
and materials prepared or compiled by or for the village in anticipation of a
criminal, civil or administrative proceeding upon the request of the village
attorney advising the village, and materials prepared or compiled with respect
to internal audits of the village.
      M.   Records relating to the village's adjudication of employee
grievances or disciplinary cases; however, this exemption shall not extend to
the final outcome of cases in which discipline is imposed.
      N.   Administrative or technical information associated with automated
data processing operations, including but not limited to software, operating
protocols, computer program abstracts, file layouts, source listings, object
modules, load modules, user guides, documentation pertaining to all logical and
physical design of computerized systems, employee manuals, and any other
information that, if disclosed, would jeopardize the security of the system or
its data or the security of materials exempt under this section.
      O.   Records relating to collective negotiating matters between the
village and its employees or representatives, except that any final contract or
agreement shall be subject to inspection and copying.
      P.   Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data used to
determine the qualifications of an applicant for a license or employment.
      Q.   The records, documents and information relating to real estate
purchase negotiations until those negotiations have been completed or otherwise
terminated. With regard to a parcel involved in a pending or actually and
reasonably contemplated eminent domain proceeding under the eminent domain act,
records, documents and information relating to that parcel shall be exempt
except as may be allowed under discovery rules adopted by the Illinois supreme
court. The records, documents and information relating to a real estate sale
shall be exempt until a sale is consummated.
      R.   Any and all proprietary information and records related to the
operation of an intergovernmental risk management association or self-insurance
pool or jointly self-administered health and accident cooperative or pool.
Insurance or self-insurance (including any intergovernmental risk management
association or self-insurance pool) claims, loss or risk management
information, records, data, advice or communications.
      S.   Information contained in or related to examination, operating, or
condition reports prepared by, on behalf of, or for the use of the village
responsible for the regulation or supervision of financial institutions or
insurance companies, unless disclosure is otherwise required by state law.
      T.   Information that would disclose or might lead to the disclosure of
secret or confidential information, codes, algorithms, programs, or private
keys intended to be used to create electronic or digital signatures under the
electronic commerce security act.
      U.   Vulnerability assessments, security measures, and response policies
or plans that are designed to identify, prevent, or respond to potential
attacks upon a community's population or systems, facilities, or installations,
the destruction or contamination of which would constitute a clear and present
danger to the health or safety of the community, but only to the extent that
disclosure could reasonably be expected to jeopardize the effectiveness of the
measures or the safety of the personnel who implement them or the public.
Information exempt under this item may include such things as details
pertaining to the mobilization or deployment of personnel or equipment, to the
operation of communication systems or protocols, or to tactical operations.
      V.   Maps and other records regarding the location or security of
generation, transmission, distribution, storage, gathering, treatment, or
switching facilities owned by a utility, by a power generator, or by the
Illinois power agency.
      W.   Information contained in or related to proposals, bids, or
negotiations related to electric power procurement under section 1-75 of the
Illinois power agency act and section 16-111.5 of the public utilities act that
is determined to be confidential and proprietary by the Illinois power agency
or by the Illinois commerce commission.
   2.   A public record that is not in the possession of the village but is in
the possession of a party with whom the agency has contracted to perform a
governmental function on behalf of the village, and that directly relates to
the governmental function and is not otherwise exempt under this act, shall be
considered a public record of the village, for purposes of the FOIA.
Section 7.5 Of FOIA:
Statutory Exemptions
To the extent provided for by the statutes referenced below, the following
shall be exempt from inspection and copying:
   A.   All information determined to be confidential under section 4002 of the
technology advancement and development act [20 ILCS 700/4002].
   B.   Library circulation and order records identifying library users with
specific materials under the library records confidentiality act [75 ILCS 70/
1 et seq.].
   C.   Applications, related documents, and medical records received by the
experimental organ transplantation procedures board and any and all documents
or other records prepared by the experimental organ transplantation procedures
board or its staff relating to applications it has received.
   D.   Information and records held by the department of public health and its
authorized representatives relating to known or suspected cases of sexually
transmissible disease or any information the disclosure of which is restricted
under the Illinois sexually transmissible disease control act [410 ILCS 325/
1 et seq.].
   E.   Information the disclosure of which is exempted under section 30 of the
radon industry licensing act [420 ILCS 44/30].
   F.   Firm performance evaluations under section 55 of the architectural,
engineering, and land surveying qualifications based selection act [30 ILCS
535/55].
   G.   Information the disclosure of which is restricted and exempted under
section 50 of the Illinois prepaid tuition act [110 ILCS 979/50].
   H.   Information the disclosure of which is exempted under the state
officials and employees ethics act [5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.], and records of any
lawfully created state or local inspector general's office that would be exempt
if created or obtained by an executive inspector general's office under that
act.
   I.   Information contained in a local emergency energy plan submitted to a
municipality in accordance with a local emergency energy plan ordinance that is
adopted under section 11-21.5-5 of the Illinois municipal code [65 ILCS 5/11-
21.5-5].
   J.   Information and data concerning the distribution of surcharge moneys
collected and remitted by wireless carriers under the wireless emergency
telephone safety act [50 ILCS 751/1 et seq.].
   K.   Law enforcement officer identification information or driver
identification information compiled by a law enforcement agency or the
department of transportation under section 11-212 of the Illinois vehicle code
[625 ILCS 5/11-212].
   L.   Records and information provided to a residential health care facility
resident sexual assault and death review team or the executive council under
the abuse prevention review team act [210 ILCS 28/1 et seq.].
   M.   Information provided to the predatory lending database created pursuant
to article 3 of the residential real property disclosure act [765 ILCS 77/70 et
seq.], except to the extent authorized under that article.
   N.   Defense budgets and petitions for certification of compensation and
expenses for court appointed trial counsel as provided under sections 10 and 15
of the capital crimes litigation act [725 ILCS 124/10 and 725 ILCS 124/15].
This subsection (N) shall apply until the conclusion of the trial of the case,
even if the prosecution chooses not to pursue the death penalty prior to trial
or sentencing.
   O.   Information that is prohibited from being disclosed under section 4 of
the Illinois health and hazardous substances registry act [410 ILCS 525/4].
   P.   Security portions of system safety program plans, investigation
reports, surveys, schedules, lists, data, or information compiled, collected,
or prepared by or for the regional transportation authority under section 2.11
of the regional transportation authority act [70-3615/2.11] or the St. Clair
County transit district under the bi-state transit safety act [45-111/1 et
seq.].
   Q.   Information prohibited from being disclosed by the personnel records
review act.
   R.   Information prohibited from being disclosed by the Illinois school
student records act [105 ILCS 10/1 et seq.].
   S.   Information the disclosure of which is restricted under section 5-108
of the public utilities act [220 ILCS 5/5-108].
(Ord. 10-01, 1-25-2010)
CHAPTER 11
IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
SECTION:
1-11-1: Purpose
1-11-2: Scope
1-11-3: Definitions
1-11-4: Administration
1-11-5: Identity Theft Prevention Elements
1-11-6: Program Management And Accountability
1-11-7: Other Legal Requirements
1-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this identity theft prevention program (program) is to protect
customers of the village's utility services from identity theft. The program is
intended to establish reasonable policies and procedures to facilitate the
detection, prevention and mitigation of identity theft in connection with the
opening of new covered accounts and activity on existing covered accounts.
(Ord. 08-18, 10-13-2008, eff. 11-1-2008)
1-11-2: SCOPE:
This program applies to the creation, modification and access to identifying
information of a customer of one or more of the utilities operated by the
village (electric, natural gas, water and wastewater) by any and all personnel
of the village, including management personnel. This program does not replace
or repeal any previously existing policies or programs addressing some or all
of the activities that are the subject of this program, but rather it is
intended to supplement any such existing policies and programs. (Ord. 08-18,
10-13-2008, eff. 11-1-2008)
1-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings set forth
opposite their name, unless the context clearly requires that the term be given
a different meaning:
COVERED ACCOUNT: An account that the village offers or maintains, primarily for
personal, family or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit
multiple payments or transactions (16 CFR 681.2(b)(3)(i)). A utility account is
a "covered account". The term "covered account" also includes other accounts
offered or maintained by the village for which there is a reasonably
foreseeable risk to customers or the utility from identity theft (16 CFR 681.2
(b)(3)(ii)).
IDENTIFYING INFORMATION: Any name or number that may be used, alone or in
conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person,
including any name, social security number, date of birth, official state or
government issued driver's license or identification number, alien registration
number, government passport number, employer or taxpayer identification number.
Additional examples of "identifying information" are set forth in 16 CFR
section 603.2(a).
IDENTITY THEFT: A fraud committed or attempted using the identifying
information of another person without authority (16 CFR sections 681.2(b)(8)
and 603.2(a)).
RED FLAG: A pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the possible
existence of identity theft.
Certain terms used but not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings
given to them in the FTC's identity theft rules (16 CFR part 681) or the fair
credit reporting act of 1970 (15 USC section 1681 et seq.), as amended by the
fair and accurate credit transactions act of 2003 into law on December 4, 2003
(public law 108-159). (Ord. 08-18, 10-13-2008, eff. 11-1-2008)
1-11-4: ADMINISTRATION:
The initial adoption and approval of the identity theft prevention program
shall be by ordinance of the village board. Thereafter, changes to the program
of a day to day operational character and decisions relating to the
interpretation and implementation of the program may be made by the mayor
(program administrator). Major changes or shifts of policy positions under the
program shall only be made by the village board.
Development, implementation, administration and oversight of the program will
be the responsibility of the program administrator. The program administrator
may, but shall not be required to, appoint a committee to administer the
program. The program administrator shall be the head of any such committee. The
program administrator will report at least annually to the village board
regarding compliance with this program.
Issues to be addressed in the annual identity theft prevention report include:
   A.   The effectiveness of the policies and procedures in addressing the risk
of identity theft in connection with the opening of new covered accounts and
activity with respect to existing covered accounts.
   B.   Service provider arrangements.
   C.   Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's
response.
   D.   Recommendations for material changes to the program, if needed for
improvement. (Ord. 08-18, 10-13-2008, eff. 11-1-2008)
1-11-5: IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION ELEMENTS:
   A.   Identification Of Relevant Red Flags: The village has considered the
guidelines and the illustrative examples of possible red flags from the FTC's
identity theft rules and has reviewed the village's past history with instances
of identity theft, if any. The village hereby determines that the following are
the relevant red flags for purposes of this program given the relative size of
the village and the limited nature and scope of the services that the village
provides to its citizens:
      1.   Alerts, notifications, or other warnings received from consumer
reporting agencies or service providers.
         a.   A fraud or active duty alert is included with a consumer report
or an identity verification response from a credit reporting agency.
         b.   A consumer reporting agency provides a notice of credit freeze in
response to a request for a consumer report.
         c.   A consumer reporting agency provides a notice of address
discrepancy, as defined in section 681.1(b) of the FTC's identity theft rules.
         d.   A consumer report indicates a pattern of activity that is
inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or
customer, such as:
            (1)   A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries;
            (2)   An unusual number of recently established credit
relationships;
            (3)   A material change in the use of credit, especially with
respect to recently established credit relationships; or
            (4)   An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse
of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor.
      2.   The presentation of suspicious documents.
         a.   Documents provided for identification appear to have been altered
or forged.
         b.   The photograph or physical description on the identification is
not consistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer presenting the
identification.
         c.   Other information on the identification is not consistent with
information provided by the person opening a new covered account or customer
presenting the identification.
         d.   Other information on the identification is not consistent with
readily accessible information that is on file with the village, such as a
signature card or a recent check.
         e.   An application appears to have been altered or forged, or gives
the appearance of having been destroyed and reassembled.
      3.   The presentation of suspicious personal identifying information,
such as a suspicious address change.
         a.   Personal identifying information provided is inconsistent when
compared against external information sources used by the village. For example:
            (1)   The address does not match any address in the consumer report
or CRA ID check response; or
            (2)   The social security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is
listed on the social security administration's death master file.
         b.   Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not
consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the
customer. For example, there is a lack of correlation between the SSN range and
date of birth.
         c.   Personal identifying information provided is associated with
known fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third party sources used
by the village. For example:
            (1)   The address on an application is the same as the address
provided on a fraudulent application; or
            (2)   The phone number on an application is the same as the number
provided on a fraudulent application.
         d.   Personal identifying information provided is of a type commonly
associated with fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third party
sources used by the village. For example:
            (1)   The billing address on an application is fictitious, a mail
drop, or a prison; or
            (2)   The phone number is invalid, or is associated with a pager or
answering service.
         e.   The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other persons
opening an account or other customers.
         f.   The address or telephone number provided is the same as or
similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually
large number of other persons opening accounts or other customers.
         g.   The person opening the covered account or the customer fails to
provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in
response to notification that the application is incomplete.
         h.   Personal identifying information provided is not consistent with
personal identifying information that is on file with the village.
         i.   If the village uses challenge questions, the person opening the
covered account or the customer cannot provide authenticating information
beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer
report.
      4.   The unusual use of, or other suspicious activity related to, a
covered account.
         a.   Shortly following the notice of a change of address for a covered
account, the village receives a request for the addition of authorized users on
the account.
         b.   A new utility account is used in a manner commonly associated
with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example, the customer fails to make
the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments.
         c.   A covered account with a stable history shows irregularities.
         d.   A covered account that has been inactive for a reasonably lengthy
period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the
expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors).
         e.   Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable
although usage of utility products or services continues in connection with the
customer's covered account.
         f.   The village is notified that the customer is not receiving paper
account statements.
         g.   The village is notified of unauthorized usage of utility products
or services in connection with a customer's covered account.
      5.   Notice of possible identity theft.
         a.   The village is notified by a customer, a victim of identity
theft, a law enforcement authority, or any other person that it has opened a
fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft.
   B.   Detection Of Red Flags: The employees of the village who interact
directly with customers on a day to day basis shall have the initial
responsibility for monitoring the information and documentation provided by the
customer and any third party service provider in connection with the opening of
new accounts and the modification of or access to existing accounts and the
detection of any red flags that might arise. Management shall see to it that
all employees who might be called upon to assist a customer with the opening of
a new account or with modifying or otherwise accessing an existing account are
properly trained such that they have a working familiarity with the relevant
red flags identified in this program so as to be able to recognize any red
flags that might surface in connection with the transaction. An employee who is
not sufficiently trained to recognize the red flags identified in this program
shall not open a new account for any customer, modify any existing account or
otherwise provide any customer with access to information in an existing
account without the direct supervision and specific approval of a management
employee. Management employees shall be properly trained such that they can
recognize the relevant red flags identified in this program and exercise sound
judgment in connection with the response to any unresolved red flags that may
present themselves in connection with the opening of a new account or with
modifying or accessing of an existing account. Management employees shall be
responsible for making the final decision on any such unresolved red flags.
The program administrator shall establish from time to time a written policy
setting forth the manner in which a prospective new customer may apply for
service, the information and documentation to be provided by the prospective
customer in connection with an application for a new utility service account,
the steps to be taken by the employee assisting the customer with the
application in verifying the customer's identity and the manner in which the
information and documentation provided by the customer and any third party
service provider shall be maintained. Such policy shall be generally consistent
with the spirit of the customer identification program rules (31 CFR 103.121)
implementing section 326(a) of the USA PATRIOT act but need not be as detailed.
The program administrator shall establish from time to time a written policy
setting forth the manner in which customers with existing accounts shall
establish their identity before being allowed to make modifications to or
otherwise gain access to existing accounts.
   C.   Response To Detected Red Flags: If the responsible employees of the
village as set forth in the previous subsection are unable, after making a good
faith effort, to form a reasonable belief that they know the true identity of a
customer attempting to open a new account or modify or otherwise access an
existing account based on the information and documentation provided by the
customer and any third party service provider, the village shall not open the
new account or modify or otherwise provide access to the existing account as
the case may be. Discrimination in respect to the opening of new accounts or
the modification or access to existing accounts will not be tolerated by
employees of the village and shall be grounds for immediate dismissal.
The program administrator shall establish from time to time a written policy
setting forth the steps to be taken in the event of an unresolved red flag
situation. Consideration should be given to aggravating factors that may
heighten the risk of identity theft, such as a data security incident that
results in unauthorized access to a customer's account, or a notice that a
customer has provided account information to a fraudulent individual or
website. Appropriate responses to prevent or mitigate identity theft when a red
flag is detected include:
      1.   Monitoring a covered account for evidence of identity theft.
      2.   Contacting the customer.
      3.   Changing any passwords, security codes, or other security devices
that permit access to a covered account.
      4.   Reopening a covered account with a new account number.
      5.   Not opening a new covered account.
      6.   Closing an existing covered account.
      7.   Not attempting to collect on a covered account or not selling a
covered account to a debt collector.
      8.   Notifying law enforcement.
      9.   Determining that no response is warranted under the particular
circumstances. (Ord. 08-18, 10-13-2008, eff. 11-1-2008)
1-11-6: PROGRAM MANAGEMENT AND ACCOUNTABILITY:
   A.   Initial Risk Assessment; Covered Accounts: Utility accounts for
personal, family and household purposes are specifically included within the
definition of "covered account" in the FTC's identity theft rules. Therefore,
the village determines that with respect to its residential utility accounts it
offers and/or maintains covered accounts. The village also performed an initial
risk assessment to determine whether the utility offers or maintains any other
accounts for which there are reasonably foreseeable risks to customers or the
utility from identity theft. In making this determination the village
considered: 1) the methods it uses to open its accounts, 2) the methods it uses
to access its accounts, and 3) its previous experience with identity theft, and
it concluded that it does not offer or maintain any such other covered
accounts.
   B.   Program Updates; Risk Assessment: The program, including relevant red
flags, is to be updated as often as necessary but at least annually to reflect
changes in risks to customers from identity theft. Factors to consider in the
program update include:
      1.   An assessment of the risk factors identified above.
      2.   Any identified red flag weaknesses in associated account systems or
procedures.
      3.   Changes in methods of identity theft.
      4.   Changes in methods to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft.
      5.   Changes in business arrangements, including mergers, acquisitions,
alliances, joint ventures, and service provider arrangements.
   C.   Training And Oversight: All staff and third party service providers
performing any activity in connection with one or more covered accounts are to
be provided appropriate training and receive effective oversight to ensure that
the activity is conducted in accordance with policies and procedures designed
to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft. (Ord. 08-18, 10-
13-2008, eff. 11-1-2008)
1-11-7: OTHER LEGAL REQUIREMENTS:
Awareness of the following related legal requirements should be maintained:
   A.   31 USC 5318(g) - reporting of suspicious activities.
   B.   15 USC 1681c-1(h) - identity theft prevention; fraud alerts and active
duty alerts - limitations on use of information for credit extensions.
   C.   15 USC 1681s-2 - responsibilities of furnishers of information to
consumer reporting agencies.
   D.   15 USC 1681m - requirements on use of consumer reports. (Ord. 08-18,
10-13-2008, eff. 11-1-2008)
CHAPTER 12
IDENTITY PROTECTION
SECTION:
1-12-1: General
1-12-2: Definitions
1-12-3: Prohibited Activities
1-12-4: Coordination With The Freedom Of Information Act And Other Laws
1-12-5: Limited Employee Access To Social Security Numbers
1-12-6: Embedded Social Security Numbers
1-12-7: Applicability
1-12-8: Availability Of Policy
1-12-9: Amendments
1-12-10: Statement Of Purpose
1-12-1: GENERAL:
This identity protection policy is adopted pursuant to the Illinois identity
protection act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 179/1 et seq., to protect social
security numbers from unauthorized disclosure. All village officers, employees,
and agents shall comply with the identity protection act and this policy at all
times. (Ord. 14-07, 4-28-2014)
1-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words shall have the following meanings when used in this policy:
ACT: The Illinois identity protection act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 179/
1 et seq.
BOARD: The board of trustees of the village.
PERSON: Any individual in the employ of the village.
POLICY: This identity protection policy.
PUBLICLY POST OR PUBLICLY DISPLAY: To intentionally communicate or otherwise
intentionally make available to the general public.
REDACT: To alter or truncate data so that no more than five (5) sequential
digits of an SSN are accessible as part of personal information.
SSN(s): Any social security number provided to an individual by the social
security administration.
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE: The statement of the purpose or purposes for which the
village is collecting and using an individual's SSN that the act requires the
village to provide when collecting an SSN or upon request by an individual.
VILLAGE: The village of Pawnee. (Ord. 14-07, 4-28-2014)
1-12-3: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Neither the village nor any person may:
      1.   Publicly post or publicly display in any manner an individual's SSN.
      2.   Print an individual's SSN on any card required for the individual to
access products or services provided by the person or entity.
      3.   Require an individual to transmit an SSN over the internet unless
the connection is secure or the SSN is encrypted.
      4.   Print an individual's SSN on any materials that are mailed to the
individual, through the U.S. postal service, any private mail service,
electronic mail, or any similar method of delivery, unless state or federal law
requires the SSN to be on the document to be mailed. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, SSNs may be included in applications and forms sent by mail,
including, but not limited to: a) any material mailed in connection with the
administration of the unemployment insurance act; b) any material mailed in
connection with any tax administered by the department of revenue; and c)
documents sent as part of an application or enrollment process or to establish,
amend, or terminate an account, contract, or policy or to confirm the accuracy
of the SSN. An SSN that is permissibly mailed pursuant to this subsection A4
will not be printed, in whole or in part, on a postcard or other mailer that
does not require an envelope or be visible on an envelope without the envelope
having been opened.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection C of this section or unless
otherwise provided in the act, neither the village nor any person may:
      1.   Collect, use, or disclose an SSN from an individual, unless: a)
required to do so under state or federal law, rules, or regulations, or the
collection, use, or disclosure of the SSN is otherwise necessary for the
performance of the village's duties and responsibilities; b) the need and
purpose for the SSN is documented before collection of the SSN; and c) the SSN
collected is relevant to the documented need and purpose.
      2.   Require an individual to use his or her SSN to access an internet
website.
      3.   Use the SSN for any purpose other than the purpose for which it was
collected.
   C.   The prohibitions in subsection B of this section do not apply in the
following circumstances:
      1.   The disclosure of SSNs to agents, employees, contractors, or
subcontractors of a governmental entity or disclosure by a governmental entity
to another governmental entity or its agents, employees, contractors, or
subcontractors if disclosure is necessary in order for the entity to perform
its duties and responsibilities; and, if disclosing to a contractor or
subcontractor, prior to such disclosure, the governmental entity first receives
from the contractor or subcontractor a copy of the contractor's or
subcontractor's policy that sets forth how the requirements imposed under this
act on a governmental entity to protect an individual's SSN will be achieved.
      2.   The disclosure of SSNs pursuant to a court order, warrant, or
subpoena.
      3.   The collection, use, or disclosure of SSNs in order to ensure the
safety of: state and local government employees; persons committed to
correctional facilities, local jails, and other law enforcement facilities or
retention centers; wards of the state; and all persons working in or visiting a
state or local government agency facility.
      4.   The collection, use, or disclosure of SSNs for internal verification
or administrative purposes.
      5.   The disclosure of SSNs by a state agency to the village for the
collection of delinquent child support or of any state debt or to the village
to assist with an investigation or the prevention of fraud.
      6.   The collection or use of SSNs to investigate or prevent fraud, to
conduct background checks, to collect a debt, to obtain a credit report from a
consumer reporting agency under the federal fair credit reporting act, to
undertake any permissible purpose that is enumerated under the federal Gramm
Leach Bliley act, or to locate a missing person, a lost relative, or a person
who is due a benefit, such as a pension benefit or an unclaimed property
benefit. (Ord. 14-07, 4-28-2014)
1-12-4: COORDINATION WITH THE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT AND OTHER LAWS:
The village shall comply with the provisions of the Illinois freedom of
information act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/1 et seq., and any other
state law with respect to allowing the public inspection and copying of
information or documents containing all or any portion of an individual's SSN.
However, the village shall redact SSNs from the information or documents before
allowing the public inspection or copying of the information or documents.
When collecting SSNs, the village shall request each SSN in a manner that makes
the SSN easy to redact if required to be released as part of a public records
request. (Ord. 14-07, 4-28-2014)
1-12-5: LIMITED EMPLOYEE ACCESS TO SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS:
Only employees who are required to use or handle information or documents that
contain SSNs will have access. All employees who have access to SSNs shall
first be trained to protect the confidentiality of SSNs. The training will
include instructions on the proper handling of information that contains SSNs
from the time of collection through destruction of the information. (Ord. 14-
07, 4-28-2014)
1-12-6: EMBEDDED SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS:
Neither the village nor any person shall encode or embed an SSN in or on a card
or document, including, but not limited to, using a bar code, chip, magnetic
strip, RFID technology, or other technology, in place of removing the SSN as
required by the act and this policy. (Ord. 14-07, 4-28-2014)
1-12-7: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   If any provision of this policy conflicts with any provision of the
act, the provisions of the act shall prevail.
   B.   This policy does not apply to:
      1.   The collection, use, or disclosure of an SSN as required by state or
federal law, rule, or regulation; or
      2.   Documents that are recorded with a county recorder or required to be
open to the public under a state or federal law, rule, or regulation,
applicable case law, supreme court rule, or the constitution of the state of
Illinois; provided, however, that the village shall redact the SSN from such
document if such law, rule, or regulation permits. (Ord. 14-07, 4-28-2014)
1-12-8: AVAILABILITY OF POLICY:
All village employees shall be advised of the existence of this policy. Village
employees who are required to use or handle information or documents that
contain SSNs have been provided a copy of this policy, which each shall
maintain at all times. A copy of the policy is available to all other employees
and any member of the public by requesting a copy from the village clerk. (Ord.
14-07, 4-28-2014)
1-12-9: AMENDMENTS:
This policy may be amended by the village at any time. If the policy is
amended, the village shall file a written copy of the policy, as amended, with
the board and shall also advise all village employees of the existence of the
amended policy. A copy of the amended policy will be made available to village
employees and the public as set forth in the preceding section above. (Ord. 14-
07, 4-28-2014)
1-12-10: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The village shall provide an individual with the following statement of purpose
whenever an individual is asked to provide the village with his or her SSN or
if an individual requests it.
   STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
   The Village of Pawnee complies with the Identity Protection Act, 5 ILCS 179/
1 et seq. which requires each local and State government agency to draft,
approve, and implement an Identity Protection Policy that includes a statement
of the purpose or purposes for which the Village is collecting and using an
individual's social security number.
   We will only use your social security number for the purpose for which it
was collected. We will not:
      • Sell, lease, loan, trade, or rent your social security number to a
third party for any purpose;
      • Publicly post or publicly display your social security number;
      • Print your social security number on any card required for you to
access our services;
      • Require you to transmit your social security number over the internet,
unless the connection is secure or your social security number is encrypted; or
      • Print your social security number on any materials that are mailed to
you, unless State or Federal law requires that number to be on documents mailed
to you, or unless we are confirming the accuracy of your social security
number.
   We collect and use social security numbers for one or more of the following
reasons:
      • Complaint mediation or investigation;
      • Crime victim compensation;
      • Vendor services, such as executing contracts and/or billing;
      • Law enforcement investigation;
      • Internal verification;
      • to investigation and prevention of fraud, conducting background checks,
debt collection, and obtaining credit report from consumer reporting agencies
      • Administrative services;
      • Other reasons that would be explained to you at the time we ask for
your social security number.
   The President and Board of Trustees have adopted Identity Protection Act
requirements as Title 1, Chapter 12 of the Village Code of Ordinances. You may
request a copy of the Statement of Purpose any time you have been asked by the
Village to provide your social security number or if you request a copy of the
statement.
   If you have questions or complaints about the Village's Identity Protection
Policy, contact:
   Pawnee Village Clerk
   P.O. Box 560
   Pawnee, IL 62558
(Ord. 14-07, 4-28-2014)
CHAPTER 13
TRAVEL AND EXPENSES REIMBURSEMENT POLICY
SECTION:
1-13-1: Purpose
1-13-2: Definitions
1-13-3: Authorized Types Of Official Business
1-13-4: Reimbursable Expenses And Limits
1-13-5: Approval Of Expenses
1-13-6: Documentation Of Expenses
1-13-7: Entertainment Expenses
1-13-1: PURPOSE:
The Village will reimburse employee and officer travel, meal, and lodging
expenses incurred in connection with pre-approved travel, meal, and lodging
expenses incurred on behalf of the Village. (Ord. 16-15, 12-12-2016)
1-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements, theaters,
circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
TRAVEL: Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees and
officers of the Village or by wards or charges of the Village involving
reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing
transportation or related services. (Ord. 16-15, 12-12-2016)
1-13-3: AUTHORIZED TYPES OF OFFICIAL BUSINESS:
Travel, meal and lodging expenses shall be reimbursed for employees and
officers of the Village only for purposes of official business conducted on
behalf of the Village, which includes but is not limited to off-site or out-of-
town meetings related to official business and seminars, conferences and other
educational events related to the employee's or officer's official duties.
Employee travel will be approved in advance by the employee's supervisor.
Travel of the Village President and Trustees will be approved in advance by the
Village Board. Travel of other Village officers will be approved in advance by
the Village President. (Ord. 16-15, 12-12-2016)
1-13-4: REIMBURSABLE EXPENSES AND LIMITS:
   A.   CMS Rates For Meals, Lodging And Mileage: Reimbursable expenses for
meals and lodging and for mileage will be limited to those amounts established
by the State of Illinois Department of Central Management Services from time to
time and published on the internet (currently, www.illinois.gov/cms/Employees/
travel/Pages/TravelReimbursement.a spx).
   The expense limits in force as of the date of this chapter are on file in
the Village; however, when the Department of CMS publishes changes in its
limits, the Village's limits shall be deemed to be changed in like amount.
   B.   Airfare: Since official business of the Village does not normally
involve air transportation, all air transportation expenses for any employee or
officer of the Village must be approved by the Village Board in advance.
Travelers are expected to obtain the lowest available airfare that reasonably
meets business travel needs. Only coach or economy tickets will be paid or
reimbursed. The traveler will pay for the difference between higher priced
tickets and coach or economy tickets with his or her personal funds.
   C.   Automobiles: If a Village-owned vehicle is available, it will be used.
There will be no reimbursement of the cost of rental cars. For personal
vehicles, mileage reimbursement will be based on mileage from the Village Hall
to the off-site location of the official business, not from the employee's or
officer's residence. When attending a training event or other off-site official
business directly from an employee's or officer's residence, no reimbursement
will be made if the distance is less than the mileage of a normal commute to
the workplace. If the distance is higher than the employee's or officer's
normal commute, reimbursement will be paid based on the differential of the
commute less the mileage of a normal commute to the workplace.
   D.   Other Transportation: The traveler should utilize hotel shuttle service
or other shuttle services, if available. If none are offered, the use of the
most economic transportation is encouraged.
   E.   Vacation In Conjunction With Business Travel: In cases where vacation
time is added to a business trip, any cost variance in airfare, car rental,
lodging and/or any other expenses must be clearly identified on the Travel,
Meal, and Lodging Expense Report form and paid by the traveler.
   F.   Accompanied Travel: When a traveler is accompanied by others not on
official business, any lodging, transportation, meals or other expenses above
those incurred for the authorized traveler will not be reimbursed by the
Village.
   G.   Parking: Parking fees at a hotel or motel will be reimbursed only with
a receipt. Valet parking will not be reimbursed. (Ord. 16-15, 12-12-2016)
1-13-5: APPROVAL OF EXPENSES:
Travel, meal, and lodging expenses incurred by any employee in excess of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) must be approved in an open meeting by a
majority roll-call vote of the Village Board.
Travel, meal, and lodging expenses incurred by the Village President or any
Village Trustee in any amount must be approved by roll call vote at an open
meeting of the Village Board. Travel, meal, and lodging expenses advanced as a
per diem to any employee or any member of the Village Board must be approved by
roll call vote at an open meeting of the Village Board prior to payment.
Documentation of expenses must be provided in accordance with sections
1-13-3, 1-13-4 and 1-13-6 of this chapter, and any excess from the per diem
must be repaid. (Ord. 16-15, 12-12-2016)
1-13-6: DOCUMENTATION OF EXPENSES:
   A.   Before an expense for travel, meals, or lodging may be approved under
section
1-13-5 of this chapter, the following minimum documentation must first be
submitted, in writing, to the Village Board on a Travel, Meal, and Lodging
Expense form:
      1.   An estimate of the cost of travel, meals, or lodging if expenses
have not been incurred or a receipt of the cost of the travel, meals, or
lodging if the expenses have already been incurred;
      2.   The name of the individual who received or is requesting the travel,
meal, or lodging expense;
      3.   The job title or office of the individual who received or is
requesting the travel, meal, or lodging expense; and
      4.   The date or dates and nature of the official business for which the
travel, meal, or lodging expense was or will be expended.
   All documents and information submitted under this section are public
records subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act.
   The Village hereby adopts as its official standardized form for the
submission of travel, meal, and lodging expenses the Travel, Meal, and Lodging
Expense Report form on file in the Village. (Ord. 16-15, 12-12-2016)
1-13-7: ENTERTAINMENT EXPENSES:
No employee or officer shall be reimbursed for any entertainment expense,
unless ancillary to the purpose of the program, event or other official
business. (Ord. 16-15, 12-12-2016)
CHAPTER 14
SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY 1
SECTION:
1-14-1: Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-14-2: Definition Of Sexual Harassment
1-14-3: Procedure For Reporting An Allegation Of Sexual Harassment
1-14-4: Prohibition On Retaliation For Reporting Sexual Harassment Allegations
1-14-5: Consequences Of A Violation Of The Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-14-6: Consequences For Knowingly Making A False Report
 
Notes
     This policy was drafted using the Illinois Department of Human Rights
  Sexual Harassment Model Policy and has been modified to conform to Public Act
1 100-0554.
     The provisions of this policy will apply only insofar as they do not
  conflict with any state or federal law.
1-14-1: PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts have
determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under Title VII
of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a
right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment
is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual
orientations. It is a policy of Village of Pawnee to prohibit harassment of any
person by any municipal official, municipal agent, municipal employee or
municipal agency or office on the basis of sex or gender. All municipal
officials, municipal agents, municipal employees and municipal agencies or
offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any person, regardless of any
employment relationship or lack thereof. (Ord. 18-14, 11-26-2018)
1-14-2: DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   A.   This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in the
Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual harassment as:
      1.   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any
conduct of a sexual nature when:
         (a)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment;
         (b)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is
used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
         (c)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially
interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment.
      2.   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
         (a)   Verbal: sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor,
and jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature.
         (b)   Non-verbal: suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, “catcalls,” “smacking”
or “kissing” noises.
         (c)   Visual: posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
         (d)   Physical: touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching,
brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
         (e)   Textual/Electronic: "sexting" (electronically sending messages
with sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually
explicit language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of
electronic communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line
postings, blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and
Twitter).
   B.   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a “reasonable person.” (Ord. 18-14, 11-26-2018)
1-14-3: PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   A.   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes herself/
himself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident(s)
as directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his position to
the offending employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not necessary
for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
   B.   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following:
      1.   Electronic/Direct Communication. If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
      2.   Contact with Supervisory Personnel. At the same time direct
communication is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or
intimidated by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the
immediate supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a
director of human resources, an ethics officer, the city manager or
administrator, or the chief executive officer of the municipality.
      The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual harassment
must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there are no
witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other responsible
officer, the municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of the
harassment.
      3.   Resolution Outside Municipality. The purpose of this policy is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
municipality. However, all municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within three hundred (300) days
of the alleged incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint with
the EEOC must also be filed within three hundred (300) days.
   C.   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what
was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not limited
to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
   D.   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and
investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome. (Ord. 18-
14, 11-26-2018)
1-14-4: PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ALLEGATIONS:
   A.   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or
municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any
municipal employee due to a municipal employee's:
      1.   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this policy;
      2.   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation
of this policy; or
      3.   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
   B.   For the purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal employee that
is taken in retaliation for a municipal employee's involvement in protected
activity pursuant to this policy.
   C.   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
   D.   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/15-10) provides
whistleblower protection from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge,
suspension, demotion, or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in
retaliation for an employee who does any of the following:
      1.   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, State agency, or
other State employee that the State employee reasonably believes is in
violation of a law, rule, or regulation,
      2.   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member, State agency or other State
employee, or
      3.   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
   E.   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (740 ILCS 174/15(a)), an employer may
not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a court, an
administrative hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in
any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that
the information discloses a violation of a State or federal law, rule, or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a State or federal law, rule, or regulation. (740 ILCS 174/15(b)).
   F.   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-101), it is a
civil rights violation for a person, or for two or more people to conspire, to
retaliate against a person because he/she has opposed that which he/she
reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment,
because he/she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or
participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois
Human Rights Act.
   G.   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or passed
over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may file a
retaliation charge - either due within three hundred days (300) days of the
alleged retaliation. (Ord. 18-14, 11-26-2018)
1-14-5: CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION OF THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this policy or the
Prohibition on Sexual Harassment contained in 5 ILCS 430/5-65, may be subject
to a fine of up to five thousands dollars ($5,000) per offense, applicable
discipline or discharge by the municipality and any applicable fines and
penalties established pursuant to local ordinance, State law or Federal law.
Each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any discipline imposed by the
municipality shall be separate and distinct from any penalty imposed by an
ethics commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a court of law or a
State or Federal agency. (Ord. 18-14, 11-26-2018)
1-14-6: CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT:
   A.   A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser
using the sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping
sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false
report is not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the
seriousness of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is
a severe offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of
this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreements.
   B.   In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging
a violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act to
an ethics commission, an inspector general, the State Police, a State's
Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official is guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor. An ethics commission may levy an administrative fine
of up to five thousands dollars ($5,000) against any person who intentionally
makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation. (Ord. 18-14, 11-26-2018)
TITLE 2
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
2-1-1: Municipal Utility Tax
2-1-2: Definitions
2-1-3: Tax Imposed
2-1-4: Continuance Of Tax Imposed Pursuant To Section 2-1-1 Of This Chapter
2-1-5: Collection Of Tax
2-1-6: Tax Remittance And Return
2-1-7: Resales
2-1-8: Books And Records
2-1-9: Credits And Refunds
2-1-10: Penalties
2-1-1: MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply:
   GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for the distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, as
the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued
in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit
services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used,
labor or service cost or any other expense whatsoever.
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation or political
subdivision of this state or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
   B.   Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the privilege,
occupation or business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling
electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the village
and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts
therefrom. (Ord. 94-2, 1-10-1994, eff. 5-1-1994; amd. 1994 Code)
   C.   Exemptions: No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any
transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such
business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be
made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof.
Any utility accounts of the village of Pawnee shall be exempt from the taxes
imposed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 15-16, 12-14-2015)
   D.   Additional Costs: Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money
or value of products or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer
as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business.
   E.   Basis: The tax provided for herein shall be based on the "gross
receipts", as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed
on or after May 1, 1994.
   F.   Returns: On or before the last day of August 1994, each taxpayer shall
make a return to the village treasurer for the months of May, June and July
1994 stating:
      1.   Its name;
      2.   Its principal place of business;
      3.   Its gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed;
      4.   Amount of tax;
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
On or before the last day of every third month thereafter, each taxpayer shall
make a like return to the Village Treasurer for a corresponding three (3) month
period.
   G.   Payment Of Tax: The taxpayer making the return herein provided for
shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the Village Treasurer the
amount of tax herein imposed; provided, that in connection with any return, the
taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon the total
billings of the business subject to the tax during the period for which the
return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt
adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings
and the taxable gross receipts.
   H.   Tax Credits For Errors: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has
been paid which was not due under the provisions of this Section, whether as
the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any tax due or to become due, under this Section, from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously
paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be
so credited.
   I.   Violation And Penalties: Any taxpayer who fails to make a return or who
makes a fraudulent return or who wilfully violates any other provision of this
Section is guilty of a misdemeanor subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the
amount of tax due. (Ord. 94-2, 1-10-1994, eff. 5-1-1994; amd. 1994 Code)
2-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or
maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other
representative operating within this State under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this State permanently
or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this State.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes
of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of
electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois
Municipal Code 1 , directly in the generation, production, transmission,
delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the
Village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
TAXPAYER: A person paying the tax imposed by this Chapter; a taxpayer may be
either a purchaser or a tax collector. (Ord. 99-3, 2-22-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
2-1-3: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code 2  and any
and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of
using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or
consumed within the corporate limits of the Village at the following rates,
calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
      1.   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.00432 dollars per kilowatt-hour;
      2.   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.00284 dollars per kilowatt-hour;
      3.   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.00255 dollars per kilowatt-hour;
      4.   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.00248 dollars per kilowatt-hour;
      5.   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.00241 dollars per kilowatt-hour;
      6.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.00227 dollars per kilowatt-hour;
      7.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.00223 dollars per kilowatt-hour;
      8.   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.00220 dollars per kilowatt-hour;
      9.   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.00216 dollars per kilowatt-hour; and
      10.   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt-hours in a month; 0.00213 dollars per kilowatt-hour.
   B.   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the Village, the State or any other political subdivision of the
State.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, the tax shall not
be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would
violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution
of the State of Illinois.
   D.   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or
after May 1, 1999; and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by
nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such customers
for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the Public Utilities
Act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-104, (which takes effect on September
30, 1999) or the first bill issued to such customers on or after January 1,
2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner. (Ord. 99-3, 4-12-1999)
 
Notes
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
2-1-4: CONTINUANCE OF TAX IMPOSED PURSUANT TO SECTION 2-1-1 OF THIS CHAPTER:
Until the tax imposed pursuant to Section
2-1-3 of this Chapter is effective with respect to a class of customers, the
five percent (5%) gross receipts tax imposed pursuant to Section 2-1-1 of this
Chapter shall remain in effect for such class of customers. Section
2-1-1 of this Chapter shall have no effect on and after January 1, 2001. (Ord.
99-3, 2-22-1999)
2-1-5: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   Subject to the provisions of Section
2-1-7 of this Chapter regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the
tax imposed under this Chapter shall be collected from purchasers by the person
maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers electricity to such
purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time
and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
   B.   Any tax required to be collected by this Chapter, and any tax in fact
collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the Village by the person delivering
the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be
allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges
for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such
charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to
remit such tax.
   C.   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser
by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an
amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect to reimburse them
for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing
and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the Village upon
request. For purposes of this Chapter, any partial payment of a billed amount
not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the
delivery of electricity. (Ord. 99-3, 2-22-1999)
2-1-6: TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN:
   A.   Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return with the
Village Clerk. The return shall contain the information prescribed by Exhibit A
of this Section, and shall be accompanied by a check in the amount of the tax
due. The return may be in a format convenient to the tax collector, so long as
it contains all required information. The return and accompanying remittance
shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during
which the tax is collected or is required to be collected.
   B.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form containing the
information specified in Exhibit A of this Section and pay the tax directly to
the Village Clerk on or before the last day of the month following the month
during which the electricity is used or consumed.
   EXHIBIT A
   CONTENTS OF ELECTRICITY TAX RETURN
      Each return made by a taxpayer shall contain, as a minimum, the following
information:
      (A)   The name of the taxpayer, and if the taxpayer is not a natural
person, the name of the officer or employee preparing the tax return.
      (B)   The address, phone number and fax number of the taxpayer's
principal place of business.
      (C)   The taxpayer's kilowatt-hour usage, or kilowatt-hours sold at
retail if the taxpayer is a tax collector, during the tax period.
      (D)   The period of time for which the return is made.
      (E)   The amount of tax due.
(Ord. 99-3, 2-22-1999)
2-1-7: RESALES:
   A.   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the Village shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the Village
President and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity,
and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially
nontaxable as a sale for resale.
   B.   If a person who receives electricity in the Village claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the Village
President for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it
is not liable for the tax imposed by this Chapter on any purchases of
electricity, and shall furnish such additional information as the Village
President may reasonably require.
   C.   Upon approval of the application, the Village President shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
   D.   The Village President may cancel the resale number of any person if the
person fails to pay any tax payable under this Chapter for electricity used or
consumed by the person, or if the number: 1) was obtained through
misrepresentation, or 2) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
   E.   If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption
and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this Chapter
directly to the Village Clerk pursuant to subsection
2-1-6B of this Chapter on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or
consumes, and shall collect the tax pursuant to Section
2-1-2 of this Chapter and remit the tax pursuant to subsection
2-1-6A of this Chapter on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller
to a purchaser.
   F.   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complies with all other conditions of this Section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the Village
Clerk the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other
information that the Village Clerk may reasonably require. (Ord. 99-3, 2-22-
1999)
2-1-8: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this
Chapter, shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity,
including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave
rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this Chapter. The
books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times
during business hours of the day. (Ord. 99-3, 2-22-1999)
2-1-9: CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this Chapter, in order to
permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the Village, no person shall be
entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this Chapter unless
the person files a claim for refund or credit within one year after the date on
which the tax was paid or remitted. (Ord. 99-3, 2-22-1999)
2-1-10: PENALTIES:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or
who wilfully violates any other provision of this Chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and in addition, shall be
liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. 99-3, 2-22-1999)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
2-2-1: Definitions
2-2-2: Liquor Commissioner
2-2-3: License And Compliance Required
2-2-4: Application For License
2-2-5: Initial License Fees
2-2-6: Disposition Of License Application
2-2-7: Restrictions On Issuance
2-2-8: Record Of Licenses
2-2-9: Insurance Requirements
2-2-10: Term Of License; Renewals
2-2-10-1: Permanent Outdoor Tavern Area Permit
2-2-11: Transfer Of License
2-2-12: Classifications And Fees; Hours
2-2-13: Number Of Licenses
2-2-14: Conditions Of License
2-2-15: Location Restrictions
2-2-15-1: Consumption Of Alcohol On Public Ways
2-2-16: Violation Of Federal Or State Statute Or Village Ordinance Or
Regulation
2-2-17: View From Street
2-2-18: Personnel Restrictions
2-2-19: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
2-2-20: Sales To Minors And Certain Other Persons
2-2-21: Violation Of Retailers' Occupation Tax Act; Citizen Complaints
2-2-22: Suspension Or Revocation Of Licenses; Fines
2-2-23: Violation And Penalties
2-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, as used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified
or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl
alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. This chapter shall not apply
to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance
with acts of congress and regulations promulgated thereunder nor to any liquid
or solid containing five-tenths of one percent (0.5%) or less of alcohol by
volume.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water and includes, among
other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of the state of Illinois, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its
members through the payment of annual dues and owning, hiring or leasing a
building or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable
and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants
and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members
and their guests; provided, that such club files with the liquor commissioner,
at the time of its application for a license under this chapter, two (2) copies
of a list of names and residences of its members and similarly files within ten
(10) days of the election of any additional member his or her name and address,
and provided further, that its affairs and management are conducted by a board
of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at
their annual meeting and that no member or any officer, agent or employee of
the club is paid or directly or indirectly receives in the form of salary or
other compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic
liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by
members beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any
annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other governing
body out of the general revenue of the club.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed
and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and
guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty five (25)
or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and
having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests,
such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same
building or buildings in connection therewith and such building or buildings,
structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and
dining room equipment and capacity.
LIQUOR COMMISSIONER: The President of the Village of Pawnee.
LIQUOR CONTROL ACT: The Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934, 235 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-1, et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
PERSON: Any natural person or any corporation, partnership or unincorporated
association.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and
regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and
having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare,
cook and serve suitable food for its guests 1 .
RETAILER: A person who sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether
principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
SELL AT RETAIL and SALE AT RETAIL: Refers to and means sales for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
SPECIAL EVENT: An event conducted by an educational, fraternal, political,
civic, religious or other nonprofit organizations.
SPECIAL EVENT RETAILER: An educational, fraternal, civic, religious or
nonprofit organization which sells or offers for sale, beer or wine or both,
only for consumption at the location and on the dates designated by a special
event license.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin or other spirituous liquors and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances 2 .
STATE COMMISSION: The Illinois Liquor Control Commission.
TO SELL: Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as above defined. (Ord.
92-16, 8-10-92)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 235 ILCS 5/1-3.23.
2 2. S.H.A. 235 ILCS 5/1-3.02.
2-2-2: LIQUOR COMMISSIONER:
   A.   Designation of Village President as Liquor Commissioner: The Village
President is hereby designated as the Liquor Commissioner and shall be charged
with the administration of the Liquor Control Act and of such ordinances and
resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted. The President may
appoint a person to assist in the exercise of the powers and the performance of
the duties provided for in subsection B hereof.
   B.   Powers, Duties and Functions: The Liquor Commissioner shall have all
the powers, functions and duties with respect to local liquor licenses granted
by the Liquor Control Act, including:
      1.   To grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke
for cause all local licenses issued to persons or entities for premises within
the Village and to impose fines as set forth herein.
      2.   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter, at
any time, upon the premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of the Liquor Control Act or this Chapter or any rules or
regulations adopted by the Liquor Commissioner or by the State Commission, have
been or are being violated and at such time to examine the premises of the
licensee in connection therewith.
      3.   To receive complaints from any citizen within the Village that any
of the provisions of the Liquor Control Act or of this Chapter have been or are
being violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner provided by the
Liquor Control Act or this Chapter.
      4.   To receive local license fees and pay same to the Village Treasurer.
      5.   To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a
local license or for a renewal thereof, of any licensee upon whom notice of
revocation or suspension has been served or any licensee against whom a
citation proceeding has been instituted by the State Commission; to examine, or
cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant or licensee
or respondent, and to hear testimony and take proof for information in the
performance of the Liquor Commissioner's duties, and for such purposes, to
issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of the State. For the
purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the Liquor Commissioner
under this Section, the Commissioner may authorize an agent to act on his
behalf.
      6.   To notify the Secretary of State where a club incorporated under the
General Not for Profit Corporation Act 1  or a foreign corporation functioning
as a club in this State under a certificate of authority issued under that Act
has violated the Liquor Control Act by selling or offering for sale at retail
alcoholic liquors without a retailer's license.
      7.   To revoke and suspend licenses and levy fines in accordance with
subsections
2-2-22A through E. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-92)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 805 ILCS 105/101.01 et seq.
2-2-3: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the Village any
alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license or in
violation of the terms of such license. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-92)
2-2-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Contents of Application: An applicant for a license shall submit to the
Liquor Commissioner or to the Village Clerk (who shall transmit the application
to the Liquor Commissioner) an application, in writing, under oath stating:
      1.   The applicant's name and mailing address.
      2.   The name and address of the applicant's business.
      3.   If applicable, the date of the filing of the assumed name of the
business with the County Clerk.
      4.   In case of a copartnership, the date of the formation of the
partnership; in the case of an Illinois corporation, the date of its
incorporation, or in the case of a foreign corporation, the state where it was
incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Business
Corporation Act 1  to transact business in the State.
      5.   The number, the date of issuance and the date of expiration of the
applicant's current State and local retail liquor licenses.
      6.   The name and address of the landlord, if the premises are leased,
with a copy of the lease.
      7.   Whether the applicant has made an application for a liquor license
which has been denied, and if so, the reasons therefor.
      8.   Whether the applicant has ever had any previous liquor license
suspended or revoked, and if so, the specific reasons thereof.
      9.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any criminal
misdemeanor or felony, and if so, the particulars thereof.
      10.   Whether the applicant possesses a current Federal wagering stamp,
and if so, the reasons therefor.
      11.   Whether the applicant or any other person with an interest in the
applicant's place of business is a public official, and if so, the particulars
thereof.
      12.   The applicant's name, sex, date of birth, social security number,
position and percentage of ownership in the business, and the name, sex, date
of birth, social security number, position and percentage of ownership in the
business of every owner, partner, corporate officer, director, manager and any
person who owns five percent (5%) or more of the shares of the applicant's
business entity or parent corporations of the applicant business entity.
      13.   In addition to any other requirement of this subsection, an
applicant for a special event retailer's license shall also submit proof of
adequate dram shop insurance for the special event prior to being issued a
license.
      14.   If said application is made in behalf of a partnership, firm,
association, club or corporation, then the same shall be signed by at least two
(2) members of such partnership or the president and secretary of such
corporation or two (2) authorized agents of said partnership or corporation.
   B.   Incomplete Applications:
      1.   Applications for liquor licenses which are incomplete or fail to
contain the statements or information required by subsection A hereof shall be
rejected by the Liquor Commissioner. The Commissioner shall issue a written
rejection of such application setting forth the deficiencies in said
application within sixty (60) days of its receipt by the Liquor Commissioner or
by the Village Clerk. Prior to such rejection, the applicant may submit the
additional information or statements required to complete such application in
accordance with subsection A hereof.
      2.   Administrative or legal expenses incurred in reviewing incomplete
liquor license applications, advising the applicant of such deficiencies and
rejecting such applications shall be paid by the applicant. A bill or invoice
shall be submitted to the applicant specifying the additional administrative or
legal expenses incurred in processing the applicant's incomplete liquor license
application, which shall be paid by the applicant together with the annual
license fee prior to the issuance of such liquor license. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-92)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.
2-2-5: INITIAL LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fees:
      1.   The first and initial license fee for new licenses applied for
between May 1 and October 31 of any year shall be in an amount equal to the
annual fee described in Section
2-2-12 of this Chapter plus a nonrefundable fee of two hundred dollars
($200.00) to defray the costs of investigation of the applicant, as provided
for and pursuant to the provisions of this Section, payable in one installment.
      2.   The first and initial license fee for new licenses applied for
between November 1 and April 30 of any year shall be in an amount equal to one-
half (1/2) the annual fee plus the nonrefundable fee of two hundred dollars
($200.00) to defray the costs of investigation of the applicant, as provided
for and pursuant to the provisions of this Section, payable in one installment.
   B.   Transfer, Assignment or Sale: Any sale, transfer or assignment of more
than fifty percent (50%) of the shares of a corporation shall terminate said
license for the purpose of payment of a fee for a first and initial license.
   C.   Bankruptcy or Insolvency: Any bankruptcy, insolvency of a license or
any sale, transfer or assignment of any copartner, copartnership or
copartnership interest in a license held by a copartnership shall terminate
said license for the purpose of payment of a fee for a first and initial
license.
   D.   Disposition of Fees: All such fees shall be paid to the Village
Treasurer at the time application is made. In the event the license applied for
is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant, except for the
nonrefundable fee set forth in subsection A of this Section. If the license is
granted, then the fee shall be deposited as set forth above and no portion
thereof shall be refunded. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-92)
2-2-6: DISPOSITION OF LICENSE APPLICATION:
   A.   Optional Fingerprinting Requirement:
      1.   The Liquor Commissioner may, in the exercise of his discretion,
require any applicant for a new Village liquor license, or any applicant for a
renewal of a Village liquor license, to be fingerprinted, whether said
applicant be an individual or a partnership. Should the applicant be a
corporation, the Liquor Commissioner may, within his discretion, require the
following to be fingerprinted:
         a.   The officers, manager or director of said corporation; or
         b.   Any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than
five percent (5%) of the capital stock of said corporation.
      2.   All such fingerprinting shall be done by the Police Department. The
fingerprints shall be submitted to the appropriate State and Federal agencies
for processing, as available. The cost of fingerprinting shall be paid by the
applicant.
   B.   Additional Information: The Liquor Commissioner may, after examination
of the application, require the submission of further information needed for a
determination under Section
2-2-7 or conduct further investigations as set forth in subsection
2-2-2B5 of this Chapter.
   C.   Acceptance or Rejection: The Commissioner shall issue a written
acceptance or rejection of an application within sixty (60) days of its receipt
by the Commissioner or Village Clerk or shall notify an applicant of the
reasons for further time being necessary to complete the investigation or
processing. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-92)
2-2-7: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE:
No liquor license shall be issued to:
   A.   A natural person who is not a resident of the Village.
   B.   A natural person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which such person resides.
   C.   A natural person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   D.   A natural person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is
keeping a house of ill fame.
   E.   A natural person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   F.   A natural person whose license under this Chapter or under the Liquor
Control Act has been revoked for cause.
   G.   A natural person who, at the time of application for renewal of any
license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   H.   A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof or any limited
partnership thereof owning more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate limited
partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a
license hereunder for any reason other than residence.
   I.   A corporation, if any officer, manager, assistant manager or director
thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than
five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to
receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and
residence.
   J.   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in the State of Illinois or
unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Business
Corporation Act 1  to transact business in the State.
   K.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee.
   L.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or who
shall have forfeited a bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation.
   M.   A person who does not actually or beneficially own the premises for
which a license is sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full period
for which the license is to be issued.
   N.   Any law enforcing public official, including members of local liquor
control commissions, any mayor, alderman or member of a city council or a
commission, any president of a village board of trustees, any member of a
village board of trustees, or any president or member of a county board, and no
such official shall be interested directly in the manufacture, sale or
distribution of alcoholic liquor; except, that a license may be granted to such
official in relation to premises which are not located within the territory
subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is
approved by the State Commission.
   O.   Any person not eligible for or who has failed to obtain a State retail
liquor dealer's license.
   P.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   Q.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1(a)(3) through (a)(10) or as proscribed by
a statute replacing any of the aforesaid statutory provisions.
   R.   Federal Gaming Devices or Wagering Stamps:
      1.   A natural person to whom a Federal gaming device or a Federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax
period.
      2.   A copartnership to which a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax
period, or if any of the partners have been issued a Federal gaming device
stamp or Federal wagering stamp by the Federal government for the current tax
period.
      3.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of
such corporation has been issued a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal
wagering stamp for the current tax period.
      4.   Any premises for which a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax
period. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-92)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.
2-2-8: RECORD OF LICENSES:
The Village Clerk shall keep a complete record of all such licenses issued and
shall furnish the Chief of Police with a copy thereof. Upon revocation or
suspension of any license, the Village Clerk shall immediately give written
notice thereof to the Chief. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-92)
2-2-9: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
No license shall be granted to an applicant until such applicant shall furnish
evidence satisfactory to the Local Commissioner that such applicant is covered
by a policy of dram shop insurance issued by a responsible insurance company
authorized and licensed to do business in the State, insuring such applicant
against liability which such applicant may incur under the Liquor Control Act.
The evidence of the insurance policy shall indicate that the term of the
insurance is of sufficient length to encompass the period of the license
sought. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-92)
2-2-10: TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWALS:
Each license issued hereunder shall terminate on April 30 following the
issuance thereof. Any licensee may renew such license at the expiration
thereof; provided, that it is then qualified to receive a license and the
premises for which such renewal licensee is sought are suitable for such
purpose; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall
not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the village
board from decreasing or limiting the number of classes of licenses to be
issued within the village. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-1992)
2-2-10-1: PERMANENT OUTDOOR TAVERN AREA PERMIT:
   A.   On application and payment of an investigation and processing fee of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to the license fees set forth herein,
the holder of a class A, D, E, F or G license may be issued a permanent outdoor
tavern area permit.
   B.   A permanent outdoor tavern area permit shall, upon issuance, entitle
the licensee to allow outside alcoholic liquor consumption as authorized by his
primary classification, outside of the permanent structure of his premises,
under the following conditions:
      1.   A permanent fence, not less than six feet (6') in height, made of
wood or other similar material, shall be erected by the licensee. Design and
material must be approved by the liquor commissioner in accordance with
standards approved from time to time by the village board. The fence shall be
designed in such a manner so as to separate the licensee’s patrons from the
general public, and shall be positioned between the area in which alcoholic
liquor can be consumed outside and any adjoining residential or commercial
property. All applicable fence permits must be obtained and fees paid prior to
erecting the fence.
      2.   Access into the outdoor tavern area shall be from the permanent
structure only and no access shall be permitted from the street, sidewalk, or
adjoining property. Emergency exits as approved by the liquor commissioner
shall be provided.
      3.   No music of any kind may be played or broadcast from the outdoor
tavern area or within the permanent structure which is of such a volume so as
to disturb the neighborhood in any manner. Music shall not be played or
broadcast after ten o’clock (10:00) P.M.
      4.   No sales or dispensing of alcoholic liquor may be made from the
outside tavern area or permanent structure to any person upon adjoining
property, public street, sidewalk or alley, and no alcoholic liquor served in
an open container may be removed from the outdoor cafe or permanent structure.
      5.   Proof of dramshop insurance coverage on the outdoor tavern area must
be submitted with the completed application.
      6.   Adequate security must be provided by the licensee.
      7.   Outside tavern area activities may only be conducted during normal
business hours of the establishment.
      8.   (Reserved)
      9.   The permanent outside tavern area may include an outside smoking
shelter erected and maintained in accordance with the smoke free Illinois act,
410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 82/1 et seq., and any regulations of the state
of Illinois promulgated in accordance therewith, as presently in force or as
hereinafter amended. Compliance with such act and regulations is a condition of
issuance and renewal of the permit.
      10.   The outdoor tavern area permit shall be displayed together with the
licensee’s A, D, E, F or G license, and shall be considered as part of the
license, and subject to suspension or revocation whenever the license is
subject to suspension or revocation.
      11.   The licensee shall be subject to all other regulations governing
the class of license held by the licensee, including, but not limited to,
regulations governing hours and the sale of food, except as specifically
amended herein.
   C.   The initial permanent outside tavern area permit shall expire upon the
expiration of the license that is current as of the date of issuance of the
initial permit. Thereafter, the permanent outside tavern area permit may be
renewed and shall expire annually along with the expiration and renewal of the
license. The annual fee for the permit shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00),
to be paid by the licensee along with the license fee.
   D.   Each licensed premises shall be limited to one outdoor tavern area
permit for one outdoor tavern area. (Ord. 09-04, 4-13-2009; amd. Ord. 22-08, 5-
23-2022)
2-2-11: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
   A.   Ownership Of License: A license shall be a purely personal privilege,
effective for a period not to exceed one year after issuance, unless sooner
revoked as provided herein, and shall not constitute property nor shall it be
subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and shall
not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution; provided, that
executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee and the
trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in
part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic
liquor under the order of the appropriate court and may exercise the privileges
of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such
decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of such
license, but not longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or
insolvency of such licensee.
   B.   Refund: A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid
for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under
such license in accordance with this section. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-1992)
2-2-12: CLASSIFICATIONS AND FEES; HOURS:
There shall be the following numbers and classes of licenses with an annual
license fee as indicated:
   A.   Class A Licenses: Class A licenses shall authorize the retail sale on
the premises specified of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises as
well as other retail sales of such liquor, except between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day except Sunday, and
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on Sunday. The annual fee
for such license shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
   B.   Class B Licenses: Class B licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor, but not for consumption on the premises where sold and except
between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any
day except Sunday, and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on
Sunday. The license fee for such license shall be two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
   C.   Class D Licenses: Class D licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
beer and wine only, but not for consumption on the premises where sold and
except between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
of any day except Sunday, and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. on Sunday. The annual fee for such license shall be two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00).
   D.   Class E Licenses: Class E licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor on the premises of a club and except for the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. through six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day except Sunday,
and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on Sunday. The annual
fee for a Class E license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   E.   Class F Licenses: Class F licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
beer and wine only for consumption on the premises where sold and except for
the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day
except Sunday, and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on
Sunday. The annual fee for such license shall be two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
   F.   Class G Licenses: Class G licenses shall authorize the retail sale on
the premises specified of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises as
well as other retail sales of such liquor, and except for the hours between two
o’clock (2:00) A.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. on Monday through Saturday, and
between two o’clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o’clock (10:00) A.M. on Sunday. The
annual fee for such license shall be three hundred fifty dollar ($350.00). For
renewals of Class G liquor license, due May 1, 2021, the annual fee is waived.
The annual fee will be in place for renewals May 1, 2022 and forward.
   G.   Special Event Licenses: Special event licenses shall temporarily
authorize the sale of beer and "wine coolers" (herein defined as a mixture of
wine and other liquids and with an alcoholic content of under 7 percent by
volume) only on the specified premises only from twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight for a period of not to exceed three (3)
calendar days during the event known as Pawnee Prairie Days, or for a period
not to exceed one calendar day for other special events as specifically
authorized from time to time by resolution of the Village Board. Any such
resolution shall state whether the special event may occur in whole or in part
on a Village street, sidewalk or other property, and shall identify the areas
where the special event may occur. The grant of a special event license shall
be conditional upon proof of temporary dramshop insurance naming the Village as
an additional insured if the special event is to occur in whole or in part on a
Village street, sidewalk or other property, and upon reasonable practices to
prevent the sale to or consumption by minors. The license fee shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00) for the first day and fifteen dollars ($15.00) for any
succeeding day.
   H.   Class H Licenses: Class H licenses shall authorize the retail sale on
the premises specified of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises as
well as other retail sales of such liquor, except between the hours of midnight
(12:00) A.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. of any day except Sunday, and midnight
(12:00) A.M. and ten o’clock (10:00) A.M, on Sunday. The annual fee for such
license shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). (Ord. 17-05, 3-13-2017;
amd. Ord. 21-06, 3-8-2021; Ord. 21-07, 3-8-2021; Ord. 22-09, 5-23-2022; Ord.
23-06, 3-13-2023)
2-2-13: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
The number of licenses issued by the Village shall be as follows:
   A.   There may be one Class A license;
   B.   There may be one Class B license;
   C.   There may be zero (0) Class D licenses;
   D.   There may be one Class E license;
   E.   There may be zero (0) Class F licenses;
   F.   There may be four (4) Class G licenses; and
   G.   There may be one special event license outstanding at any time.
   H.   There may be one Class H licenses.
   I.   At no time shall there be more than three Class A - Class H licenses on
the square at any one time. This does not exclude the issuance of special event
licenses on the square. (Ord. 13-14, 9-9-2013; amd. Ord. 14-04, 3-24-2014; Ord.
17-06, 3-27-2017; Ord. 22-09, 5-23-2022; Ord. 23-02, 1-23-2023)
2-2-14: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to admit the public
to any premises in or on which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during the
hours within which the sale of such liquor is prohibited; provided, that in the
case of restaurants, clubs and hotels, such establishments may be kept open
during such hours but no alcoholic liquor may be sold to or consumed by the
public during such hours.
   B.   Election Days: Licensees may sell at retail any alcoholic liquor on the
day of any national, State, County or Village election, including primary
elections, during the hours the polls are open, within the political area in
which such election is being held.
   C.   Refilling Original Packages: No person licensed under this chapter
shall fill or refill, in whole or in part, any original package of alcoholic
liquor with the same or any other kind or quality of alcoholic liquor, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession for sale at retail
any bottles, casks or other containers containing alcoholic liquor, unless in
original packages, except vinous beverages and pitchers of beer as permitted
elsewhere herein.
   D.   Quantity Sales For On Premises Consumption: It shall be unlawful for
any licensee to sell, give away or permit to be sold, served or given away for
consumption on the licensed premises any distilled spirits, except by the glass
in individual servings not exceeding three (3) fluid ounces.
   E.   Displaying License: Every licensee shall cause the license or licenses
to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises.
   F.   Compliance With Codes: No licensed premises shall be operated or
occupied in violation of any Building, Fire, Health or Safety Code, rule,
regulation, occupancy or capacity limitation established or adopted by the
Village, the State, the County, or if applicable, the Fire Protection District
for the Village. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-1992; amd. Ord. 17-05, 3-13-2017; Ord. 21-
06, 3-8-2021)
2-2-15: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Public Structures And Places:
      1.   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school, hospital, home for
the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children or any
military or naval station; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to
hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs or restaurants or
other places where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business
carried on if such place of business or use so exempted is established for such
purposes prior to the establishment of any such church, school, home for the
aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children or any
military or naval station nor to the renewal of a license for the sale at
retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within one hundred feet (100') since the
issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of one
hundred feet (100') shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used
for worship services or educational programs and not to property boundaries.
      2.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to
a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor, if any such
sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely
for the promotion of some common object other than sale or consumption of
alcoholic liquor.
   B.   Patronage By Minors: No such license shall be issued to any person for
the sale of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where
the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the principal
business transacted consists of schoolbooks, school supplies, food, lunches or
drinks for such minors.
   C.   Change In Location: A license issued hereunder shall permit the sale of
alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and license.
Such location may be changed only when and upon the written permit to make such
change shall be issued by the local commissioner. No change of location shall
be permitted unless the proposed new location is in compliance with the
provisions and regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-1992)
2-2-15-1: CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL ON PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   No person shall consume, sell, pour, or provide any alcoholic liquor on
any public way or right of way, including, but not limited to, public highways,
streets, alleys, and sidewalks, unless specifically authorized pursuant to: 1)
a special event permit issued by the state of Illinois which has been approved
by resolution of the corporate authorities or 2) a special event license for
the annual event known as “Pawnee Prairie Days”.
   B.   No licensee hereunder, other than as authorized pursuant to: 1) a
special event permit issued by the state of Illinois which has been approved by
resolution of the corporate authorities; or 2) a special event license issued
by the village pursuant to subsection
2-2-12G of this chapter, shall allow any customer or patron to enter or exit
the licensed premises onto any public way or right of way, including, but not
limited to, public highways, streets, alleys, and sidewalks, with an open
container containing alcoholic liquor.
   C.   During the term of the Executive Orders issued by the Governor of the
State of Illinois in calendar year 2020, the terms of liquor licenses issued by
the Village of Pawnee shall include the opportunity to serve alcohol in alleys
adjacent to the licensed premises, on the following terms:
      1.   Outside service will be allowed on public ways only on Friday and
Saturday, at times as established by the Liquor Commissioner.
      2.   All patrons must enter and exit the licensed premises through the
front door of the premises.
      3.   All patrons must be at tables in the alley. Each licence holder must
provide tables and chairs in the alley. No more than 10 patrons are allowed at
any one table.
      4.   The licensee must provide porta potties and a hand-sanitizing
station in the alley.
      5.   The alley must be cleared and cleaned by the licensee each night, so
there will be no interference with regular daily activities in the alley.
      6.   Staff of the licensee must deliver all drinks and/or food to the
tables. Staff must wear appropriate facewear and gloves.
      7.   Live music may be allowed with the permission of the Liquor
Commissioner.
      8.   The hours of service for all on-premise service pursuant to a Pawnee
Liquor License during this period shall terminate at 1 a.m. for all classes of
Licenses, notwithstanding the provisions of 2-2-12 of this Code.
      9.   The Liquor Commissioner may make additional rules relating to
outdoor service of alcohol as may be necessary. (Ord. 10-23, 7-12-2010; amd.
Ord. 15-06, 5-13-2015; Ord. 21-18, 10-25-2021)
2-2-16: VIOLATION OF FEDERAL OR STATE STATUTE OR VILLAGE ORDINANCE OR
REGULATION:
   A.   No person holding a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall in
the conduct of the licensed business or upon the licensed premises:
      1.   Violate any federal law or state statute, including, but not limited
to, state statutes pertaining to alcoholic liquors, sanitation and smoking.
      2.   Suffer or permit a violation of any federal law or law of the state
of Illinois, or of any rule of the Illinois liquor control commission,
including, but not limited to, statutes pertaining to alcoholic liquors,
sanitation and smoking.
      3.   Suffer or permit a violation of this code or of any building or
other code adopted pursuant to this code.
      4.   Violate any county ordinance, resolution or regulations pertaining
to sanitation or food handling.
   B.   Violations may be proved by evidence that the licensee has been
convicted of a violation of a federal law or a law of the state of Illinois in
the conduct of the licensed business or upon the premises, or has been found
guilty by the appropriate administrative agency of violating state statutes or
regulations.
   C.   Proof before of facts which establish a violation of any federal law,
state statute, or village or county ordinance or resolution or rule, shall be
sufficient cause for imposing a fine, revocation or suspension of license
issued pursuant to this chapter, irrespective of whether or not a conviction
has been obtained in any court. (Ord. 10-11, 4-12-2010)
2-2-17: VIEW FROM STREET:
   A.   No person holding a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall in
the conduct of the licensed business or upon the licensed premises:
      1.   Board, block, or otherwise treat windows and doors in the
establishment to block the view of the licensed premised from the street.
(Ord. 20-20, 12-14-2020)
2-2-18: PERSONNEL RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Change In Personnel:
      1.   Any changes in partnerships, officers, directors, persons holding
directly or beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the stock or ownership
interest, managers or assistant managers of establishments licensed under this
chapter shall be reported, in writing, to the liquor commissioner within ten
(10) days of the change. All such new personnel shall meet all the standards of
this chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a liquor license. All such
changes in personnel shall be subject to review by the liquor commissioner.
      2.   When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of
ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible
to hold a liquor license, said license shall terminate.
      3.   When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes
place in officers, directors, managers or shareholders of more than five
percent (5%) of the stock, resulting in the holding of office or such shares of
stock by one who is not eligible for a license, said license shall terminate.
      4.   When a license has been issued to an individual who is no longer
eligible for a license, said license shall terminate.
   B.   Employees: It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with or who is a
carrier of any contagious, infectious or venereal disease, and it shall be
unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such
disease to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the
handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor. No employee, agent or
manager, while on duty within the premises, shall use or consume any illegal
drugs or alcoholic liquor or be under the influence of illegal drugs or
alcoholic liquor.
   C.   Supervision: A license which operates with a manager or assistant
manager shall have on duty, at all times, such manager or assistant manager
when the license is in effect. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-1992)
2-2-19: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Peddling: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the
village.
   B.   Gambling: It shall be unlawful to permit any gambling on any premises
licensed to sell alcoholic liquor.
   C.   Solicitation: It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager or other
person in charge of any licensed premises where alcoholic liquor is sold or
offered for sale for consumption thereon to engage, employ or permit the
engagement or employment of any person, nor shall any person be permitted to
remain on said premises, who shall solicit any patron or customer thereof to
purchase alcoholic or nonalcoholic liquor or sexual favors or services for
himself or any other person, nor shall any person, whether employer,
entertainer or otherwise, solicit any patron or customer therein to purchase
alcoholic or nonalcoholic liquor for himself or any other person therein.
However, nothing herein contained shall prohibit any adult manager, waitress or
waiter who shall be regularly employed therein from accepting and serving the
order of a patron or customer in the regular course of employment as such
manager, waitress or waiter. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-1992)
2-2-20: SALES TO MINORS AND CERTAIN OTHER PERSONS:
   A.   Restricted Sales: No licensee or officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver
alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years or to any
intoxicated person or to any person known by him or her to be under legal
disability or in need of mental treatment. No person, after purchasing or
otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such
alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of twenty one (21) years,
except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service. It shall be
unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to misrepresent
his age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any
place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold.
   B.   Sign To Be Posted: In every place in the village where alcoholic liquor
is sold, there shall be displayed, at all times, in a prominent place a printed
card which shall read substantially as follows:
         WARNING TO PERSONS
         UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS
      You are subject to a fine up to $500.00 under the ordinances of the
Village of Pawnee if you purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, or
misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic
liquor.
   C.   Presence Of Minors Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any holder of a
liquor license or his agent or employee to suffer or permit any persons under
the age of twenty one (21) years to be or remain in any room or compartment
adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the room or place where such licensed
premises is located; provided, that this shall not apply to any person under
the age of twenty one (21) years who is accompanied by a parent or guardian or
to that portion of any licensed premises which derives its principal business
from the sale or service of commodities other than alcoholic liquor.
   D.   Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent or
guardian to knowingly permit any person of which he is the parent or guardian
to violate any provision of this section. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-1992)
   E.   Sales And Delivery By Minors: No person under the age of twenty one
(21) years may draw, pour, mix, dispense, sell, or deliver alcoholic liquors
except as follows:
      1.   Between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and nine o'clock
(9:00) P.M., and only while food is being prepared and served on the licensed
premises, persons over the age of nineteen (19) years and under the age of
twenty one (21) years, and actively supervised by persons over the age of
twenty one (21) may draw, pour and mix alcoholic liquor in an establishment
licensed for on premises consumption.
      2.   Persons over the age of eighteen (18) years may be employed as
waiters and waitresses to deliver to customers alcoholic liquor drawn, poured
or mixed by another. (Ord. 15-06, 5-13-2015)
   F.   Possession By Minors: Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of
alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase or accept a gift of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his
possession.
   G.   Consumption By Minors Prohibited: The consumption of alcoholic liquor
by any person under the age of twenty one (21) years is forbidden.
   H.   Identification Of Age:
      1.   If a licensee or such licensee's agent or employee believes, has
reason to believe or should have reason to believe that a sale or delivery of
alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the age of the prospective recipient,
such licensee, agent or employee shall, before making such sale or delivery,
demand presentation of some form of positive identification (containing proof
of age) issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties.
Reasonable care in compliance with the provisions of this subsection shall be
competent evidence and may be considered in prosecution, revocation or
suspension for the violation of any section of this chapter relating to
revocation or suspension for the violation of any other provision of this
chapter.
      2.   No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification
card, use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged
identification card or obtain an identification card by means of false
information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of
alcoholic liquor in violation of this section.
   I.   Religious Ceremonies: Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prohibit the possession and dispensing or consumption by a person under the age
of twenty one (21) years of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious
service or ceremony. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-1992)
2-2-21: VIOLATION OF RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX ACT; CITIZEN COMPLAINTS:
   A.   In addition to other grounds specified in this chapter, the liquor
commissioner, upon the complaint of the state department of revenue, may refuse
the issuance or renewal of a retail license or suspend or revoke such license
for any of the following violations of the "retailers' occupation tax act" 1
approved June 28, 1933, as amended 2 :
      1.   Failure to make a tax return.
      2.   The filing of a fraudulent return.
      3.   Failure to pay all or part of any tax or penalty finally determined
to be due.
      4.   Failure to keep books and records.
      5.   Failure to secure and display a certificate or subcertificates of
registration.
      6.   Wilful violation of any rule or regulation of the state department
of revenue relating to the administration and enforcement of tax liability.
   B.   Any five (5) residents of the village shall have the right to file a
complaint with the liquor commissioner that a licensee has been or is violating
the provisions of this chapter or the liquor control act or the rules or
regulations issued pursuant thereto. Such complaint shall be in writing, in the
form prescribed by the liquor commissioner and shall be signed and sworn to by
the parties complaining. The complaint shall state the particular provision,
rule or regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail upon
which belief is based. If the liquor commissioner is satisfied that the
complaint substantially charges a violation and that from the facts alleged
there is reasonable cause for such belief, he shall set the matter for hearing
and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing
and of the particular charge in the complaint. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-1992)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
2 2. See section
  2-1-1 of this title.
2-2-22: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES; FINES:
   A.   Right To Revoke Or Suspend: The liquor commissioner may revoke or
suspend any license if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter or of any valid ordinance or resolution enacted by
the village board or any applicable rule or regulation established by the
liquor commissioner or the state commission which is not inconsistent with law.
   B.   Fine In Lieu Of Suspension Or Revocation: In lieu of suspension or
revocation, the liquor commissioner may instead levy a fine on the licensee for
such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each violation; each day on which a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. Not more than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) in fines under this subsection may be imposed against any licensee
during the period of his license. Proceeds from such fines shall be paid into
the general corporate fund of the village.
   C.   Public Hearing: However, no such license shall be so revoked or
suspended and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the
liquor commissioner with a three (3) day written notice to the licensee
affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. All such hearings
shall be open to the public and the liquor commissioner shall reduce all
evidence to writing and shall maintain an official record of the proceedings.
If the liquor commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation
of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the
community, he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for
such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises
closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to
be heard during that period; except, that if such licensee shall also be
engaged in the conduct of another business on the licensed premises, such order
shall not be applicable to such other business.
   D.   Notice Of Determination: The liquor commissioner shall, within five (5)
days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license
should be revoked or suspended or that the licensee should be fined, state the
reason for such determination in a written order, and either the amount of the
fine, the period of suspension or that the license has been revoked and shall
serve a copy of such order within the five (5) days upon the licensee.
   E.   Appeals: The licensee, after the receipt of such order of suspension or
revocation, shall have the privilege, within a period of twenty (20) days after
the receipt of such order of suspension or revocation, of appealing the order
to the state commission for a decision sustaining, reversing or modifying the
order of the liquor commissioner. If the state commission affirms the liquor
commissioner's order to suspend or revoke the license at the first hearing, the
appellant shall cease to engage in the business for which the license was
issued until the liquor commissioner's order is terminated by its own
provisions or reversed upon rehearing or by the courts.
   F.   Forfeiture Of Fees: Whenever any license hereunder has been revoked as
provided for in this chapter, the licensee shall incur a forfeiture of all
monies that have been paid for the license.
   G.   Use Of Premises After Revocation: When a license has been revoked for
any cause, no license shall be granted to any person for a period of one year
thereafter for the conduct of the business of manufacturing, distributing or
selling alcoholic liquor in the premises described in such revoked license.
(Ord. 92-16, 8-10-1992)
2-2-23: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Nonlicensee Penalties: Any person, other than a licensee violating any
provision of this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
   B.   Licensee Penalties: A licensee violating any provision of this chapter
may be fined by the local commissioner in lieu of suspension or revocation. The
fine shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each such violation.
Each day on which the violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
Not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in fines under this subsection
may be imposed against any licensee during the period of the licensee's
license.
   C.   Fine Proceeds: Proceeds of fines imposed by the liquor commissioner
shall be paid into the village treasury. (Ord. 92-16, 8-10-1992)
CHAPTER 3
RAFFLES
SECTION:
2-3-1: Definitions
2-3-2: License Required; Application Procedures; Fee
2-3-3: Licensing Restrictions
2-3-4: Ineligibility for License
2-3-5: Raffle Manager; Bond Requirements
2-3-6: Conduct of Raffles
2-3-7: Records and Reports
2-3-8: Penalty
2-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given them:
CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an
indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide
systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to
schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and
intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable
sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable operating
expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-
profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in section 5/28-2(b) of the "Illinois
Criminal Code of 1961" 1 , conducted by an organization licensed under this
Chapter in which:
   A.   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance.
   B.   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except, that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a public exhibited sporting
contest.
RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the
purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit. (Ord. 83-14, 11-14-1983)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 720 ILCS.
2-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION PROCEDURES; FEE:
   A.   License Required: No person shall conduct a raffle without having first
obtained a license therefor.
   B.   Application For License: Each application for a license shall be in
writing upon forms provided by the Village and shall contain the following:
      1.   Name and address of individual making application.
      2.   Name and address of organization applying for a license.
      3.   Approximate number of members of the organization that reside in the
Village and the length of existence of the organization.
      4.   Name and address of the raffle manager.
      5.   The location(s) at which raffle chances are to be sold or issued.
      6.   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued.
      7.   The maximum number of raffle chances to be sold.
      8.   The time of determination of winning chances.
      9.   The location(s) at which winning chances will be determined.
      10.   A sworn statement, signed by the presiding officer and secretary,
if there is one, of the organization attesting to the not-for-profit character
of the organization and attesting to the fact the organization is not otherwise
ineligible to receive a license.
      11.   Such other information as the Village may require.
   C.   License Fee: No fee shall be required for the issuance of a license.
(Ord. 83-14, 11-14-1983; amd. 1994 Code)
   D.   Issuance Or Denial: Application for licenses shall be submitted to the
Village President or to the Chief of Police. The Village President or Chief of
Police shall act either to issue or deny the license within thirty (30) days.
(Ord. 98-6, 3-9-1998)
2-3-3: LICENSING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Location: Sales of raffle chances shall be only at locations designated
in the license application and which are within the borders of the Village.
   B.   Eligibility For License: Licenses shall be issued only to a bona fide
religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans'
organization that operate without profit to their members and which have been
in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before
making application for a license and which have had, during that entire five
(5) year period, a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their
objectives.
   C.   Duration Of License: Licenses shall permit the applicant to issue or
sell raffle chances only for those dates stated in the license application, but
in no event shall the period of sales exceed one hundred eighty (180) days.
Each license is valid for one raffle only.
   D.   Maximum Value Of Prizes:
      1.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars
($150,000.00).
      2.   The retail value of each individual prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle shall not exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars
($150,000.00).
   E.   Price Of Chances: The price charged for each raffle chance sold or
issued shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 83-14, 11-
14-1983)
2-3-4: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
The following are ineligible for any license under this Chapter:
   A.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony.
   B.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter.
   C.   Any person who is not of good moral character.
   D.   Any firm in which a person defined in subsection A, B or C of this
Section has proprietary, equitable or credit interest or in which such a person
is active or employed.
   E.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B or C of
this Section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not.
   F.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B or C of
this Section is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle.
(Ord. 83-14, 11-14-1983)
2-3-5: RAFFLE MANAGER; BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Manager Required; Bond Required: All operation of, and the conduct of,
raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffle manager designated by
the organization. At the time the application is submitted to the Village, the
manager shall give a fidelity bond in the amount of the maximum dollar amount
of all raffle chances to be sold, as stated on the application, in favor of the
organization conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of his duties.
   B.   Waiver Of Bond Requirement: The above bond requirement may be waived by
the unanimous vote of the members of the organization. The occurrence of said
unanimous vote shall be by affidavit of the organization's presiding officer,
filed with the Village. (Ord. 83-14, 11-14-1983; amd. 1994 Code)
2-3-6: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   Use Of Proceeds: The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to
conduct that game.
   B.   Participation: No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring
organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   C.   Remuneration: No person may receive any remuneration or profit for
participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
   D.   Rental Of Premises: A licensee may rent a premises on which to
determine the winning chance in a raffle only from an organization which is
also licensed under this Chapter.
   E.   Location: Raffle chances may be sold or issued only at the locations
specified on the license, and winning chances may be determined only at those
locations specified on the license.
   F.   Minors: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate
in the conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen
(18) years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined
only when accompanied by his parent or guardian. (Ord. 83-14, 11-14-1983)
2-3-7: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
   A.   Records To Be Kept: Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall
keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount
and date of payment.
   B.   Accounting Of Revenues: Gross receipts from the operation of raffles
programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including
bingo gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit
organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue
of the State and placed in a separate account. Each organization should have
separate records for its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles should not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   C.   Monthly Report: Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall
report monthly to its membership and to the Village its gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from raffles and the distribution of net proceeds
itemized as required by this Section.
   D.   Preservation Of Records; Public Inspection: Records required by this
Section shall be preserved for three (3) years and organizations shall make
available their records relating to operation of raffles for public inspection
at reasonable times and places. (Ord. 83-14, 11-14-1983)
2-3-8: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the foregoing provisions shall be subject to
penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 4
SOLICITORS
SECTION:
2-4-1: Definition; Exemptions
2-4-2: Peddling And Soliciting Prohibited
2-4-3: First Amendment Solicitations
2-4-4: Not For Profit Solicitations
2-4-5: License Required
2-4-6: Application For License
2-4-7: Form Of License; Signatures Required
2-4-8: License Fee, Term And Expiration
2-4-9: Duty To Announce Name And Identify Product
2-4-10: Failure To Leave Upon Request
2-4-11: Posted Premises; Uninvited Soliciting
2-4-12: Fraudulent And Deceptive Practices
2-4-13: Hours Permitted
2-4-14: Penalty
2-4-1: DEFINITION; EXEMPTIONS:
 
                         As used in this chapter, shall include the selling,
                         bartering, or exchanging, or the offering for sale,
                         barter, or exchange, of any tangible personal property
                         or services, such as home improvements or termite
                         inspection, upon or along the streets, highways, or
                         public places of the village, whether at one place
                         thereon or from place to place or by calling at
                         residences. "Peddling and soliciting" shall be taken
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING: to include the solicitation of orders, business of any
                         kind, and services, whether or not the goods are
                         delivered or the services performed at the time the
                         order is taken. The provisions of this chapter do not
                         apply to telephone solicitations, nor do they regulate
                         or prohibit the delivery of tangible personal property
                         to residents of the village where such delivery has
                         been ordered or requested by such resident. (Ord. 23-
                         16, 11-27-2024)
 
2-4-2: PEDDLING AND SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
Except as provided by Sections 2-4-3 and 2-4-4 of this chapter, peddling and
soliciting are prohibited in the Village of Pawnee. (Ord. 23-16, 11-27-2024)
2-4-3: FIRST AMENDMENT SOLICITATIONS:
Persons soliciting for causes protected by the first amendment of the United
States constitution shall procure a license without payment of a fee and shall
not be restricted as to days or hours of solicitation. (Ord. 23-16, 11-27-2024)
2-4-4: NOT FOR PROFIT SOLICITATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sales or solicitations by
any bona fide not for profit, religious, charitable or governmental
organization, or any subsidiary thereof. (Ord. 23-16, 11-27-2024)
2-4-5: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any solicitor of contributions or vendor of merchandise or itinerant merchant
or solicitor claiming an exemption pursuant to Section 2-4-3 or 2-4-4 above
must first procure a license from the Chief of Police. No person shall sell by
peddling or soliciting any goods, wares, merchandise, perishable agricultural
commodities or services, or solicit orders, contributions, sales,
subscriptions, or business of any kind, along the streets, highways or public
places of the village, or by calling at residences within the village, without
first procuring a license to do so from the chief of police. (Ord. 23-16, 11-
27-2024)
2-4-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The license application shall include the applicant's name, permanent business
address (which must include a street address), residence address of the
principal individual involved with the peddling or soliciting (and if the
applicant is a corporation, the residence addresses of its officers), the
location at which the applicant intends to do business, the nature of the
business the applicant intends to conduct, a copy of the applicant's
certificate of registration under the retailer's occupation tax act 1, a
complete inventory of the goods the applicant intends to offer for sale, and a
list of all licenses to conduct business as a transient merchant or an
itinerant vendor obtained by the applicant in the state in the twelve (12)
months preceding the date of filing of the application. (Ord. 23-16, 11-27-
2024)
2-4-7: FORM OF LICENSE; SIGNATURES REQUIRED:
A license may be issued, as nearly as may be, in the following form, and shall
be signed on behalf of the village by the village clerk, chief of police, or
other party authorized and designated by the village board:
Date Pawnee, Illinois,
   having made application in due form, and in all other respects complied with
the ordinances of the Village in this behalf, therefore, the undersigned
representative of the Village of Pawnee does hereby authorize, empower and
license the said applicant to engage in peddling or soliciting for from.
Nevertheless, this license is granted upon this express condition, that if the
said applicant shall observe and obey all ordinances of this Village, which now
are, or may be in force, regulating or relating to his said business, then this
license shall be valid for the period aforesaid; otherwise, it may be annulled,
revoked or forfeited, at the option of the Village Board.
Village of Pawnee,
by authorized representative
(Ord. 23-16, 11-27-2024)
2-4-8: LICENSE FEE, TERM AND EXPIRATION:
There is no fee for a license for persons exempted from the prohibition on
peddling or soliciting by Section 2-4-3 and 2-4-4 above. The license shall
expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued. No license shall be
granted for a longer term than one year. (Ord. 23-16, 11-27-2024)
2-4-9: DUTY TO ANNOUNCE NAME AND IDENTIFY PRODUCT:
Any person engaged in peddling and soliciting shall, before entering any
residence, identify himself or herself to the occupant by name and state what
organization, company and/or product he or she represents. (Ord. 23-16, 11-27-
2024)
2-4-10: FAILURE TO LEAVE UPON REQUEST:
No person shall engage in peddling or soliciting at, or remain on the premises
of, any residence after having been asked by the occupant thereof to leave said
premises or residence. (Ord. 23-16, 11-27-2024)
2-4-11: POSTED PREMISES; UNINVITED SOLICITING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling or soliciting
upon any premises or residence located thereon if such premises or residence is
posted against solicitation by means of a notice prominently displayed upon
which is printed the legend:
      NO SOLICITORS
   B.   A residence shall be deemed to be posted against peddling or soliciting
if there is exhibited, on or near the main entrance to the premises or on or
near the main door to any residence located thereon, a sign at least three
inches by four inches (3" x 4") in size, which bears the legend set out in
subsection A of this section in letters at least one-third inch (1/3") in
height. (Ord. 23-16, 11-27-2024)
2-4-12: FRAUDULENT AND DECEPTIVE PRACTICES:
   A.   No person who engages in peddling or soliciting shall use any plan,
scheme or ruse to make any statement which indicates or implies that the
purpose of such person's visit is other than to obtain orders for or to make
sales of goods or services, consistent with the exemption provided by Section
2-4-3 or 2-4-4.
   B.   No person who engages in solicitation shall misrepresent the right of a
buyer to rescind or cancel a sale under the provisions of the applicable law.
(Ord. 23-16, 11-27-2024)
2-4-13: HOURS PERMITTED:
No person (including residents and itinerants) shall engage in the business of
peddling or soliciting at residences without the prior consent of the occupant
except between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. Monday through Saturday and one o'clock (1:00) P.M and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. (Ord. 23-16, 11-27-2024)
2-4-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). The penalty for
subsequent violations shall be Seven Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($750.00). (Ord.
23-16, 11-27-2024)
CHAPTER 5
SECONDHAND STORES
SECTION:
2-5-1: Definition
2-5-2: Regulations Governing Secondhand Stores
2-5-3: Penalties
2-5-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, the term "second-hand store" refers to a retail
establishment which sells or offers for sale to the public, used goods,
articles or other items of personal property which have been previously owned
by a person other than the retail establishment or the owner or operator
thereof, before being offered for sale by, or placed on consignment with, such
retail establishment. "Second-hand store" does not include pawnbrokers as
defined by the pawnbroker regulation act. (Ord. 00-11, 8-29-2000)
2-5-2: REGULATIONS GOVERNING SECONDHAND STORES:
   A.   Each secondhand store shall require two (2) forms of identification to
be provided by each person providing goods, articles and other items of
personal property to the secondhand store for resale or for sale upon
consignment. One of the two (2) forms of identification shall include such
person's residence address, and one of the two (2) forms of identification
shall contain such person's photograph. Acceptable forms of identification
shall include, but are not limited to: driver's license, social security card,
utility bill, employee or student identification card, credit card, or a civic,
union or professional association membership card.
   B.   Each secondhand store shall maintain a true and accurate record of all
goods, articles and items of personal property received or purchased by the
secondhand store for resale or sale on consignment. Such records shall include
the name and address of the person from whom such goods, articles or items are
purchased or accepted on consignment, as determined pursuant to subsection A of
this section; a general description of such goods, articles or items; and if
any item has a serial number, the serial number thereof; and the date and time
the goods, articles or items were purchased by the secondhand store or placed
on consignment.
   C.   The records maintained pursuant to subsection B of this section shall
be available upon request for inspection and copying by the Pawnee police
department or any other law enforcement agency with jurisdiction in the village
of Pawnee. The records shall be maintained for a period of two (2) years.
   D.   No goods, articles or items purchased by a secondhand store, or placed
on consignment for sale therein, shall be resold for a period of forty eight
(48) hours after receipt thereof by the owner or operator of the secondhand
store.
   E.   No secondhand store shall purchase goods, articles or items for resale,
or accept consignment of goods, articles or items for sale, from any minor or
from any intoxicated person.
   F.   The records maintained pursuant to subsection B of this section shall
be confidential, and shall not be used or disclosed by the Pawnee police
department except in connection with an investigation or charge of a felony or
misdemeanor, or in connection with a request in connection with an
investigation or charge of a felony or misdemeanor from another law enforcement
agency, the states attorney of Sangamon County, or a court of law.
   G.   The owner and operator of each secondhand store, and each officer,
director and manager of any firm or corporation which is the owner or operator
of a secondhand store, is responsible for violations of this chapter by his,
her or its employees and agents. (Ord. 00-11, 8-29-2000)
2-5-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation which violates any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. Each time an owner or operator or agent of a
secondhand store purchases goods, items or articles for resale, or accepts
consignment of items for sale, in violation of this ordinance, constitutes a
separate offense. (Ord. 00-11, 8-29-2000)
CHAPTER 6
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
2-6-1: Definitions
2-6-2: Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Imposed
2-6-3: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
2-6-4: Returns To Department
2-6-5: Resellers
2-6-6: Severability
2-6-7: Effective Date
2-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID:        The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in this municipality
                    regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT:         The Illinois Department of Revenue.
                    The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
                    telecommunications in this municipality and for all services and equipment provided
                    in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or
                    otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or nature,
                    and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such
                    telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs or any
                    other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be
                    included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall
                    include charges imposed at each channel termination point within this municipality
                    and charges for the portion of the inter-office channels provided within this
                    municipality. Charges for that portion of the inter-office channel connecting two
                    (2) or more channel termination points, one or more of which is located within the
                    jurisdictional boundary of this municipality, shall be determined by the retailer
                    by multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the inter-office channel by
                    a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of channel termination points that
                    are located within the jurisdictional boundary of the municipality and the
                    denominator of which is the total number of channel termination points connected by
                    the inter-office channel. However, "gross charge" shall not include any of the
                    following:
                    (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to:
                       (a)   The tax imposed by this chapter;
                       (b)   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act;
                       (c)   The tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
                       (d)   911 surcharges; or
                       (e)   Charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-
                    221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, as amended, or any similar charges added
                    to customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the
                    Illinois Commerce Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax
                    liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities
                    Act.
                    (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such
                    municipality.
                    (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or
                    information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information
                    intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited
GROSS CHARGE:       to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment, tabulating
                    equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a
                    time-sharing agreement.
                    (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or
                    rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and
                    separately identified from other charges.
                    (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under Section 9-222.1 of
                    the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
                    time specified by the Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity.
                    (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in
                    connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries
                    or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this chapter has
                    already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that the charges between the
                    parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
                    subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the
                    generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service.
                    (7)   Bad debts (“bad debt” means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale
                    at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that
                    has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal
                    income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently
                    paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the
                    reporting period in which the payment is made).
                    (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication devices.
                    (9)   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the Telecommunications
                    Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
                    (10)   Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if:
                       (a)   Those charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications
                    that are taxable;
                       (b)   Those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or invoice;
                    and
                       (c)   The retailer can reasonable identify the nontaxable charges on the
                    retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business.
                       If the nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross charge from
                    the sale of both taxable and nontaxable services of telecommunications billed on a
                    combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or telecommunications.
                    The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the retailer of the
                    telecommunications.
INTERSTATE          All telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this State.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS:
INTRASTATE          All telecommunications that originate and terminate within this State.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS:
                    Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock
                    company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver,
PERSON:             trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court, the
                    Federal and State governments, including State universities created by statute, or
                    any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this State.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail.
                    Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail
                    as defined in this Section. The Department may, in its discretion, upon
                    application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not
                    maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction of the
RETAILER:           Department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment of the
                    tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such tax.
                    When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon
                    all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this State in the same manner
                    and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
                    within this State. The permit may be revoked by the Department at its discretion.
                    Retailer maintaining a place of business in this state or any like term, means and
                    includes any retailer having or maintaining within this State, directly or by a
RETAILER            subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales
MAINTAINING A PLACE office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative
OF BUSINESS IN THIS operating within this State under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary,
STATE:              irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is
                    located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is
                    licensed to do business in this state.
                    The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services
                    and equipment provided in connection therewith for a consideration, to persons
SALE AT RETAIL:     other than the Federal and State governments, and State universities created by
                    statute and other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
                    subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and
                    not for resale.
                    The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services
                    are originated or at which telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer.
                    In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones,
SERVICE ADDRESS:    paging systems, and maritime systems, service address means the customer's place of
                    primary use as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act.
                    For air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location
                    of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by
                    telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
                    A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or permittees
TAXPAYER:           engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in a
                    municipality and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by the ordinance.
                    In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it, includes,
                    without limitation, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll,
                    and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph
                    services, teletypewriter, computer exchange services, cellular mobile
                    telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio,
                    paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way
                    communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic
                    or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser,
                    microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter,
                    "private line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single
                    customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a
                    communications channel or group of channels, from one or more specified locations
TELECOMMUNICATIONS  to one or more other specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications"
:                   shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications
                    are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for
                    purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases
                    of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
                    component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
                    consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications.
                    Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-company
                    facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used
                    as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall
                    be non-taxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall
                    not be considered "telecommunications" subject to the tax imposed under this
                    Ordinance. For purposes of this Section, "prepaid telephone calling arrangements"
                    means that term as defined in Section 2-27 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act.
                    (Ord. 21-16, 7-12-2021)
 
2-6-2: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
   A.   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in
the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of one
percent (1%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-municipal taxation of the act
or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer,
upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that
event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or
authorized by this Section to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due
and paid in the municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit
against any other municipal tax.
   B.   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in
the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of one
percent (1%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-state or multi-municipal
taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this
subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in
another State or municipality in this State on such event, shall be allowed a
credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this Section to the
extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other State or
such tax properly due and paid in another municipality in this State which was
not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this
State.
   C.   The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on such act or privilege
to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
municipality. (Ord. 21-16, 7-12-2021)
2-6-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the taxpayer
by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this State and shall be
remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be collected
pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt
owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner
prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by this chapter shall
constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid,
is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale
at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the
taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Department in the
manner provided by the Department.
   B.   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 21-16, 7-12-2021)
2-6-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
On or before the last day of February 2022, and on or before the last day of
every month thereafter, the tax imposed under this Ordinance on
telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required by the Department pursuant to the Illinois Simplified
Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (35 ILCS 636/5-50) and any accompanying
rules and regulations created by the Department to implement the Act. (Ord. 21-
16, 7-12-2021)
2-6-5: RESELLERS:
   A.   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
Department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this Article on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the Department may reasonably require.
   B.   Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
Department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax-free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person's having discontinued the making of resales.
   C.   Except as provided hereinabove in this Section, the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications in this State shall not be made
tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an
active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such
person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 21-16, 7-12-
2021)
2-6-6: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of this
chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall
not affect other provisions of this chapter, or their application, that can be
given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 21-
16, 7-12-2021)
2-6-7: EFFECTIVE DATE:
Title 2 Chapter 6 of the Municipal Code of the Village of Pawnee as enacted by
Ordinance 98-7 with Sections
2-6-1 through 2-6-10 shall remain in full force and effect through December 31,
2021.
Beginning January 1, 2022, this chapter shall be in full force and effect from
and after its passage and approval and publication as required by law.
Copies of this chapter shall be certified and sent to the Illinois Department
of Revenue prior to September 20, 2021. (Ord. 21-16, 7-12-2021)
CHAPTER 7
TAXPAYERS' BILL OF RIGHTS
SECTION:
2-7-1: Applicability
2-7-2: Definitions
2-7-3: Notices
2-7-4: Late Payment
2-7-5: Payment
2-7-6: Certain Credits And Refunds
2-7-7: Audit Procedure
2-7-8: Appeal
2-7-9: Hearing
2-7-10: Interest And Penalties
2-7-11: Abatement
2-7-12: Installment Contracts
2-7-13: Statute Of Limitations
2-7-14: Voluntary Disclosure
2-7-15: Publication Of Tax Ordinances
2-7-16: Liens
2-7-17: Application
2-7-18: Severability
2-7-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in
connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
ACT: The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act", 50 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 45/1 et seq.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and board of trustees of the village.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village treasurer, or other officer or employee
designated from time to time by the corporate authorities, who is charged with
the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered
taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized
by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead.
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of
this chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such
authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this
chapter and the act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
property tax code or fees collected by the village other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
VILLAGE: The village of Pawnee, Illinois. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-3: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local
tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
   A.   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
   B.   Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-4: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or b) received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate
postage prepaid. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-5: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: a) first to any interest due for the applicable period; b)
second to the tax due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty
for the applicable period. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-6: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   A.   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid
the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to
protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes
under duress.
   B.   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
   C.   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         a.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         b.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         c.   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled
check or receipt for the payment;
         d.   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         e.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator
of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         a.   Grant the claim; or
         b.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as
to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum, based on
a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or
the grant of a credit. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-7: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   A.   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   B.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty
(30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal business
hours.
   C.   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not more than thirty (30) days from the
date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator
agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer is unable to comply
with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date
within the thirty (30) days, approved in writing, that is convenient to the
taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   D.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
   E.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer or tax
collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   F.   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of
the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   G.   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-8: APPEAL:
   A.   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   B.   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator
of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the
basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition
for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five
(45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   C.   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local
tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled within fourteen
(14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless
the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   D.   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
   E.   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five
(45) day period. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-9: HEARING:
   A.   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under section
2-7-8 of this chapter, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing
regarding any appeal.
   B.   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not
exceed fourteen (14) days.
   C.   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear
testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or
assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   D.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-10: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
   A.   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be nine
percent (9.0%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365)
days and the number of days elapsed.
   B.   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty, of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village
issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure
to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the
total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was
required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a
failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 01-01,
1-22-2001)
2-7-11: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late
filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-12: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-13: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns
in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of
the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   A.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   B.   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due,
the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
   C.   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-14: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-15: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village
clerk's office. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-16: LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   A.   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
   B.   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   C.   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 01-
01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-17: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of
the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any present tax ordinance is
in conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall control.
(Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
2-7-18: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph or provision of this chapter shall be held to be
invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of
such section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the remaining
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
CHAPTER 8
VIDEO GAMING
SECTION:
2-8-1: Definitions
2-8-2: Video Gaming Permitted
2-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT: Any retail establishment which is licensed under the
liquor control ordinance of the village, and where alcoholic liquor is drawn,
poured, mixed, or otherwise served for consumption on the premises.
LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT: The location where a qualified fraternal
organization that derives its charter from a national fraternal organization
regularly meets.
LICENSED VETERANS ESTABLISHMENT: The location where a qualified veterans
organization that derives its charter from a national veterans organization
regularly meets.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion
of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including,
but not limited to, video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the
Illinois gaming board utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which
the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The
term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash or tokens
or is for amusement purposes only. (Ord. 12-07, 6-11-2012)
2-8-2: VIDEO GAMING PERMITTED:
Notwithstanding any provision of any village ordinance heretofore adopted,
including, but not limited to, section
2-2-19 of this title, video gaming from video gaming terminals licensed by the
state of Illinois and operated pursuant to the video gaming act, 230 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., is permitted in the village at licensed
establishments, licensed fraternal establishments and licensed veterans
establishments. (Ord. 12-07, 6-11-2012)
CHAPTER 9
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
SECTION:
2-9-1: Definitions
2-9-2: Mobile Food Vendor License
2-9-3: Separate License
2-9-4: License Issuance
2-9-5: License Term
2-9-6: License Not Transferable
2-9-7: Permit Display
2-9-8: State Law And Health Code Compliance
2-9-9: License Suspension
2-9-10: Glass Prohibition
2-9-11: Indemnification
2-9-12: Insurance Requirement
2-9-13: Temporary License
2-9-14: Multiple Site Form
2-9-15: Permitted Locations
2-9-16: Hours Of Operations
2-9-17: Penalties
2-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
MOBILE FOOD OPERATION: A self-contained food service operation, located in a
readily movable motorized, wheeled, or towed vehicle, used to store, prepare,
display and/or serve food intended for immediate human consumption. It shall
include, but is not limited to, food carts, food trucks, and ice cream trucks.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR: A vendor of a Mobile Food Operation.(Ord. 24-04, 6-24-2024)
2-9-2: MOBILE FOOD VENDOR LICENSE:
A Mobile Food Vendor license is required for any person(s) wishing to operate
as a Mobile Food Vendor, except:
   A.   A Mobile Food Vendor license is not required for Village-sponsored
special events where a fee to participate is required or assessed by the
Village;
   B.   A Mobile Food Vendor license is not required for private catered events
held on private property when there are no sales to the general public and such
sales are limited to attendees or invitees; or
   C.   For other special events occurring upon resolution or majority vote of
the Village Board. (Ord. 24-04, 6-24-2024)
2-9-3: SEPARATE LICENSE:
If a Mobile Food Vendor has more than one Mobile Food Operation, then each such
Mobile Food Operation shall require a separate Mobile Food Vendor license.
(Ord. 24-04, 6-24-2024)
2-9-4: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
Upon the submission of a complete application showing compliance with all terms
of this Chapter and passage of an investigation, when required, the Mobile Food
Vendor license shall be signed by the Village President. (Ord. 24-04, 6-24-
2024)
2-9-5: LICENSE TERM:
No license shall be granted for longer than one year and shall expire on the
last day of December following its issuance.
   A.   The license for an annual Mobile Food Vendor license shall be valid on
January 1 and expiring on December 31 for the year in which it was issued.
   B.   Licenses for applications received throughout the year shall be valid
from their date of issuance without proration.
   C.   All licenses and permits shall be either displayed so that they are
visible to customers at all times or kept within the confines of the food
truck/cart so that they are readily available upon request or inspection.
   D.   The fee for an annual license shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00).
   E.   The Village will limit the number of annual licenses to three (3).
(Ord. 24-04, 6- 24-2024)
2-9-6: LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE:
Mobile Food Vendor licenses shall not be transferable to any other applicant or
Mobile Food Vendor. (Ord. 24-04, 6-24-2024)
2-9-7: PERMIT DISPLAY:
Mobile Food Vendors shall obtain and either display or have readily available
for inspection at all times all State of Illinois and/or Sangamon County Health
Department permits required to operate their food truck/cart. (Ord. 24-04, 6-
24- 2024)
2-9-8: STATE LAW AND HEALTH CODE COMPLIANCE:
Any Mobile Food Vendor operating in the Village shall be properly permitted by
the Sangamon County Health Department. All food trucks shall be subject to the
State of Illinois and Sangamon County Health Codes and all rules and
regulations promulgated by the applicable Health Commissioner. No food, food
products, or beverages for public consumption shall be kept, offered for sale,
transported, or handled except in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the State of Illinois and the Sangamon County Health Department. (Ord. 24-04,
6-24-2024)
2-9-9: LICENSE SUSPENSION:
If the State of Illinois or the Sangamon County Health Department suspends or
revokes their respective permits and/or licenses, then the Mobile Food Vendor
license shall hereby be revoked until such time as the State of Illinois or the
Sangamon County Health Department permits and/or licenses are reinstated. (Ord.
24-04, 6-24-2024)
2-9-10: GLASS PROHIBITION:
No food or beverage may be sold or given away in a glass container or bottle.
(Ord. 24-04, 6-24-2024)
2-9-11: INDEMNIFICATION:
Every Mobile Food Vendor shall indemnify and hold harmless the Village for all
suits or actions brought against the Village for or on account of any injuries
or damages received or sustained by any party or parties caused by the said
vendor. (Ord. 24-04, 6-24-2024)
2-9-12: INSURANCE REQUIREMENT:
Proof of insurance of the vendor's public liability, food products liability,
and property damage insurance sufficient to protect vendor, property owners,
and the Village from all claims for damage to property or bodily injury,
including death, which may arise from the operations under the registration or
in connection therewith. Such insurance shall provide coverage of not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. A registration issued
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be invalid at any time the
insurance required herein is not maintained and evidence of continuing coverage
is not filed with the Village. (Ord. 24-04, 6-24-2024)
2-9-13: TEMPORARY LICENSE:
Temporary Mobile Food Vendor licenses issued to Mobile Food Vendors for either
Village-approved special events or Village-sponsored special events shall be
valid only for the dates provided on the license, not to exceed five (5)
consecutive days, and shall be event specific. Each event shall require a
separate application and temporary license. The temporary license fee shall be
one hundred dollars ($100.00), unless the temporary license is issued to a
Mobile Food Vendor who has paid for, been issued, and currently has an annual
Mobile Food Vendor license. (Ord. 24-04, 6-24-2024)
2-9-14: MULTIPLE SITE FORM:
Licensed Mobile Food Vendors are required to complete and submit the Illinois
Department of Revenue ST-2 Multiple Site Form for each applicable reporting
period. (Ord. 24-04, 6-24-2024)
2-9-15: PERMITTED LOCATIONS:
Mobile Food Vendors may operate only in permitted locations or at a special
event authorized by the Village, and in accordance with all applicable laws and
ordinances. Unless expressly authorized by a duly-issued permit, location
restrictions shall include:
   A.   No Mobile Food Vendor shall operate in any residential zoned area of
the Village;
   B.   No Mobile Food Vendor shall operate in the Historic Area Designation
(around the Village Square)
   C.   No Mobile Food Vendor shall operate on private property without first
obtaining written consent to operate from the private property owner;
   D.   No Mobile Food Vendor shall operate in a location where it would
substantially obstruct a public way, impair the movement of pedestrians or
vehicles, or pose a hazard to public safety, and in no event shall operate
within sixteen (16) feet from roadway intersections or in an area marked as a
No Parking or Fire Zone;
   E.   No Mobile Food Vendor shall park, stand, or operate in a location which
is adjacent to or within seventy (70) feet of the property line of a
restaurant. This requirement shall not apply to a restaurant affiliated with
the Mobile Food Vendor. A restaurant may manifest affiliation by written
request to the Village as part of the application process or at other times
when seeking to affiliate with a Mobile Food Vendor;
   F.   No Mobile Food Vendor shall operate within seventy (70) feet of any
fair, carnival, circus, festival, special event, or civic event that is
licensed or sanctioned by the Village except when the Mobile Food Vendor has
obtained the necessary registration to participate in the event;
   G.   No Mobile Food Vendor shall operate within seventy (70) feet of the
property line of public parks;
   H.   No Mobile Food Vendor shall operate in any area of the Village that the
Village Board has determined is unsuitable for such operation. The Board, from
time to time, shall consult with the Public Works Department and Zoning Board
to determine which areas are unsuitable for Mobile Food Vendors. (Ord. 24-04,
6-24-2024)
2-9-16: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m., excluding special events referenced herein. (Ord. 24-04, 6-24-2024)
2-9-17: PENALTIES:
It shall be unlawful to operate as a Mobile Food Vendor without a license as
issued by this Chapter. Violators are subject to the general penalties of the
Village, and revocation of any licenses issued pursuant to the Code of
Ordinances of the Village. (Ord. 24-04, 6-24-2024)
CHAPTER 10
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
2-10-1: Sale Of Fireworks
2-10-2: Definitions
2-10-3: Permit Required For Display Of Fireworks
2-10-4: Public Display; Agreement; Insurance Coverage
2-10-5: Compliance With State And Federal Laws On Fireworks Required
2-10-6: Permissible Display Hours
2-10-7: Cleanup Of Debris From Display
2-10-8: Permit Fee
2-10-9: Permit Issuance; Limitations
2-10-10: Penalty
2-10-1: SALE OF FIREWORKS:
The sale of fireworks is prohibited within the Village of Pawnee. Penalty, see
section
2-10-10. (Ord. 25-01, 2-10-2025)
2-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS: Those fireworks that must comply with the construction,
chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S. consumer products
safety commission, as set forth in 16 C.F.R. parts 1500 and 1507, and
classified as fireworks UN0336 or UN0337 by the United States department of
transportation under 49 C.F.R. 172.101. "Consumer fireworks" shall not include
snake or glow worm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known as "party
poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads" and
"auto burglar alarms"; sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other
devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths grains
or less of explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed that
the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion;
and toy pistol paper or plastic caps that contain less than twenty hundredths
grains of explosive mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at
all times.
Any fireworks that contain more explosive mixture than allowed by the
definition of 'consumer fireworks' are 'display fireworks'. (Ord. 25-01, 2-10-
2025)
FIREWORKS: For purposes of this subchapter, the firework definitions set forth
in the pyrotechnic use act, 425 ILCS 35/1, shall also apply and shall be
incorporated herein.
2-10-3: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS:
No person or persons shall display, use or explode display fireworks without
first obtaining a permit from the Pawnee fire protection district and
delivering a copy of the permit, along with the insurance and indemnification
information, to the village manager at least fifteen (15) days before the
proposed display.
Penalty, see section
2-10-10. (Ord. 25-01, 2-10-2025)
2-10-4: PUBLIC DISPLAY; AGREEMENT; INSURANCE COVERAGE:
No permit for a public display of display fireworks shall be issued unless the
person applying is a lead pyrotechnic operator and that person executes and
delivers with the applicant an appropriate hold harmless agreement to the
village and proof of insurance in a sum not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000) conditioned on compliance with the provisions of the pyrotechnic
use act and the regulations of the state fire marshal adopted thereunder. (Ord.
25-01, 2-10-2025)
2-10-5: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS ON FIREWORKS REQUIRED:
No person or persons shall apply for a permit, display, use, or explode display
fireworks as defined in section 2-10-2, unless they are in compliance with the
provisions of the pyrotechnic use act and all other applicable laws and
regulations.
Penalty, see section
2-10-10. (Ord. 25-01, 2-10-2025)
2-10-6: PERMISSIBLE DISPLAY HOURS:
No person or persons shall display, use, or explode consumer fireworks except
between the hours of eight thirty o’clock (8:30) p.m. and eleven o’clock (11:
00) p.m on July 3, 4, and 5 each year. On December 31 of each year, it shall be
permissible to display, use or explode fireworks between the hours of five
thirty o’clock (5:30) p.m. and one o’clock (1:00) a.m. on January 1. No person
shall display, use or explode display or consumer fireworks except during the
hours allowed by this section, unless the permit for display fireworks provide
for additional dates and times.
Penalty, see section
2-10-10. (Ord. 25-01, 2-10-2025)
2-10-7: CLEANUP OF DEBRIS FROM DISPLAY:
Every person who displays, uses or explodes fireworks shall clean up all debris
from the display. In addition to any other penalty provided for by the Village
of Pawnee code of ordinances, failure to clean up debris shall be considered by
the village in determining whether to renew an existing permit or grant a
subsequent permit for display fireworks.
Penalty, see section
2-10-10. (Ord. 25-01, 2-10-2025)
2-10-8: PERMIT FEE:
The applicant shall be responsible for paying any applicable permit fees
established by the Pawnee fire protection district, directly to the Pawnee fire
protection district. (Ord. 25-01, 2-10-2025)
2-10-9: PERMIT ISSUANCE; LIMITATIONS:
The chief of the Pawnee fire protection district is authorized to accept
applications on behalf of the village and issue up to seven (7) permits for
display fireworks within the Village of Pawnee each year in accordance with the
terms and conditions of this subchapter. The village board may increase the
number of permits available by adoption of a resolution. (Ord. 25-01, 2-10-
2025)
2-10-10: PENALTY:
   A.   1.   Any person violating the provisions of this code prohibiting the
sale of fireworks in the village shall be subject to a fine as follows:
         a.   For the first offense, not less than twenty-five dollars ($25) or
more than fifty dollars ($50).
         b.   For the second offense, not less than one hundred dollars ($100)
or more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250).
         c.   For the third or subsequent offense, not less than three hundred
dollars ($300) or more than seventy hundred fifty dollars ($750).
      2.   In addition, the village may seek any other remedies available at
law and equity to restrain or enjoin violations of this chapter.
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter requiring a permit and insurance for the use of display fireworks,
upon conviction, be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250) nor
more than seven hundred fifity dollars $750 for each offense.
   C.   In addition to the fine established by
2-10-10 (B) any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions
of this chapter regulating the hours for display of fireworks, upon conviction,
be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750) for each offense. (Ord. 25-01, 2-10-2025)
CHAPTER 11
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
2-11-1: Definitions
2-11-2: License Required
2-11-3: Filing Of Application And Fee Provision
2-11-4: Application For Massage Establishment
2-11-5: Issuance Of License For Massage Establishment
2-11-6: Facilities Necessary
2-11-7: Operating Requirements
2-11-8: Advertising
2-11-9: Inspections
2-11-10: Transfer Of License
2-11-11: Display Of Licens
2-11-12: Employment Of Massage Therapists
2-11-13: Revocation Or Suspension Of License For Massage Establishment
2-11-14: Renewal Of License
2-11-15: Maintaining Public Nuisance
2-11-16: Penalty
2-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ADVERTISE OR ADVERTISING MATERIAL: The issuance of any card, sign, or device to
any person; the causing, permitting, or allowing of any sign or marking on or
in any building, vehicle, or other structure; or any printed, audio, or video
material published in or broadcast by any newspaper, magazine, television,
radio, internet, internet streaming device, blog, chat room, website, or social
media.
APPLICANT: Any person that applies for a massage establishment license.
BODYWORK OR BODYWORK SERVICES: Any method of applying pressure on or friction
against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, touching
or stimulating, the external parts of the body, by another individual, with the
hands, any body part, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus
or appliances, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol,
liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments or similar
preparations, for compensation. The definition of bodywork or bodywork services
for the purposes of this article is intentionally not the same and is broader
than the definition of massage in this article, and is intended to cover
massage, bodywork services provided by bodywork practitioners, and other
similar services that fit the general definition, regardless of what the
services or the person providing the services is called, unless expressly
excluded by this chapter.
BODYWORK PRACTITIONER OR BODYWORK PROVIDER: Any person who provides bodywork
services, including massage therapists.
EMPLOYEE: Any and all persons other than massage therapists, who render any
service to the licensee, who receive compensation directly from the licensee,
and who have no physical contact with customers and clients.
HEALTH OFFICER: Health officer shall mean the director of the department of
health of the County of Sangamon or his authorized representative.
LICENSEE: An applicant who has received a license from the village to operate a
massage establishment.
MASSAGE, MASSAGE SERVICES, OR MASSAGE THERAPY: Any system of structured
palpitation or movement of the soft tissue of the body, including, but not
limited to, techniques such as effleurage or stroking and gliding, petrissage
or kneading, tapotement or percussion, tapping, pounding, friction, vibration,
compression, touching, stimulating, and stretching the external parts of the
body with or without the aid of lubricants, rubbing alcohol, liniments.
antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, salt or herbal
preparations, hydromassage, thermal massage, a massage device that mimics or
enhances the actions typically performed by human hands, or any other similar
preparations commonly used in this practice.
MASSAGE: Massage for the purposes of this chapter is intended to cover massage
and bodywork services provided by massage therapists, bodywork practitioners,
and other similar services that fit the definition, regardless of what the
services or the person providing the services is called, unless expressly
excluded by this chapter.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any
establishment having a fixed place of business within the Village that
advertises or offers massage services, or where any person for any
consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage, or carries on, or
permits to be engaged or carried on any massage services as defined in this
chapter.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in
the practice of massage as defined in this article, and who holds a valid
license from the Illinois department of finance and professional regulation, or
possesses written documentation of exemption from licensing or certification
under the Illinois massage licensing act (225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.) to perform
massage services. For the purposes of this chapter, "massage therapist" shall
include practitioners of Asian bodywork approaches and other similar
practitioners exempt from licensing under the Illinois massage licensing act
(225 ILCS 57/25).
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, limited liability
company, joint venture, joint stock company, corporation or combination thereof
in whatever form or character.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA: The male or female genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus
or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. (Ord. 25-02, 2-
24-2025)
2-11-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, offer, engage in, conduct or
carry on, or to permit to be advertised, offered, engaged in, conducted or
carried on, in or upon any premises in the village, the operation of a massage
establishment as herein defined, without first having obtained a license from
the village pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, with the exception of
the following:
   A.   Hospitals, nursing homes, medical facilities, or offices at which
physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, podiatrists, naprapaths,
occupational therapists, physical therapists, or other health care workers duly
licensed by the State of Illinois to provide, on an ongoing basis, professional
health services to individuals including, but not limited to, services
permitted by the Illinois occupational therapy practices act (335 ILCS 75/1 et
seq.); the Illinois physical therapy act (225 ILCS 90/1 et seq.): or the
Illinois naprapathic practices act (225 ILCS 63/1 et seq.);
   B.   Athletic trainers for any athletic program of a private or public
school, college, or any athletic team regularly organized or engaging in
competition;
   C.   Barbers, estheticians, and cosmetologists who are duly licensed by the
State of Illinois, and who only provide massage services of the neck, back,
face, scalp, hair, hands, and feet of a patron who is fully clothed;
   D.   Any school or educational institution licensed to do business as a
school or educational institution in the State of Illinois, or any school
recognized by or approved by or affiliated with the American massage therapy
association, the national certification board for therapeutic massage and
bodywork, or the federation of state massage therapy boards, and which has for
its purpose or offers courses in the teaching of the theory, method,
profession, or work of bodywork or massage, including clinical externships,
practicums or community services;
   E.   Home-based massage services provided by a person who is duly licensed
by the State of Illinois, provided that such person is otherwise in compliance
with the village code pertaining to home occupations; and
   F.   Massage services offered or conducted by a licensed massage
establishment and which are performed at a location other than a massage
establishment, provided that such massage services are performed in accordance
with this chapter. (Ord. 25-02, 2-24-2025)
2-11-3: FILING OF APPLICATION AND FEE PROVISION:
   A.   Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate, or conduct a
massage establishment shall file an application with the village clerk as
provided herein and pay a non-refundable fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
The application shall be in the form provided by the village clerk or his/her
designee.
   B.   The village clerk shall, within five (5) days of the receipt of an
application for a massage establishment license, forward copies of such
application to the chief of police, the department of public works, the fire
department, and the county department of health. The police department, the
department of public works, the fire department, and the county department of
health, may, within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a copy of the
application, inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage
establishment and make written recommendations concerning compliance with the
codes, laws, regulations, and ordinances that each respective department
administers. The president shall thereafter review the application and make the
final determination whether to grant or deny the application for a license
under this chapter, and shall also provide a copy of the recommendation to the
village clerk.
   C.   The president shall determine whether to grant, deny or hold an
application for further investigation, and the village clerk shall notify the
applicant that his or her application is granted, denied, or held for further
investigation by the president. Upon the conclusion of such additional
investigation, if necessary, the president shall determine whether to grant or
deny, and the village clerk shall advise the applicant in writing whether the
application is granted or denied by the president. (Ord. 25-02, 2-24-2025)
2-11-4: APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   The application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall
set forth the exact nature of the massage services to be administered, and the
proposed place of business and facilities therefor.
   B.   The application for a license shall contain the following information:
      1.   The applicant's name, current address, telephone number, and date of
birth.
      2.   The name, address, and date of birth of all employees, massage
therapists, managers, and persons with supervisory authority that have been or
are intended to be employed by the applicant or provide massage services.
      3.   Whether the applicant has had any license denied, revoked or
suspended in the Village of Pawnee, State of Illinois, or any other state or
municipality for a massage establishment, and the reasons therefor.
      4.   Whether the applicant, or any employee, massage therapist, manager,
or person with supervisory authority has had any criminal or municipal
ordinance violation convictions, forfeiture of bond, and pleadings of nolo
contendere on all charges, except minor traffic violations, within the last
five (5) years.
      5.   Authorization for the chief of police or his designee to conduct a
background check and take fingerprints on the applicant, and any manager or
person with supervisory authority.
      6.   A copy of the State of Illinois issued massage license for each
massage therapist that has been or is intended to be employed by the applicant
to provide massage services, or a copy of the certification or other written
documentation or proof of exemption for licensing as required by the massage
licensing act (225 ILCS 57/25).
      7.   A drawing or floor plan of the premises designating each room by its
purpose or the activity that will take place in each room.
      8.   If the premises is leased:
         a.   A copy of the lease, and any subleases, assignments or
acceptances in effect at the time of application;
         b.   The name, address and telephone number of the legal owner of the
premises;
         c.   If the legal owner is notan individual, the name, address and
telephone number of a representative or agent authorized to act on behalf of
the legal owner; and
         d.   If the premises is managed or supervised by someone other than
the legal owner thereof, the name, address and telephone number of the person,
business or entity who manages or supervises the premises.
      9.   If the applicant is a business:
         a.   The type of business or entity (i.e., sole proprietorship,
corporation, limited liability company, partnership, etc.);
         b.   The name of the business or entity, and all assumed names under
which the business or entity is conducted; and
         c.   The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and dates of birth of
all persons with management and supervisory authority of the business or
entity.
      10.   The information requested in divisions (B)(1), (3), (4) and (5)
shall also include information for the following persons:
         a.   If the applicant is a sole proprietorship, the information sought
to be provided shall be for the individual.
         b.   If the applicant is a partnership, the information sought to be
provided shall be for each general and limited partner, for each individual who
is a general partner of such general or limited partnership, and for each
individual who owns more than five percent (5%) of such limited partnership.
         c.   If the applicant is a joint venture, the information sought to be
provided shall be for each joint venturer and each individual who owns more
than five percent (5%) of such joint venture.
         d.   If the applicant is a corporation, the information sought to be
provided shall be for each officer and director, and if the corporation's stock
is publicly traded, each shareholder owning more than five percent (5%) of the
outstanding stock in said corporation.
         e.   If the applicant is a limited liability company, the information
sought to be provided shall be for each manager and member owning or holding
more than a five percent (5%) membership interest.
   C.   If a change in any information required under this section occurs at
any time during a license period, the licensee shall file a written statement
with the village clerk indicating the nature and effective date of the change.
The change in information statement shall be filed no later than ten (10) days
after the change(s) take effect.
(Ord. 25-02, 2-24-2025)
2-11-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   Upon receipt of the president's determination as referred to in this
chapter, the village clerk shall issue a license to maintain, operate or
conduct a massage establishment, unless the president finds:
      1.   That the operation of the massage establishment, as proposed by the
applicant, would not comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited
to, the building, health, planning, housing, zoning, and fire codes of the
Village of Pawnee; or
      2.   That the applicant and any other person who will be directly or
indirectly engaged in the management and operation of a massage establishment
has been convicted of or pled guilty to:
         a.   A felony;
         b.   An offense involving sexual misconduct with children; or
         c.   Prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, keeping a place of
prostitution, pimping, or other similar offense opposed to decency and
morality; or
         d.   That the applicant has failed or refused to give information
relevant to the investigation of the application; submitted false, misleading
or incomplete information; or has refused to submit to or cooperate with any
inspection required by this chapter; or
      3.   That the operation of the massage establishment, as proposed by the
applicant, would violate the provisions of this chapter; or
      4.   That the granting of the license would not be in the best interests
of the village and the reason(s) therefore; or
   B.   The president, at his/her discretion, may issue a license to any person
convicted of or who has pled guilty to any felony, if the president finds that
such conviction occurred at least five (5) years prior to the date of
application, the applicant has had no subsequent convictions, and the applicant
has shown evidence of rehabilitation sufficient to warrant the public trust.
   C.   Every massage establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall expire on January 1 of each year, unless sooner suspended or revoked in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 25-02, 2-24-2025)
2-11-6: FACILITIES NECESSARY:
   A.   No massage establishment shall be issued a license, nor be operated,
established or maintained within the village, unless said establishment
complies with each of the following minimum requirements:
      1.   Construction of room used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers
shall be made waterproof with approved waterproof materials and shall be
installed in accordance with the building code of the Village of Pawnee.
      2.   All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas,
lavatories, and floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected.
      3.   Adequate bathing, dressing, locker, and toilet facilities shall be
provided for patrons to be served at any given time. In the event male and
female patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate bathing, dressing,
locker, toilet, and massage room facilities shall be provided. Separate toilet
and lavatory facilities shall be maintained for personnel.
      4.   The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing non-disposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such non-disposable Instruments and materials shall be disinfected
after use on each patron.
      5.   Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean
linen, towels, and other materials used in connection with administering
massages. All soiled linens, towels, and other materials shall be kept
improperly covered containers or cabinets, which shall be kept separate from
the clean storage areas.
      6.   Toilet facilities shall be provided within the massage establishment
in convenient locations. When five (5) or more employees and patrons of
different sexes are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet
facilities shall be provided. A single water closet per sex shall be provided
for each twenty (20) or more employees or patrons of that sex on the premises
at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water
closet has been provided. Toilet facilities shall be designated as to the sex
accommodated therein.
      7.   Lavatories or washbasins shall provide both hot and cold running
water and shall be installed in the toilet room. Lavatories or washbasins shall
be provided with a soap dispenser and sanitary towels.
      8.   The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial
service. (Ord. 25-02, 2-24-2025)
2-11-7: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
   B.   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the
reception area in a location available to all patrons and prospective customers
or provided to all patrons and prospective customers as a written price list.
   C.   All employees, managers, persons with supervisory authority, massage
therapists, agents, and independent contractors shall wear clean, non-
transparent outer garments, which cover the sexual and genital areas while on
the licensed premises. Employees, massage therapists, agents, and independent
contractors shall not disrobe, or offer or agree to disrobe, either wholly or
partially while in the presence of any patron receiving massage services, A
separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with
individual lockers for each employee and massage therapist. Doors to such
dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
   D.   All massage establishments shall maintain clean, laundered sheets and
towels in sufficient quantity, and shall be laundered after each use thereof
and stored in a sanitary manner.
   E.   The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels,
cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of an employee, manager, person
with supervisory authority, massage therapist, agent or independent contractor.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for any employee, manager, person with supervisory
authority, massage therapist, agent, or independent contractor, to place his or
her hand upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any
manner, or to massage a sexual or genital area of any person while on the
licensed premises.
   G.   No employee, manager, person with supervisory authority, massage
therapist, agent or independent contractor shall perform, or offer or agree to
perform any act which would require the touching of the patrons' genital area.
   H.   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and
all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam
or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly
cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be
thoroughly cleaned after each use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it
shall be kept dry.
   I.   Oils, creams, lotions, or other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
   J.   No massage therapist shall administer a massage to a patron impaired by
intoxicating liquor or drugs, nor shall any massage therapist administer a
massage to a patron while impaired by intoxicating liquor or drugs.
   K.   No massage therapist shall administer a massage to a patron exhibiting
any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation, or skin eruption, unless a
physician or nurse practitioner duly licensed by the State of Illinois
certifies in writing that such person may be safely massaged and prescribing
the conditions thereof.
   L.   Each massage therapist shall wash his or her hands in hot running
water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering a massage to
each patron.
   M.   1.   All licensees shall maintain, as a business record of the licensed
massage establishment, a record of:
         a.   The date and time of all massage services performed at the
licensed premises:
         b.   The name of the massage therapist administering massage services;
and
         c.   The amounts received for massage services.
      2.   The record of the date, time, and service provided must be made
before services are initiated, and the record of the amount received for
services must be made at the time payment is rendered. All records shall be
kept for a period of at least one (1) year and shall be made available in a
format that can be inspected at any reasonable time upon request by the
president or the chief of police or their designees.
   N.   The main entrance to the massage establishment where patrons and
potential customers are greeted shall be clearly visible from the outside and
shall have and maintain clear glass that is not painted over, darkened, or
otherwise blocked by cloth or any other obstruction,
   O.   A sign shall be posted in a prominent location near the main entrance
of the massage establishment identifying the establishment as a massage
establishment and state the trade or business name as it appears on the massage
establishment's license.
   P.   Prospective customers and patrons shall be provided with written notice
which states the following;
      "State law prohibits soliciting another for the purpose of a sexual act.
Solicitation can be punishable as a Class 4 felony, subject an offender to
fines and imprisonment, and impoundment of any vehicle used by the offender to
commit the offense. Offers or requests to buy or purchase sexual services or
acts shall be immediately reported to law enforcement."
   Q.   Written notice shall be posted in a conspicuous location accessible to
all employees and massage therapists which states the following:
      "State law prohibits soliciting another for the purpose of a sexual act.
Solicitation can be punishable as a Class 4 felony, subject an offender to
fines and imprisonment, and impoundment of any vehicle used by the offender to
commit the offense. Offers or requests to buy or purchase sexual services or
acts should be immediately reported to the City of Springfield police
department by calling 911."
   R.   The hours of operation for massage establishments shall be limited to
the hours between eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. and nine o’clock (9:00) p.m.
   S.   There shall be not be placed, published, or distributed any
advertisement, picture, or statement in any manner or medium which is false,
deceptive, or misleading in order to induce any person to.purchase or utilize
any massage services, or which reasonably appears to suggest or imply any
sexual activity in connection with massage services.
   T.   No person shall reside or be allowed to remain overnight in the
licensed premises; provided, however, that if the licensed premises contains
living quarters that are properly zoned and authorized for such residential use
above the massage establishment, the entrance to such living quarters shall be
separate from the entrance to the massage establishment and shall not be
accessible in any manner from the interior of the massage establishment. (Ord.
25-02, 2-24-2025)
2-11-8: ADVERTISING:
No massage establishment granted a license under provisions of this chapter
shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published, or
distributed any advertising material that depicts any portion of the human body
that would reasonably suggest or imply to prospective customers that any sexual
activity is available or will be performed in connection with massage services,
or that employees, managers, persons with supervisory authority, or massage
therapists are dressed in any manner other than prescribed in this article, nor
shall any massage establishment suggest or imply in the text of such
advertising that any sexual activity is available or will be performed in
connection with massage services. (Ord. 25-02, 2-24-2025)
2-11-9: INSPECTIONS:
The department of public works, and the police department may make an
inspection of each massage establishment granted a license under the provisions
of this article for the purposes of determining whether the provisions of this
article are complied with. Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times
and in a reasonable manner. As a condition of the issuance of a license under
this article, the licensee consents to walk-through inspections by authorized
Village employees, without notice, at anytime during business hours, It shall
be unlawful for any licensee to fail to allow such inspection officer access to
the premises or to hinder such officer in any manner. (Ord. 25-02, 2-24-2025)
2-11-10: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
No license for the operation of a massage establishment issued pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be transferable: provided, however, that upon
the death or incapacity of a licensee, the massage establishment may continue
in business for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, to
allow for the approval of a new license. (Ord. 25-02, 2-24-2025)
2-11-11: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every licensee shall display a valid license in a conspicuous place within the
massage establishment so that the same may be readily seen by patrons or
prospective customers entering the premises. (Ord. 25-02, 2-24-2025)
2-11-12: EMPLOYMENT OF MASSAGE THERAPISTS:
   A.   Massage establishments shall not employ or contract with any person as
a massage therapist unless he or she holds a current, valid license issued by
the Illinois department of financial and professional regulation or written
proof of exemption from said license, as required by the massage licensing act
(225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.). Upon receiving notice or constructive notice that a
massage therapist has been disciplined or subject to investigation by the
department, the licensee shall be responsible for obtaining information as to
the status of said massage therapist's license.
   B.   Each massage establishment shall maintain a current list of all
licensed massage therapists who perform massage services and proof of their
current, valid license or written proof of exemption from said license as
required by the massage licensing act (225 ILCS 5 7/1 et seq.), The licensee
shall allow inspection of such records at any reasonable time upon request by
the village.
   C.   No student or non-licensed person, other than a person with written
proof of exemption from licensure as required by the massage licensing act (225
ILCS 57/1 et seq.), shall be allowed in a massage therapy room with a patron
unless accompanied by a licensed massage therapist at all times.
(Ord. 25-02, 2-24-2025)
2-11-13: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT:
Any license issued for a massage establishment under this article may be
revoked or suspended by the president for good cause or where any provision of
this chapter, the village code, or any law is violated by the licensee or any
massage therapist, employee, manager, person with supervisory authority, agent,
or independent contractor of the licensee while at the massage establishment.
For purposes of license revocation or suspension, the licensee shall be
strictly liable for such violations, regardless of actual or constructive
knowledge of such violations. It shall also be cause for revocation or
suspension that the licensee has made a false statement on an application for a
license or renewal thereof under this article, or in any case where the
licensee refused to permit any duly authorized police officer. Village
inspector, or health Inspector of the County of Sangamon to inspect the
licensed premises or the operations therein. Such license may also be revoked
or suspended by the president after upon the recommendations of a duly
authorized police officer. Village inspector, or the health inspector that such
business is being managed, conducted, or maintained without regard for the
public health or health of patrons or prospective customers, or without due
regard to proper sanitation or hygiene. (Ord. 25-02, 2-24-2025)
2-11-14: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any licensee may renew his or her license prior to the expiration thereof on
January 1 of each year, provided that he or she is qualified to receive a
license and the massage establishment complies with all of the requirements in
this chapter. Applications for renewal of license must be made in writing to
the village clerk not more than two (2) months and not less than one (1) month
prior to expiration of an existing license and accompanied by the applicable
license fee. (Ord. 25-02, 2-24-2025)
2-11-15: MAINTAINING PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any building used, operated, or maintained as a massage establishment in
violation of this article with the intentional, knowing, reckless or negligent
permission of the owner, licensee, or person managing or supervising the
building, together with all fixtures and other property used in violation of
this article, are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 25-02, 2-24-2025)
2-11-16: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of
not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) per offense. Each day the violation continues shall be
a separate offense. The village shall have the right to prohibit occupancy of
any building being utilized in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 25-02, 2-24-2025)
CHAPTER 12
MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND
MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
2-12-1:    Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax Imposed
2-12-2:    Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax
2-12-3:    Illinois Department Of Revenue To Administer Both Taxes
2-12-4:    Clerk To File Ordinance With Illinois Department Of Revenue
2-12-1: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in this municipality at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
chapter is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. 25-08, 8-11-2025, eff. 1-1-2026)
2-12-2: MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales
of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be the same rate identified in section 2-12-1, above. The
imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of
Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. 25-08, 8-11-2025, eff. 1-1-2026)
2-12-3: ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES:
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 25-08, 8-11-2025, eff. 1-1-2026)
2-12-4: CLERK TO FILE ORDINANCE WITH ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE:
   As required under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/
8-11-24), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of the
Ordinance upon which this chapter is based with the Illinois Department of
Revenue.
(Ord. 25-08, 8-11-2025, eff. 1-1-2026)
TITLE 3
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-2: Removal Of Nuisance Greenery, Pests And Rubbish Required By Owner
3-1-3: Removal Of Nuisance Greenery, Pests And Rubbish By Village
3-1-4: Other Nuisances To Be Removed
3-1-5: Enumeration Of Nuisances Not Exclusive
3-1-6: Penalty
3-1-7: Legal And Equitable Remedies
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used herein the following terms have the following definitions:
NUISANCE:
   A.   Sound, animals or things which interfere with the peace or comfort or
disturb the quiet enjoyment of any person in the village.
   B.   Anything which is made, permitted, used, kept, maintained, operated or
any building or any animal that is kept in a manner which is offensive,
nauseous, dangerous to life, limb or property or detrimental to the health of
the persons residing in that area.
   C.   Any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind discharged
into any street, alley or public place or on any adjacent lot or ground.
   D.   Any lot, ground or premises, within the village, on which stagnant
water may be standing so as to become or likely to become foul, putrid,
offensive or detrimental to the health and comfort of persons residing in the
vicinity thereof.
   E.   The emission of dense smoke from the chimney or smokestack of any
building or premises or from any building or premises or from any garbage or
rubbish container.
   F.   Any spoiled, tainted or diseased perishable agricultural commodity.
   G.   "Nuisance greenery", "rubbish" and "pests" as defined herein.
   H.   In addition to what is herein declared to be a nuisance, those offenses
known to the common law or of the state or federal statutes as nuisances may,
in case the same exist within the village, be treated as such and proceeded
against as provided in this chapter.
NUISANCE GREENERY:
   A.   Trees, shrubs, bushes, "weeds" (as defined herein) or plants permitted
to grow on premises adjacent to any street or alley or other public way in a
manner as to obstruct the view and endanger traffic conditions.
   B.   "Weeds" (as defined herein), and dead or dying trees or bushes, stumps
and roots, on land within the village.
   C.   Elm trees infected with Dutch elm disease or ash trees infected with
the emerald ash borer.
PESTS: Undesirable arthropods (including certain insects, spiders, mites,
ticks, and related organisms), wood infesting organisms, rats, mice, and other
obnoxious undesirable animals, but does not include a feral cat, a "companion
animal" as that term is defined in the humane care for animals act 1 ,
"animals" as that term is defined in the Illinois diseased animals act 2 , or
animals protected by the wildlife code 3 .
RUBBISH: Any unsightly material, waste products, refuse, debris, trash or waste
lumber deposited, left, piled or scattered that may become a breeding place for
insects, rodents or vermin or that may give off unpleasant odors or create a
health or fire hazard where located.
WEEDS: An annual or perennial herbaceous plant of volunteer growth, not
cultivated or useful for human food or enjoyment and shall include, but not be
limited to, the following: jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistles of all kinds,
cocklebur, barberry (tall, common or other horticultural varieties), poison
ivy, yellow dock, Indian mallow, sweet clover, wild mustard (including black
mustard and yellow mustard), May weed, lamb's quarters, pig weed, beggar ticks,
wild lettuce, shepherds purse, smart weed, sow thistle, tumbleweed, milk weed,
dandelions, etc., any plant that, when in blossom, gives off an unpleasant or
obnoxious odor or pollen irritating to human tissue and any plant growth that
may conceal rubbish, debris or filthy deposits or constitute a fire hazard when
dry, and grass that is more than eight inches (8") in height, random growth or
volunteer growth of bushes or brush that may conceal rubbish, debris or filthy
deposits or constitute a fire hazard when dry or any plant that causes or adds
its influence in bringing on hay fever or other similar or noxious plant and
all plants fitting within the term "weeds" as used in the Illinois municipal
code. (Ord. 13-04, 2-11-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 510 ILCS 70/.
2 2. 510 ILCS 50/.
3 3. 520 ILCS 5/.
3-1-2: REMOVAL OF NUISANCE GREENERY, PESTS AND RUBBISH REQUIRED BY OWNER:
   A.   Failure To Obey Notice, Removal By Village; Costs: In all cases where
the owner, occupant or lessee of real estate on which there is rubbish, pests
or nuisance greenery, shall: 1) fail to cut or remove nuisance greenery; 2)
fail to remove rubbish; or 3) fail to prevent or exterminate pests after ten
(10) working days' notice in writing mailed to him or her by certified mail,
return receipt requested, at his or her last known address ascertainable by the
village, notifying him or her to: 1) cut or remove nuisance greenery; 2) remove
rubbish; or 3) to prevent or exterminate pests then the village president or
chairman of the street and sidewalk committee of the village board may cause
the nuisance greenery to be cut, trimmed or removed, or the rubbish removed or
pests exterminated or removed and the entire expense thereof shall be
chargeable to both the person who owns and the one who controls such real
estate, to be collected by suit or otherwise, in addition to the penalty
prescribed in this chapter. The ten (10) days above referred to shall begin
from date of such mailing.
   B.   Failure To Pay; Penalty: Any person, liable hereunder for payment of
the foregoing expense to the village, shall pay the full amount of said charge
within ten (10) days after date of mailing statement to owner, occupant or
lessee at his last known address or said charge shall be delinquent. Failure to
pay the charge within the time specified shall thereafter subject the violator
to a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid amount of said delinquent
charge or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater, which shall be collected
as part of said delinquent charge.
   C.   Removal: Nuisance greenery, when cut down, shall be removed from the
lot or disposed of in such manner as not to create a nuisance or hazard. (Ord.
13-04, 2-11-2013)
3-1-3: REMOVAL OF NUISANCE GREENERY, PESTS AND RUBBISH BY VILLAGE:
   A.   Enforcing Officer: It shall be the duty of the chairman of the street
and sidewalk committee of the village board, when he or she shall obtain
information from any source of the existence of nuisance greenery, pests or
rubbish on private property contrary to section
3-1-2 of this chapter, to take proper steps at once to enforce this chapter.
   B.   Removal By Village: The nuisances established pursuant to this chapter
may be removed or remedied by private contractors hired by the village, or, at
the discretion of the enforcing officer, by village personnel.
   C.   Charge: The village hereby establishes a charge, payable to the
village, of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour or any portion thereof for
the use of village employees, equipment and fuel for removal of rubbish, pests
and nuisance greenery. The corporate authorities of the village hereby find
that said charge is fair and reasonable to recompense the village for its
expenses. In the event the chairman of the streets and sidewalk committee
contracts with a third party for the removal of rubbish, pests or nuisance
greenery, the charge to the owner, occupant or lessee shall be the village's
out of pocket expenses, plus a twenty five dollar ($25.00) service charge for
administering the contract, which the corporate authorities find to be fair and
reasonable to recompense the village.
   D.   Lien: In the event that the nuisance greenery, pest or rubbish removal
expense remains unpaid for more than ten (10) days after said service is
performed and expense incurred by the village, said unpaid charge shall
constitute a lien upon the real estate, and the village clerk is hereby
authorized, in accordance with law, to file notice of lien in the office of the
recorder of deeds of Sangamon County.
   E.   Suit:
      1.   In addition to any other action authorized by section
3-1-2 of this chapter or by the Illinois municipal code, the village may, to
the extent permitted by law, bring suit to foreclose the lien and to sue the
owner or lessee or occupant of the real estate or their agent, in a civil
action to recover the money due for services rendered, plus all expenses and
reasonable attorney fees to be fixed by the court. Any such judgment shall be
enforced in accordance with law. In addition to the charges due, the village is
entitled to collect the costs of filing notice of lien, foreclosing said lien
and litigation costs, together with all office and legal expense incurred in
connection with the collection of the amount due.
      2.   Upon payment of all costs, expenses, charges and penalties, the lien
created under this section shall be released by the village, which release
shall be filed of record in the same manner as filing notice of the lien,
pursuant to law, the expense of said filing to be paid by the violator. (Ord.
13-04, 2-11-2013)
3-1-4: OTHER NUISANCES TO BE REMOVED:
Any person causing a "nuisance" as defined herein and other nuisance greenery,
rubbish and pests, and the owner, occupant or lessee of land on which any
nuisance exists, shall correct the nuisance within ten (10) working days'
notice in writing, mailed to him or her by the village president, clerk or
attorney by certified mail, return receipt requested, at his or her last known
address ascertainable by the village, notifying him to correct the nuisance.
Where an imminent threat to health or safety is involved, the village president
may specify a period of time shorter than ten (10) working days for correction
of the nuisance, and the person causing the nuisance and the owner and occupant
thereof shall be required to correct the nuisance within the time prescribed in
the notice. (Ord. 13-04, 2-11-2013)
3-1-5: ENUMERATION OF NUISANCES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The various nuisances described and enumerated in this chapter shall not be
deemed to be exclusive but shall be in addition to all other nuisances
described and prohibited by village ordinances. (Ord. 13-04, 2-11-2013)
3-1-6: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, on
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
violation. Each day during which a violation continues beyond the specified
time for correction shall constitute a separate punishable offense. (Ord. 13-
04, 2-11-2013)
3-1-7: LEGAL AND EQUITABLE REMEDIES:
In addition to the penalties and liens prescribed herein, the village may avail
itself of all legal and equitable remedies permitted by the Illinois municipal
code and other statutes of the state to abate a nuisance, including, but not
limited to, seeking preliminary and permanent injunctive relief. (Ord. 13-04,
2-11-2013)
CHAPTER 2
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: Prohibited Burning
3-2-3: Exemptions to Prohibited Burning
3-2-4: Penalties
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
AGRICULTURAL WASTES: Any refuse, except garbage and dead animals, generated on
a farm or ranch by crop and livestock production practices, including such
items as bags, cartons, dry bedding, structural materials and landscape wastes.
GARBAGE: Refuse resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food or food products.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Any vegetable or plant refuse, except garbage. The term
includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, yard trimmings and crop residues.
OPEN BURNING: The combustion of any matter in such a way that the product of
the combustion is emitted to the open air without originating or passing
through equipment for which a permit could be issued under section 9(b) of the
Act of the Illinois Pollution Control Board 1 .
RESTRICTED AREAS: The area within the boundaries of the Village unless said
area is one thousand feet (1,000') from residential or other populated areas.
(Ord. 89-13, 7-10-89)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 415 ILCS 5/9.
3-2-2: PROHIBITED BURNING:
   A.   No person shall cause or allow open burning, except as provided in
Section 3-2-3 of this Chapter.
   B.   No person shall cause or allow the burning of any refuse in any chamber
or apparatus, unless such chamber or apparatus is designed for the purpose of
disposing of the class of refuse being burned.
   C.   No person shall burn leaves or any other material on a street, gutter,
curb or sidewalk owned by the Village. (Ord. 89-13, 7-10-89)
3-2-3: EXEMPTIONS TO PROHIBITED BURNING:
The following activities are not in violation of this Chapter unless they cause
air pollution as defined in the Act of the Environmental Protection Agency 1 :
   A.   Agricultural Waste: The open burning of agricultural waste, but only:
      1.   On the premises on which such waste is generated;
      2.   In areas other than restricted areas;
      3.   When atmospheric conditions will readily dissipate contaminants;
      4.   If such burning does not create a visibility hazard on roadways,
railroad tracks or air fields;
      5.   More than one thousand feet (1,000') from residential or other
populated areas; and
      6.   When it can be affirmatively demonstrated that no economically
reasonable alternative method of disposal is available.
   B.   Combat Of Existing Fires: The setting of fires to combat or limit
existing fires, when reasonably necessary in the judgment of the responsible
government official.
   C.   Recreational And Domestic Burning: The burning of fuels for legitimate
campfire, recreational and cooking purposes or in domestic fireplaces in areas
where such burning is consistent with other laws; provided, that no garbage
shall be burned in such cases.
   D.   Waste Gases: The burning of waste gases; provided, that in the case of
refineries all such flares shall be equipped with smokeless tips or comparable
devices to reduce pollution.
   E.   Torches And Flares: Small open flames for heating tar, for welding,
acetylene torches, highway safety flares and the like. (Ord. 89-13, 7-10-1989)
   F.   Burning Of Yard Waste:
      1.   Definition: As used herein, "yard waste" includes and is limited to
leaves, wood chips, grass clippings, garden waste such as dry weeds and stalks,
and tree and shrub branches and twigs.
      2.   Burning Of Yard Waste–When Permitted: Burning of yard waste is
permitted only on even-numbered days and only in accordance with the
regulations set forth in subsection F3 of this Section. Burning of yard waste
other than in accordance with subsection F3 hereof is hereby declared a
nuisance.
      3.   Regulations Governing Burning Of Yard Waste: The following
regulations govern the burning of yard waste:
         a.   Burning of yard waste is prohibited prior to seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. or sunset, whichever is earlier.
Burning is prohibited on all odd-numbered days. Each fire must be completely
extinguished during times when burning is prohibited.
         b.   Burning of yard waste is prohibited when there is no wind
movement or when winds could constitute a hazard of airborne sparks or embers
which would spread fires.
         c.   Burning of yard waste must be personally supervised at all times
by a person at least fourteen (14) years of age.
         d.   Persons burning yard waste shall do so with due regard for the
safety of others and shall take appropriate precautions to ensure that the fire
is and can be contained at all times.
         e.   Burning of yard waste which has a moisture content that will not
allow for an open and visible flame is prohibited.
         f.   Burning of yard waste which has been chemically treated or which
produces noxious odors is prohibited.
         g.   Burning or dumping of yard waste on public property, including,
but not limited to, streets, sidewalks and alleys, is prohibited.
         h.   Burning of yard waste emitting excessive smoke, thereby creating
a visibility hazard, including, but not limited to, a hazard on any roadway,
sidewalk or private drive, is prohibited at all times.
      4.   Enforcement: The Village Police Department is charged with the
responsibility of monitoring and enforcing subsection F of this Section. The
Village Police Department may order the extinguishment of any fire which, in
the opinion of the officer on duty, violates the regulations of subsection F3
of this Section. (Ord. 96-16, 10-28-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
3-2-4: PENALTIES:
   A.   Fines: Violation of this Chapter shall be punishable by a fine as
follows:
      First offense   $ 30.00
      Second offense    50.00
      Third offense    100.00
      Subsequent offenses: Not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00.
   B.   Settlement Of Citations: To avoid prosecution for a first, second or
third offense under this Chapter, a violator may, within ten (10) days of
receiving a citation, settle the citation by payment of one-half (1/2) of the
specified fine at the Village Hall. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized
and directed to cease prosecution of any citation so settled.
   C.   Fines Not Exclusive: Fires in violation of this Chapter are hereby
declared to be a nuisance. In addition to the penalties prescribed herein, the
Village may proceed in its discretion against any violator to obtain an
injunction, or any other remedy provided at law or in equity, to restrain and
abate nuisances. (Ord. 96-16, 10-28-1996)
CHAPTER 3
VILLAGE BURN PILE
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definition
3-3-2: Burn Pile Provided
3-3-3: Residents' Use
3-3-4: Placement Of Landscape Waste
3-3-5: Regulations
3-3-6: Schedule
3-3-7: Violation
3-3-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, "domestic landscape waste" is defined as, and is
limited to, trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves,
grass, shrubbery, yard trimmings and other waste vegetation generated at a
residential property, or at vacant land zoned residential, located within the
corporate limits of the village. "Domestic landscape waste" does not include
landscape waste from any business or area not zoned residential, or landscape
waste originating outside of the village of Pawnee. (Ord. 14-08, 5-12-2014)
3-3-2: BURN PILE PROVIDED:
The village shall provide a facility for the burning, exclusively by village
personnel, of domestic landscape waste, which facility is referred to herein as
the burn pile. (Ord. 14-08, 5-12-2014)
3-3-3: RESIDENTS' USE:
Any individual resident of the village of Pawnee may deposit domestic landscape
waste at the burn pile at such times as the burn pile is open to the public.
(Ord. 14-08, 5-12-2014)
3-3-4: PLACEMENT OF LANDSCAPE WASTE:
All domestic landscape waste deposited at the burn pile shall be placed inside
an area which will be clearly marked and delineated by the village street
department. No person shall deposit domestic landscape waste outside the area
so marked and delineated, or during times when the burn pile is not open to the
public. (Ord. 14-08, 5-12-2014)
3-3-5: REGULATIONS:
Only residents of the village of Pawnee may make deposits at the burn pile. No
materials other than "domestic landscape waste" as defined herein shall be
deposited at the burn pile. No person other than authorized village employees
shall initiate or tend any fire at the burn pile. (Ord. 14-08, 5-12-2014)
3-3-6: SCHEDULE:
The village street department will establish a schedule for times when the burn
pile will be open to the public and will post signage designating normal times
during which the burn pile is open to the public as well as the definition of
"domestic landscape waste". However, the village is not bound to the posted
schedule and may in its discretion close and restrict access to the burn pile
due to operational necessities, manpower availability, weather or other
reasons. (Ord. 14-08, 5-12-2014)
3-3-7: VIOLATION:
Any person violating section
3-3-4 or 3-3-5 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject of a
fine of not less than three hundred seventy five dollars ($375.00) or more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and in addition, shall be liable to
reimburse the village for any landfill or hauling fees caused by the violation.
(Ord. 14-08, 5-12-2014)
CHAPTER 4
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: Chronic Nuisance Properties Outlawed
3-4-3: Notice And Abatement
3-4-4: Abatement Proceedings
3-4-5: Emergency Closing Procedures
3-4-6: Fines
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used herein, the following terms have the following definitions:
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY: A property upon which at least two (2) of the
following criminal activities have occurred during any sixty (60) day period,
or upon which at least three (3) of the following criminal activities have
occurred during any three hundred sixty five (365) day period, as a result of
separate events that have been independently investigated by a law enforcement
agency:
   A.   Unlawful possession or consumption of alcohol by a minor, 235 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-20;
   B.   Any homicide offense as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-
1 et seq.;
   C.   Any kidnapping offense as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
10-1 et seq.;
   D.   Any sexual assault, sexual abuse or related offenses as defined in
major sex offenses, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1.10 et seq.,
vulnerable victim offenses, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9.1 et seq.,
prostitution offenses, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14 et seq., or
pornography offenses, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20 et seq.;
   E.   Assault or battery or any related offense as defined in 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/12-1 et seq.;
   F.   Criminal housing management as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/12-5.1 and 5.1a;
   G.   Possession of explosives or incendiary devices as defined in 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/20-2;
   H.   Any offense involving damage and trespass to property as defined in 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21 et seq.;
   I.   Any offense involving deadly weapons as defined in 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/24 et seq.;
   J.   Any offense involving disorderly conduct as defined in 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/26-1 et seq.;
   K.   Any offense involving gambling as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/28-1 et seq.;
   L.   Any offense involving the possession, manufacture or delivery of
controlled substances in the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 570/401 et seq.;
   M.   Any offense involving the possession, cultivation, manufacture or
delivery of cannabis as defined in the cannabis control act, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq.;
   N.   Sale, delivery or possession of drug paraphernalia, as defined in 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 600/3 and 3.5;
   O.   Any offense involving the possession, manufacture, or delivery of
methamphetamine as defined in the methamphetamine control and community
protection act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 646/1 et seq.;
   P.   Any offense involving the use, sale or delivery of intoxicating
compounds as defined in the use of intoxicating compounds act, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 690/.01 et seq.
CONTROL: The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern
conduct that occurs on property.
OWNER: Any person having any legal or equitable interest in a chronic nuisance
property, including, but not limited to, interests under any deed, contract for
deed, lease, will, trust, land trust, or estate, and including mortgagees in
possession.
PERMIT: To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or
expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.
PERSON: Any natural person or legal person such as, without limitation, an
association, partnership, limited liability company or corporation.
PERSON IN CHARGE: Any person in actual or constructive possession of a
property, including, but not limited to, an owner or occupant of property under
his or her domain, ownership or control.
PROPERTY: Any real property, including land which is affixed, incidental or
pertinent to the land, including, but not limited to, any premises, room,
house, building, or structure or any separate part or portion thereof. (Ord.
13-5, 3-11-2013)
3-4-2: CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES OUTLAWED:
   A.   Chronic nuisance properties are hereby declared to be and are defined
as a nuisance.
   B.   No person shall be the owner or person in charge of a chronic nuisance
property. (Ord. 13-5, 3-11-2013)
3-4-3: NOTICE AND ABATEMENT:
   A.   Whenever the chief of police receives documentation of the occurrence
of the second nuisance activity in a sixty (60) day period or the third
nuisance activity in a three hundred sixty five (365) day period at or within a
property and determines that the property has become a chronic nuisance
property, the chief of police may, after consultation with the trustee having
jurisdiction over building and zoning, notify the person in charge in writing
that the property has been determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The
notice shall contain the following information: the street address or legal
description sufficient for identification of the property; a statement that the
chief of police has determined the property to be chronic nuisance property
with a concise description of the nuisance activities leading to the chief's
findings; and a demand that the person in charge respond within ten (10) days
to the chief of police and propose a course of action that the chief of police
agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.
   B.   Service of the notice shall be made either personally or by first class
mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person in
charge at the address of the property believed to be a chronic nuisance
property, or such other place which is likely to give the person in charge
notice of the determination by the chief of police.
   C.   A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at such address as
shown on the tax rolls of Sangamon County, and upon the occupant, at the
address of the property, if these persons are different than the person in
charge, and shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage
prepaid.
   D.   A copy of the notice shall also be posted at the property after ten
(10) days have elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the person
in charge if the person in charge has not contacted the chief of police.
   E.   The failure of any person to receive notice that the property may be a
chronic nuisance property shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the
proceedings under this chapter.
   F.   After the notification, but prior to the commencement of legal
proceedings by the village pursuant to this chapter, if a person in charge
agrees in writing with the chief of police that the person in charge will
pursue a course of action the parties agree will abate the nuisance activities
giving rise to the violation, the chief of police may agree to postpone legal
proceedings for a period of not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30)
days. If the agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the
nuisance activity or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached within
thirty (30) days, the chief of police, after consultation with the trustee
having jurisdiction over building and zoning, may request authorization for the
village attorney counsel to commence a legal proceeding to abate the nuisance.
(Ord. 13-5, 3-11-2013)
3-4-4: ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   If the procedures established pursuant to section
3-4-3 of this chapter have not resulted in abatement of the nuisance
conditions, the corporate authorities of the village may direct the village
attorney to commence an action in the circuit court of the 7th judicial
circuit, Sangamon County, Illinois, to abate the nuisance conditions and for
fines as set forth in section
3-4-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 13-5, 3-11-2013)
3-4-5: EMERGENCY CLOSING PROCEDURES:
In the event that it is determined that a chronic nuisance property is an
immediate threat to the public safety and welfare, the village may apply to the
court for such relief without complying with the procedures set forth in
section
3-4-3 of this chapter, including, but not limited to, an order permitting the
village to secure the property. In the event that the village is authorized to
secure the property, all reasonable costs incurred by the village to effect a
closure shall be made and assessed against the owner and person in charge. If
used herein, "costs" means these costs actually incurred by the village for the
physical securing of the property, as well as, tenant relocation costs. (Ord.
13-5, 3-11-2013)
3-4-6: FINES:
Any person found by the court to have violated this chapter shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). Each day a chronic nuisance property exists: a) after
receipt of notice from the chief of police in accordance with section
3-4-3 of this chapter, or b) after posting of a notice on the property, or c)
the offender has actual knowledge of the existence of the chronic nuisance
property, shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 13-5, 3-11-2013)
CHAPTER 5
CAMPING
SECTION:
3-5-1: Purpose
3-5-2: Definitions
3-5-3: Unlawful Camping
3-5-4: Occasional Camping In Residential Zones
3-5-5: Special Events
3-5-6: Exclusions
3-5-7: Penalties
3-5-1: PURPOSE:
The streets and public areas within the village should be readily accessible
and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for
camping purposes interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for
which they were intended. Such activity can constitute a public health and
safety hazard which adversely impacts neighborhoods and commercial areas.
Camping on private property without the consent of the owner, without proper
sanitary facilities and measures and for other than a minimal duration
adversely affects private property rights as well as public health, safety, and
welfare of the village.
The purpose of this chapter is to maintain streets, parks and other public and
private areas within the village in a clean, sanitary and accessible condition
and to adequately protect the health, safety and public welfare of the
community, while recognizing that, subject to reasonable conditions, camping
and camp facilities associated with special events can be beneficial to the
cultural and educational climate in the village. (Ord. 14-16, 9-8-2014)
3-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
CAMP AND CAMPING: To reside or dwell temporarily in a place, with shelter, and
to conduct activities of daily living such as eating, sleeping or storage of
personal possessions in such place. "Camp" and "camping" do not include
residing inside any single-family, duplex, or multi-family building that is a
principal use of a zoning lot.
CAMPSITE: A place: a) where camping occurs, b) on which shelter exists for the
purpose of future camping, or c) on which shelter exists and camping has
occurred in the past.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: All property other than public property.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: All property belonging to the village of Pawnee or other
governmental entity, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, alleys,
improved or unimproved land and parks.
SHELTER: Includes any tent, tarpaulin, lean-to, sleeping bag, bedroll, blanket,
or other form of cover or protection from the elements other than clothing.
(Ord. 14-16, 9-8-2014)
3-5-3: UNLAWFUL CAMPING:
Except as permitted pursuant to sections
3-5-4 and
3-5-5 of this chapter, it is unlawful and a public nuisance:
   A.   For any person to camp or to establish or maintain a campsite on any
public property or private property in the village of Pawnee, or
   B.   For any person to allow camping to occur, or a campsite to be
established or maintained, on property owned, occupied or controlled by such
person. (Ord. 14-16, 9-8-2014)
3-5-4: OCCASIONAL CAMPING IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
Camping and campsites are permitted in the rear yard of any private
residentially zoned lot so long as:
   A.   The owner or occupant of the private residential lot consents;
   B.   An adult owner or occupant of the private residential lot is present on
the lot between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. while camping is occurring;
   C.   The owner or occupant of the private residential lot provides access by
persons who are camping to a working toilet and sink in a building located on
the same zoning lot as the campsite, and to that purpose, has an active water
and sewer account with the village;
   D.   Camping or maintenance of a campsite on any zoning lot is limited to
not more than three (3) consecutive nights and to not more than three (3)
nights in any calendar week; and
   E.   No consideration, whether in money, goods, services, or otherwise, is
given to the owner of the residential lot in exchange for the privilege of
camping. (Ord. 14-16, 9-8-2014)
3-5-5: SPECIAL EVENTS:
The village board may, in its discretion, issue a permit to establish, maintain
and operate campsites on public or private property in connection with a
special event. A special event includes, but is not limited to, programs
operated by the village departments, youth, school, church and club events,
marathons or other sporting events and scouting activities. A reasonable fee as
established by the village board shall be paid in advance of the camping event
by the applicant, to reimburse the village for any extraordinary costs
associated with the event. In exercising its discretion to issue a temporary
permit, the village board shall consider any facts or evidence bearing on the
sanitary, health, safety and welfare conditions on or surrounding the area or
tract of land upon which the proposed campsite is to be located. (Ord. 14-16,
9-8-2014)
3-5-6: EXCLUSIONS:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit or make unlawful the ownership
or storage of a camping trailer or other vehicle on public or private property
if otherwise not prohibited by law or ordinance, and so long as the vehicle is
not occupied. (Ord. 14-16, 9-8-2014)
3-5-7: PENALTIES:
Any person found by the court to have violated this chapter shall be fined not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day on which camping in violation of
this chapter occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition to an action for fines, the village may bring an equitable action
to compel a violator or owner or occupant of property abate the public nuisance
of illegal camping. (Ord. 14-16, 9-8-2014)
CHAPTER 6
DEPOSIT OF YARD WASTE IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: Deposit Of Yard Waste Prohibited
3-6-3: Nuisance
3-6-4: Fines
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
DRAINAGE DITCH: Drainage ditches which are within a Village-owned right-of-way
adjoining a street.
PROMPTLY: Within two (2) hours.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: All areas owned by the Village for street or sidewalk purposes,
whether pursuant to a dedication, deed, easement or otherwise.
SIDEWALK: A sidewalk which is within a Village-owned right-of- way.
STREET: The paved portion of a street which is within a Village- owned right-
of-way.
YARD WASTE: Trees, tree trimmings, limbs, branches, stumps, brush, weeds,
leaves, grass, shrubbery, yard trimmings, grass clippings, and other waste
vegetation. (Ord. 17-02, 1-9-2017)
3-6-2: DEPOSIT OF YARD WASTE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Except as permitted by subsection C of this section, no person may
deposit yard waste on a street, on a sidewalk, or in or upon a drainage ditch.
   B.   Owners and occupiers of real property shall not permit or suffer any
contractor or other third party to deposit yard waste from such property on a
street, on a sidewalk, or in or upon a drainage ditch. Owners and occupiers of
real property shall promptly remove or cause the removal of yard waste from
such property which has been deposited by a contractor or other third party on
a street, sidewalk or drainage ditch in violation of this chapter.
   C.   A person who mows a drainage ditch may leave the grass clipping from
the mowing operation in the drainage ditch. Persons may blow grass clippings
onto streets and sidewalks during the normal course of mowing operations, so
long as they are promptly removed. (Ord. 17-02, 1-9-2017)
3-6-3: NUISANCE:
The deposit of yard waste in violation of section
3-6-2 of this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance. The Village may remove any
such nuisance found on its property and may bill the owner thereof for the cost
of removal, and may impose a lien on the property for the cost thereof, in
accordance with the procedures set forth in section
3-1-3 of this title. (Ord. 17-02, 1-9-2017)
3-6-4: FINES:
Any person found by the court to have violated this chapter shall be fined not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense, in addition to being liable for the cost to
the Village of removal of the nuisance. (Ord. 17-02, 1-9-2017)
CHAPTER 7
LOCAL EMERGENCY POWERS
SECTION:
3-7-1:   Definitions
3-7-2:   Declaration
3-7-3:   Orders Authorized
3-7-4:   Duration
3-7-5:   Notice
3-7-6:   Violations
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section 3-7-1, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing
or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises
within the corporate limits of the city except officials of any governmental
unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to said civil
emergency.
DISASTER: An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or
loss of life or property resulting from any natural or technological cause,
including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous
materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to
avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods
of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical shortages of
essential fuels and energy, explosion, riot, hostile military or paramilitary
action, public health emergencies, acts of domestic terrorism, other acts
defined as a "disaster" pursuant to Section 4 of the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency Act (20 ILCS 3305/4), or other acts giving rise to a state of
emergency as contemplated by Section 11-1-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/11-1-6).
LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY: A written declaration or proclamation of the Village
President, under oath, setting forth the facts which constitute a disaster,
describing the nature of the disaster and declaring that a local state of
emergency exists in accordance with the definitions set forth in this Section
3-7-1.
(Ord. 20-04, 3-26-2020)
3-7-2: DECLARATION:
Whenever a disaster, as defined in Section
3-7-1 exists, the Village President is authorized to declare the existence of a
local state of emergency. This declaration must be filed with the municipal
clerk as soon as practicable after issuance. Such declaration(s) of a local
state of emergency shall constitute a declaration of a local disaster pursuant
to 20 ILCS 3305/11, the effect of which is to activate the emergency operations
plan of the Village and to authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance under
that plan or any other applicable plan. (Ord. 20-04, 3-26-2020)
3-7-3: ORDERS AUTHORIZED:
After the proclamation of a local state of emergency, the Village President
may, in the interest of public safety and welfare and to address issues
threatened by the emergency, take any or all of the following actions by
executive order during the state of emergency:
   A.   All actions reasonably necessary to respond to the disaster;
   B.   A general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the Village
or to the Village as a whole, as the Village President deems reasonable and
advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night as the Village
President deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare;
   C.   Approve previously appropriated expenditures of the city for the
purpose of continuing the operations of the municipality;
   D.   In the event the local state of emergency extends beyond the current
fiscal year and a new budget has not been approved, approve new spending by the
Village during the existence of the local state of emergency;
   E.   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer; or
   F.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle. (Ord. 20-04, 3-
26-2020)
3-7-4: DURATION:
The declaration of a local state of emergency shall be effective for the
earlier of a period of up to seven (7) days or upon the adjournment of the
first regular meeting of the corporate authorities after the state of emergency
is declared, unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Village
President, or, his or her interim emergency successor, indicating that the
disaster no longer exists. A declaration may be continued or renewed beyond
seven (7) days by or with the consent of the Village Board of Trustees. (Ord.
20-04, 3-26-2020)
3-7-5: NOTICE:
Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Village Clerk shall notify
the news media situated within the City Village, and shall cause at least four
(4) copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency and any
curfew to be posted at the following places within the city: the city hall, the
police station, the post office, and in the area of any curfew. (Ord. 20-04, 3-
26-2020)
3-7-6: VIOLATIONS:
Any person violating any of the executive orders issued pursuant this Chapter
shall be guilty of an offense against the Village and shall be punished as
provided by Village code. (Ord. 20-04, 3-26-2020)
TITLE 4
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 0
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-0-1: Part Time Police Officers
4-0-1: PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
This section applies to any part time officers presently employed by the
village as well as to future hires. A person hired as a part time police
officer shall have the following qualifications:
   A.   The person shall be twenty one (21) years of age.
   B.   The person shall not have been convicted of any criminal felony or
criminal misdemeanor offense.
   C.   The person shall successfully complete a drug and alcohol test as
prescribed by the department and shall undergo a background check conducted by
the department.
   D.   The person shall either:
      1.   Have completed the part time police training course prescribed by
the Illinois police training board; or
      2.   Otherwise qualify as a part time officer pursuant to section 8.2 of
the police training act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 705/8.2; or
      3.   Qualify as a full time police officer, having completed the basic
training for full time officers as required by the Illinois law enforcement
training standards board pursuant to the police training act.
   E.   The person shall have successfully completed that training required
under the Illinois peace officer firearm training act, 50 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 710/0.01 et seq.
   F.   The person shall have provided the chief of police with proof of
qualification under subsections D and E of this section. (Ord. 12-06, 5-14-
2012)
CHAPTER 1
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Definitions
4-1-2: Inoculation; Certificate
4-1-3: Collar And Tags
4-1-4: Control Of Dogs And Other Animals
4-1-5: Running At Large
4-1-6: Designation Of Pound
4-1-7: Notice Of Impoundment
4-1-8: Redemption Of Impounded Dogs
4-1-9: Destruction Of Unredeemed Dogs And Other Animals
4-1-10: Dogs Which Have Bitten Persons
4-1-11: Fierce Dogs; Nuisances
4-1-12: Duties Of Village Officials
4-1-13: Unknown Owner
4-1-14: Animal Control Officer
4-1-15: Harboring Of Certain Animals Prohibited
4-1-16: Penalty
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
AT LARGE: Any dog or other animal shall be deemed to be at large when it is off
the property of its owner and not under the control of a responsible person, or
on the property of his owner and neither under the control of a responsible
person nor under restraint.
FIERCE DOG: Any dog that has bitten one or more persons shall be classified as
a fierce dog.
INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES: The injection, subcutaneously or otherwise, as
approved by the Department of Agriculture of the State of Illinois, of canine
anti-rabic vaccine approved by the Illinois Department of Agriculture.
OTHER ANIMAL: Refers to domestic animals commonly kept as pets other than dogs
and other than the animals set forth in Section 4-1-15 of this Chapter.
Includes, without limitation, cats.
OWNER: Owner or keeper of a dog or other animal means a person having a right
of property in a dog or other animal, or who keeps or harbors a dog or other
animal, or who has a dog in his or her care or who acts as its custodian, or
who knowingly permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
RESTRAINT: A dog or other animal is under restraint if it is confined by a
fence of sufficient height and security (which may be an electronic invisible
fence system) to prevent it from leaving the area so encompassed, on a leash
under the control of a responsible person, or on a leash securely fastened to
an inanimate object and of a length which prevents it from leaving the property
of its owner or keeper.
STRAY DOG: A dog which does not have a sturdy collar with a license or owner's
identification tag affixed thereto.
UNDER THE CONTROL OF A RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A dog or other animal which is
controlled by a leash or under restraint within the property limits of its
owner or keeper. (Ord. 96-12, 9-9-1996)
4-1-2: INOCULATION; CERTIFICATE:
   A.   Each calendar year, or at such intervals as may hereafter be
promulgated by the Department of Agriculture, every owner or keeper of a dog
three (3) months or more of age shall cause such dog to be inoculated against
rabies. The owner or keeper of such dog shall cause a serially numbered tag
evidencing the inoculation to be attached to a collar or harness worn by the
dog.
   B.   The inoculation of dogs required by subsection A of this Section shall
be performed by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice his profession in this
State. Upon performing the inoculation, the veterinarian shall issue to the
owner or keeper a certificate showing that fact and the date of the
performance; the owner or keeper shall procure from Sangamon County a metallic
or other suitable tag to be attached to the collar or harness of the dog, which
tag shall also certify to the fact and date of inoculation against rabies. The
tag issued shall be in the form as shall be determined by the Illinois
Department of Agriculture.
   C.   At any reasonable time upon request of any member of the Police
Department, the owner or keeper of any unmuzzled dog shall exhibit his
certificate issued under the provisions of subsection B of this Section showing
the inoculation against rabies of any dog owned or controlled by him. (Ord. 96-
12, 9-9-1996)
4-1-3: COLLAR AND TAGS:
Every owner or keeper of a dog, regardless of the age of the dog, shall cause
the dog to wear a collar or harness and shall affix thereto a metallic or other
suitable tag inscribed with the name, address and phone number, if any, of the
owner or keeper of the dog. (Ord. 96-12, 9-9-1996)
4-1-4: CONTROL OF DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS:
The owner or keeper of a dog or other animal shall keep the dog or other animal
under control at all times and shall not permit the dog or other animal to be
at large, off the premises of the property of the owner or keeper, unless under
complete control as defined in Section 4-1-1 of this Chapter. No dog or other
animal shall be allowed upon the premises of another person without that
person's permission. The owner or keeper of the dog or other animal shall not
permit it to deposit any feces upon the property of another person, or upon any
public place within the corporate limits of the Village to the prejudice of
other persons or the general public. (Ord. 96-12, 9-9-1996)
4-1-5: RUNNING AT LARGE:
No dog or other animal shall run at large at any time within the corporate
limits of the Village with or without a license tag fastened to its collar. Any
dog or other animal running at large at any time within the Village shall be
taken up by the Animal Control Officer or any employee of the Sangamon County
Animal Shelter at the direction of any Animal Control officer of the Village.
(Ord. 96-12, 9-9-1996)
4-1-6: DESIGNATION OF POUND:
   A.   The Village may designate a suitable place or places for the impounding
of dogs and other animals pursuant to this Section, which place may be a
facility maintained and operated by the Village, licensed veterinarian having
adequate facilities for confining and caring for dogs and other animals, or the
Sangamon County Animal Shelter.
   B.   The person in charge of such facility shall be known as the
"poundkeeper" for purposes of this Section, and in the case of a pound
maintained and operated by the Village, the Chief of Police will be the
poundkeeper; in the case of the County Animal Shelter, the administrator of the
facility so designated by the Sangamon County Board of Trustees shall be the
poundkeeper. (Ord. 96-12, 9-9-1996)
4-1-7: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
In case of impounding, where the owner or keeper of a dog or other animal is
disclosed by any tax or license tag worn by it, or is otherwise known to the
officers impounding it, the animal control officer shall promptly give notice
by mail to the owner or keeper of the impounding of his dog or other animal and
the place of the impounding, and shall cite the owner or keeper of the dog to
answer charges of violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 96-12, 9-9-1996)
4-1-8: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS:
   A.   Any dog or other animal impounded under the provisions of this Chapter,
except a dog which may have bitten any person or constitutes a nuisance, as
specified in Sections
4-1-10 and
4-1-11 of this Chapter shall, unless sooner redeemed, be held for the period of
days specified by the policy of the Sangamon County Animal Shelter in order to
afford opportunity to the owner or keeper thereof to redeem the same. The owner
of any dog or other animal so impounded may claim the same within the period of
time specified by the policy of the Sangamon County Animal Shelter and have the
same released upon compliance with Sections
4-1-2 and
4-1-3 of this Chapter, and upon paying the Village Clerk fifty dollars ($50.00)
for the first offense within a twelve (12) month period; seventy five dollars
($75.00) for the second offense within a twelve (12) month period; and one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for the third offense within a twelve (12) month
period, along with, in each case, the costs incurred by the Village for the
services of the County Animal Shelter or payment of charges of the licensed
veterinarian, if any. On the fourth offense within a twelve (12) month period,
the dog or other animal shall be humanely destroyed, or otherwise disposed of
by the poundkeeper.
   B.   In case an impounded dog has not been inoculated against rabies for the
current year, the owner shall also advance the fee required to have the dog
inoculated by a duly licensed veterinarian as he shall elect and the
poundkeeper shall forthwith cause the dog to be duly inoculated against rabies.
No dog shall be released without having been inoculated for the current
calendar year, or in accordance with the requirements of the Illinois
Department of Agriculture. Upon payment of the required charges, the dog shall
thereupon be released to the owner or keeper. (Ord. 96-12, 9-9-1996)
4-1-9: DESTRUCTION OF UNREDEEMED DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS:
Any impounded dog and other animal which shall not be redeemed in accordance
with Section
4-1-8 of this Chapter shall be humanely destroyed, or otherwise disposed of by
the poundkeeper. (Ord. 96-12, 9-9-1996)
4-1-10: DOGS WHICH HAVE BITTEN PERSONS:
   A.   Any dog which shall have bitten or otherwise injured any person so as
to cause an abrasion of the skin shall be immediately taken, impounded, and
kept separated from other dogs for fourteen (14) days. If, during that period,
the dog develops symptoms of illness, a veterinarian shall be called to
diagnose its condition. If the symptoms disclosed indicate the presence of
rabies, the dog shall be destroyed in a manner to preserve intact the head,
which shall thereupon be detached and immediately sent to the diagnostic
laboratory of the Illinois Department of Agriculture. In case the dog cannot be
safely taken up and impounded, it may be shot, care being taken to preserve the
head intact, which shall thereupon be immediately detached and delivered to the
diagnostic laboratory of the Department of Agriculture.
   B.   If, at the expiration of the period of fourteen (14) days, no symptoms
of rabies have developed in the dog so impounded, the same may be redeemed by
the owner upon payment of the redemption fees, and charges specified in Section
4-1-8 of this Chapter; provided, however, that in case any dog impounded for
biting a person shall have previously bitten any person, the dog shall be
humanely destroyed by the poundkeeper. After having been notified that the
owner's dog has bitten or otherwise injured any person, the owner or keeper
thereof shall not under any circumstances permit the dog to be at large unless
securely muzzled. (Ord. 96-12, 9-9-1996)
4-1-11: FIERCE DOGS; NUISANCES:
   A.   Any fierce dog running at large in the streets or public places of the
Village or upon private premises of any other person not the owner or keeper,
shall be taken up and impounded in the manner provided by this Chapter for the
impounding of dogs; provided, however, that if a fierce dog found at large
cannot be safely taken up and impounded, that dog may be slain by any Village
police officer.
   B.   Any dog or other animal which may continually disturb the quiet of any
person's or neighborhood's property, or shall destroy or in any manner injure
any animal, plant, shrub, or other property not on the premises of its owner or
keeper, is declared to be a nuisance.
   C.   Any pen, stable or place in which animals are housed or kept which is
unreasonably offensive to persons residing in the vicinity of the same or to
persons passing along any street or alley near the same, due to associated
debris or odors, or which constitute a hazard to the health of persons residing
nearby, is declared to be a nuisance.
   D.   Any dog or other animal which is a nuisance, and any fierce dog, shall
be taken up and impounded and may be redeemed or disposed of in a manner
provided for under Section
4-1-8 of this Chapter; except, any fierce dog which has bitten more than one
person shall be humanely destroyed. (Ord. 96-12, 9-9-1996)
4-1-12: DUTIES OF VILLAGE OFFICIALS:
   A.   Except as to the regulations concerning inoculation against rabies, the
Chief of Police is charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this
Chapter.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to determine that all fees
herein provided or otherwise provided by law to be paid are properly accounted
for to the Village Treasurer. (Ord. 96-12, 9-9-1996)
4-1-13: UNKNOWN OWNER:
When any dog or other animal is impounded and its owner is unknown, there shall
be placed at the Police Department by the Chief of Police, or the Chief's
designee, a notice describing the animal and where it is located. (Ord. 96-12,
9-9-1996)
4-1-14: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
The President may appoint an animal control officer by and with the consent of
the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 96-12, 9-9-1996)
4-1-15: HARBORING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
Subject to the provisions of Section 4-1-16 of this Chapter, and subject to the
Village Zoning Ordinance, the keeping or harboring of any wild animal or fowl,
horses, asses, mules, cattle, swine (including pot-bellied pigs), sheep, goats,
geese, ducks, rodents (except hamsters, guinea pigs, mice and other rodents
commonly kept as pets) or chickens within the corporate limits of the Village
is prohibited, and is hereby declared a nuisance. Such animals, if found
running at large, shall be taken up by the animal control officer and taken to
the poundkeeper for humane destruction or other disposal at the discretion of
the poundkeeper. (Ord. 96-12, 9-9-1996)
4-1-16: PENALTY:
   A.   Any owner or keeper of a dog or other animal who violates or fails to
comply with the provisions of Section
4-1-1 through Section
4-1-14 of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) but not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense, in addition to any costs of the Village as are
required to be paid in Section
4-1-1 through Section
4-1-14 of this Chapter.
   B.   Any violation of Section
4-1-15 of this Chapter is punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day of a violation
and each separate animal involved in a violation is a separate offense.
   C.   In addition to the fine, any violation is a public nuisance and may be
abated in the manner provided by law. The Village shall also have all remedies
available to it under State statutes pertaining to dogs and animals. (Ord. 96-
12, 9-9-1996)
CHAPTER 2
PIT BULL DOGS
(Rep. by Ord. 13-09, 5-28-2013)
CHAPTER 3
MINORS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Curfew
4-3-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Hours: It is unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of
age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or
highway at the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent,
legal guardian or other responsible companion at least eighteen (18) years of
age approved by a parent or legal guardian or unless engaged in a business or
occupation which the laws of this State authorize a person less than seventeen
(17) years of age to perform:
      1.   Between 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Saturday;
      2.   Between 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Sunday; and
      3.   Between 11:00 P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 A.M.
on the following day.
   B.   Responsibility of Parents and Guardians: It is unlawful for a parent,
legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a person in his custody or
control to violate subsection A of this Section. (1994 Code)
   C.   Detention by Police: Every member of the police force, while on duty,
is hereby authorized to detain any minor wilfully violating the provisions of
this Section until the parent or guardian of such minor shall take him into
custody, but such officer shall, immediately upon taking custody of the minor,
communicate with the parent or guardian. (Ord. 75-15, 6-9-75)
CHAPTER 4
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Limitations
4-4-3: Establishment
4-4-4: Coordinator
4-4-5: Functions
4-4-6: Local Disaster Emergencies
4-4-7: Purchases and Expenditures
4-4-8: Oath
4-4-9: Testing of Disaster Warning Devices
4-4-10: Authority to Accept Services, Gifts, Grants or Loans
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
COORDINATOR: The staff assistant to the President of the Village of Pawnee with
the duty of carrying out the requirements of this Chapter.
DISASTER: An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or
loss of life or property resulting from any natural or man-made cause,
including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, oil spill or
other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage,
epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot,
accident, or hostile military or paramilitary action. "Disaster" includes but
is not limited to all occurrences and threats thereof which are contemplated by
the concept of "emergency services and disaster operations".
DISASTER OPERATIONS: The functions created in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter to be performed by County and political subdivisions to alleviate
the effects of disasters.
EMERGENCY SERVICES: The preparation for and the carrying out of such functions,
other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, as
may be necessary or proper to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury
and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, earthquake, accident
or other man-made or natural causes. These functions include, without
limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health
services, rescue, engineering, air raid warning services, communications,
radiological, chemical and special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from
stricken areas, emergency assigned functions of plant protection, temporary
restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian
protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the
preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION: Any county, city, village or incorporated town.
UNITED STATES: The several states, the District of Columbia, and possessions
thereof. (Ord. 95-4, 1-23-95)
4-4-2: LIMITATIONS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to:
   A.   Interfere with the course or conduct of a private labor dispute, except
that actions otherwise authorized by this Chapter or other laws may be taken
when necessary to forestall or mitigate imminent or existing danger to public
health or safety.
   B.   Interfere with the dissemination of news or comment of public affairs;
but any communications facility or organization (including but not limited to
radio and television stations, wire services, and newspapers) may be requested
to transmit or print public service messages furnishing information or
instructions in connection with a disaster or emergency.
   C.   Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces,
firefighting forces, units of the armed forces of the United States, or any
personnel thereof, when on active duty; but the village emergency preparedness
plan shall place reliance upon such forces available for performance of
functions related to disaster emergencies.
   D.   Limit, modify or abridge the authority of the village president or the
board of trustees vested in them under the constitution, statutes or common law
of this state or village, independent of or in conjunction with any provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 95-4, 1-23-1995)
4-4-3: ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   There is hereby created an emergency services and disaster agency to
prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from
disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from
natural or manmade disaster, in accordance with "the Illinois emergency
management act of 1992".
   B.   This agency will supersede any civil defense agency heretofore
authorized, and shall be known as the Pawnee emergency services and disaster
agency (hereinafter ESDA).
   C.   The ESDA shall consist of the coordinator and other such technical,
clerical, and other administrative personnel as may be selected by the
coordinator with the approval of the board of trustees, and may make such
expenditures within their appropriation therefor as may be necessary to carry
out the purpose of this chapter.
   D.   The ESDA shall have jurisdiction over and serve the entire village,
village property not located within the corporate limits of the village and
with the approval of the village board of trustees, any other area which may
decide to contract with the village for emergency services and disaster
assistance. (Ord. 95-4, 1-23-1995)
4-4-4: COORDINATOR:
   A.   The coordinator of the village ESDA shall be appointed by the president
of the village with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The
coordinator shall be considered an officer of the village and shall have a term
of office of one year or until the coordinator's successor is appointed and
qualified. The coordinator shall receive a salary in the amount of seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per calendar quarter, and shall be entitled to
reimbursement of expenses in accordance with the village reimbursement
policies. (Ord. 15-08, 5-13-2015)
   B.   The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training, and operation of the ESDA as prescribed in the
Sangamon County emergency preparedness plan subject to the direction and
control of the president and village. He shall coordinate the activities of all
organizations for emergency services and disaster operations within the area
served by the ESDA and shall maintain liaison and cooperate with the emergency
services and disaster agency of the county of Sangamon.
   C.   In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve
of the coordinator, the president of the village, or any person designated by
him, shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is made as
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 95-4, 1-23-1995)
4-4-5: FUNCTIONS:
   A.   Prepare and keep current a disaster emergency plan for the ESDA.
   B.   Interrelate with business, labor, industry, agriculture, civic and
volunteer organizations and community leaders in the development of such plan.
   C.   Prepare and distribute to all appropriate officials in written form a
clear and complete statement of the emergency responsibilities of all local
departments and offices and of the disaster chain of command.
   D.   Cooperate with the emergency services and disaster agency of
Springfield/Sangamon County and other political subdivisions' emergency
services and disaster agencies.
   E.   Establish, train and maintain such rescue organizations as may be
deemed proper by the village board of trustees.
   F.   Establish, train and maintain such communications unit(s) as may be
deemed proper by the village board of trustees.
   G.   Establish, train and maintain such other volunteer ESDA units as may be
deemed proper by the coordinator or the village board of trustees to place the
village in a position to promptly and efficiently respond to disaster.
   H.   Prepare for issuance by the village president or board of trustees,
resolutions, proclamations, and regulations as necessary or appropriate in
coping with disaster.
   I.   Cooperate with the county government and any public or private agency
or entity in achieving any purpose of this chapter and in implementing programs
for disaster prevention, preparation, response and discovery.
   J.   Do all other things necessary, incidental or appropriate for the
implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 95-4, 1-23-1995)
4-4-6: LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES:
   A.   A local disaster emergency may be declared only by the president of the
village. It shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven
(7) days except by or with the consent of the board of trustees. Any order or
proclamation declaring the continuation of a local disaster emergency shall be
given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the village
clerk.
   B.   The effect of a local disaster emergency is to activate the response
and recovery aspects of the ESDA emergency preparedness plan and to authorize
the furnishing of aid and assistance thereunder. (Ord. 95-4, 1-23-1995)
4-4-7: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The board of trustees may, on the recommendation of the coordinator, authorize
any purchases or contracts necessary to place the village in a position to
effectively combat any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or
other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety, protect
property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in case of such disaster,
or from manmade or natural disaster. (Ord. 95-4, 1-23-1995)
4-4-8: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the ESDA shall, before
entering his or her duties, subscribe to the oath as set forth in the "Illinois
emergency management act of 1992", which oath shall be filed with the
coordinator of Sangamon County. (Ord. 95-4, 1-23-1995)
4-4-9: TESTING OF DISASTER WARNING DEVICES:
The testing of disaster warning devices including outdoor warning sirens shall
be held only on the first Tuesday of each month at ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
(Ord. 95-4, 1-23-1995)
4-4-10: AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS OR LOANS:
Whenever the federal, state or county governments or any agency or officer
thereof or whenever any person shall offer to the village services, equipment,
supplies, materials or funds by way of gift or grant for purposes of emergency
services and disaster operations, the village, acting through the board of
trustees, may authorize any officer of the village to receive such services,
equipment, supplies, materials, or funds on behalf of the village. (Ord. 95-4,
1-23-1995)
CHAPTER 5
SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICES
SECTION:
4-5-1: Operation Of Sound Amplification Devices; Restrictions
4-5-2: Exception
4-5-3: Penalty
4-5-1: OPERATION OF SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICES; RESTRICTIONS:
No driver of any motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the Village shall
operate or permit operation of any sound amplification system which can be
heard outside the vehicle from seventy five (75) or more feet when the vehicle
is being operated upon a street within the Village, unless such system is being
operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation. (Ord. 00-08,
6-19-2000)
4-5-2: EXCEPTION:
This Chapter does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. (Ord. 00-08, 6-
19-2000)
4-5-3: PENALTY:
Persons convicted of violating this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense and two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) for subsequent offenses. If the alleged offender pays
the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) to the Village Treasurer within ten
(10) calendar days of being cited, the Chief of Police shall have the
discretion to set up payment of balance for first offenders. (Ord. 00-08, 6-19-
2000)
CHAPTER 6
CANNABIS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
SECTION:
4-6-1: Definitions
4-6-2: Possession Of Cannabis Prohibited
4-6-3: Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia Prohibited
4-6-4: Penalty
4-6-5: Relationship To State Cannabis Laws
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall include and have the
following meanings:
CANNABIS: Any substance defined as cannabis in section 3 of the Illinois
Cannabis Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/3.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: Any object or device used, designed for use or intended for
use in unlawfully ingesting, smoking, administering, or storing cannabis. For
the purposes of this chapter, drug paraphernalia includes but is not limited
to:
   A.   Metal, wooden, plastic, glass, stone or ceramic pipes, with or without
screens;
   B.   Water pipes;
   C.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
   D.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
   E.   Roach clips;
   F.   Bongs;
   G.   One-hitters. (Ord. 16-10, 8-8-2016)
4-6-2: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS PROHIBITED:
No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall possess any substance
containing cannabis. (Ord. 16-10, 8-8-2016; amd. Ord. 19-18, 8-26-2020)
4-6-3: POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED:
No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall knowingly possess any item of
drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it for the purpose of unlawfully
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance
into the human body. (Ord. 16-10, 8-8-2016; amd. Ord. 19-18, 8-26-2020)
4-6-4: PENALTY:
The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be as follows:
   A.   For possession of ten grams (10 g) or less of any substance containing
cannabis: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   B.   For possession of more than ten grams (10 g) of any substance
containing cannabis, up to and including thirty grams (30 g): Five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
   C.   For possession of drug paraphernalia: Two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). (Ord. 16-10, 8-8-2016)
4-6-5: RELATIONSHIP TO STATE CANNABIS LAWS:
The Police Department may in its discretion refer charges of possession of
cannabis to the States Attorney for charges pursuant to State law instead of
bringing charges pursuant to this chapter, but no person shall be charged
pursuant to this chapter and State law for the same offense. Possession of
cannabis in excess of thirty grams (30 g) is not subject to this chapter, but
rather, shall be referred to the States Attorney to be charged pursuant to
State law. (Ord. 16-10, 8-8-2016)
TITLE 5
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Method Of Parking
5-1-2: Double Parking
5-1-3: No Parking Places
5-1-4: Trucks And Trailers
5-1-5: Parking Restrictions
5-1-6: Violations And Penalties
5-1-1: METHOD OF PARKING:
   A.   Vehicles shall be parked on the public square in the business district
in a diagonal parking position only, and vehicles shall be parked parallel to
the curb or street at all other locations in the Village, other than the public
square.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for vehicles to be backed into a place for
diagonal parking, except for commercial vehicles loading or unloading.
   C.   Except on one-way streets, no vehicle shall be parked with the left
side of such vehicle next to the curb or with the left side of such vehicle
next to the boulevard or sidewalk, as the case may be, if there be no curb, and
it shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in a street other than
parallel with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle (or on
one-way streets, the 2 left wheels or 2 right wheels of the vehicle) within
twelve inches (12") of the regularly established curb line; except, that upon
those streets that have been marked for angle parking vehicles shall be parked
at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks. (Ord. 71-10, 10-11-1971)
5-1-2: DOUBLE PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to double park at any time, on the public square in the
business district of the Village, except for commercial vehicles when engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise. (Ord. 71-10, 10-11-1971)
5-1-3: NO PARKING PLACES:
Places designated: It shall be unlawful at any time to permit any vehicle to
stand in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a policeman or
traffic signal:
   A.   In any intersection;
   B.   In a crosswalk;
   C.   Upon any bridge;
   D.   Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal, yield sign or stop sign;
   E.   Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection;
   F.   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable
width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18');
   G.   At any curb within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
   H.   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway;
   I.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade
crossing;
   J.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any Fire
Department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any
such station within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance;
   K.   On any sidewalk or parkway;
   L.   On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
   M.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking or at any place
where the curbing adjacent to the street or roadway has been painted a yellow
color; and (Ord. 83-3, 1-24-1983)
   N.   Subject to the regulations of the State Department of Highways, on
State Highway Route 104 within the Municipal boundaries, except that this
prohibition shall not apply to emergency vehicles and funeral processions.
(Ord. 74-13, 11-25-1974)
5-1-4: TRUCKS AND TRAILERS 1 :
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any trucks or tractor-trailer combinations
over thirty feet (30') in length to be parked in front of residential property,
other than the residence of the operator or owner of such vehicle, for a period
longer than two (2) hours, except when loading and unloading at such residence.
   B.   No tractor-trailer truck combinations shall be parked on the square in
the business district at any time, except when loading or unloading
merchandise. (Ord. 71-10, 10-11-1971)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 3 of this title for vehicle size and weight restrictions.
5-1-5: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   No person shall park a truck, except those licensed by the State of
Illinois with a B license classification, a bus having a rated seating capacity
of twenty (20) or more passengers, farm equipment, construction equipment,
trailers, boats on trailers, or any camper or motor home of any description or
use:
      1.   On a roadway, unless approved by the Village of Pawnee;
      2.   On any public street for a period of twenty-four (24) consecutive
hours or more.
   B.   No person shall park, store, keep or allow to stand any vehicle not
listed in paragraph A. of this section on any public street or alley or
property owned by the Village of Pawnee for a period of seven (7) consecutive
days or more.
   C.   Any registered owner of a vehicle that from all appearances maybe in
violation of paragraph A.1. of this section may be subject to the issuance of a
parking notice from the Pawnee Police Department. The parking notice shall
inform the registered owner of the vehicle that the vehicle may be in violation
of Title 5, Chapter 1 of the Village of Pawnee Code of Ordinances. The notice
shall further warn the owner that if the vehicle is not moved within seven (7)
days of the date of mailing the parking notice, the vehicle shall be towed by
the police department. The notice shall be mailed to the address of the
registered owner of the vehicle by regular U.S. Mail. In no case shall a
vehicle be towed pursuant to a violation of division (B) of this section until
seven (7) days after the mailing of a parking notice by the department.
   D.   In addition to the parking notice described in division (C) of this
section, all inoperable vehicles shall have an inoperable vehicle sticker
firmly affixed to the left side of the rear window of the vehicle. The
inoperable vehicle sticker shall specify that the vehicle must be removed from
the public street within seven (7) days of the date of the placement of the
sticker or it may be towed by the department. (Ord. 18-13, 8-13-2018; amd. Ord.
18-13, 8-13-2018)
5-1-6: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person accused of and cited for a violation of an ordinance
provision prohibiting the parking or standing of a motor vehicle, may avoid
prosecution for the offense by paying to the Village Clerk, within seven (7)
days from the date of the offense, the sum of ten dollars ($10.00). If the
accused fails to pay the fine assessed within seven (7) days, a final notice
shall be sent to the accused. Failure to pay the fine assessed within thirty
(30) days of the notice shall result in an increase of said fine to thirty
dollars ($30.00).
   B.   All remittances of fines may be made by check, money order or currency
and must be accompanied by a signed plea of guilty and a waiver of hearing.
   C.   Payment of fines may be made either by mail or in person. The hours of
payment at the Office of the Village Clerk shall be from eight thirty o'clock
(8:30) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M., Monday through Friday, except
holidays.
   D.   Failure to pay the citation shall result in prosecution of an ordinance
violation in the Circuit Court of the Seventh Judicial Circuit, Sangamon
County, Illinois. Upon conviction, the violator shall be fined the sum of
thirty dollars ($30.00). In addition, the violator shall be liable for the
Village costs and attorneys' fees. (Ord. 94-1, 1-10-1994; amd. Ord. 18-13, 8-
13-2018)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Stop Streets
5-2-2: One-Way Traffic
5-2-3: No Parking Areas
5-2-4: Wrong Way Signs
5-2-5: Do Not Enter Signs
5-2-6: No Turn Signs
5-2-7: Left Or Right Turn Only Signs
5-2-8: School Speed Limits
5-2-9: Through Traffic Keep Left Signs
5-2-10: Yield Signs
5-2-11: Stop For Children At Crosswalk Signs
5-2-12: Handicapped Signs
5-2-13: Twenty Miles Per Hour Zones
5-2-14: Alley Speed Limits
5-2-1: STOP STREETS:
Boulevard "Stop" signs shall be placed upon the following streets in the
village, said stops to be designated as boulevard stops:
Street At Intersection With Corner Ord. #
Street                 At Intersection With Corner                  Ord. #
Alley south of Tiny Te 7th Street           North                   1994 Code
Pee
Alley south of Tiny Te 7th Street           South                   1994 Code
Pee
Brenda Drive           Marrianne Drive      Northeast               1994 Code
Brenda Drive           Neala Drive          Southwest               1994 Code
Doc Norris Drive       Michele              Northeast               02-06
Doc Norris Drive       4th Street           South                   1994 Code
Doc Norris Drive       5th Street           Northeast               97-16
Doc Norris Drive       5th Street           Southwest               97-16
Doc Norris Drive       7th Street           North                   1994 Code
Douglas                5th Street           South                   1994 Code
Douglas                6th Street           North                   1994 Code
Douglas                8th Street           North                   1994 Code
Frisina Drive          Doc Norris Drive     Northeast               1994 Code
Frisina Drive          K. Layne Drive       Southwest               1994 Code
Harrison               4th Street           South                   1994 Code
Harrison               5th Street           North                   1994 Code
Henkle Drive           Sutherland           Northeast               1994 Code
Jefferson              1st Street           South                   1994 Code
Jefferson              4th Street           Northeast and southwest 07-09
Jefferson              6th Street           North                   1994 Code
Jefferson              6th Street           South                   1994 Code
Jefferson              8th Street           North                   1994 Code
Jefferson              8th Street           South                   1994 Code
Jefferson              9th Street           North                   1994 Code
Jefferson              10th Street          Southeast               96-2
Jefferson              13th Street          Southeast               96-2
K. Layne Drive         4th Street           South                   1994 Code
Lincoln                5th Street           South                   1994 Code
Lincoln                8th Street           South                   1994 Code
Lincoln                10th Street          North                   1994 Code
Lincoln                10th Street          South                   1994 Code
Lincoln                13th Street          North                   1994 Code
Madison                9th Street           East                    94-9
Madison                10th Street          East                    94-9
Madison                10th Street          West                    94-9
Margaret Drive         Neala Drive          Southwest               1994 Code
Marrianne              3.5 East             South                   1994 Code
Michele                Doc Norris Drive     Northwest               02-06
Michele                Doc Norris Drive     Southeast               02-06
Michele                K. Layne             Southeast               14-02
Michele Drive          Neala Drive          Northeast               1994 Code
Monroe                 9th Street           North                   1994 Code
Monroe                 9th Street           South                   1994 Code
Monroe                 13th Street          North                   1994 Code
Neala                  Margaret             Southwest               07-09
Neala                  3.5 East             South                   1994 Code
Nelson                 4th Street           South                   1994 Code
Nelson                 5th Street           North                   1994 Code
Nelson                 6th Street           Southwest               14-02
Penn                   4th Street           South                   1994 Code
Penn                   5th Street           North                   1994 Code
Penn                   5th Street           South                   1994 Code
Penn                   6th Street           South                   1994 Code
Penn                   8th Street           Southwest               14-02
Rutledge               13th Street          North                   1994 Code
Sherman                4th Street           South                   1994 Code
Sherman                5th Street           Northeast               97-16
Sherman                5th Street           Southwest               97-16
Sherman                7th Street           North                   1994 Code
Sherman                7th Street           South                   1994 Code
Sutherland             Henkle               Northeast               14-02
Sutherland             4th Street           North                   1994 Code
Township Road 13.75    4th Street           Northeast               94-13
(Park Drive)
Township Road 13.75    4th Street           Southwest               94-13
(Park Drive)
Washington             1st Street           North                   1994 Code
Washington             1st Street           South                   1994 Code
Washington             4th Street           North                   1994 Code
Washington             4th Street           South                   1994 Code
Washington             6th Street           North                   1994 Code
Washington             6th Street           South                   1994 Code
Washington             8th Street           North                   1994 Code
Washington             8th Street           South                   1994 Code
Washington             13th Street          North                   1994 Code
Winant                 Washington           Northeast               1994 Code
1st Street             Washington           Northeast               1994 Code
2nd Street             Jefferson            Northeast               1994 Code
2nd Street             Rutledge             Southeast               14-02
3rd Street             Jefferson            Northeast               1994 Code
4th Street             Carroll              Northeast               1994 Code
4th Street             Carroll              Southwest               1994 Code
4th Street             Jefferson            Southwest               1994 Code
4th Street             North School Drive   North                   1994 Code
4th Street             South School Drive   South                   1994 Code
4th Street             Sutherland/K. Layne  Northeast               1994 Code
                       Drive
4th Street             Sutherland/K. Layne  Southwest               1994 Code
                       Drive
4th Street             Township Road 13.75  Southeast               94-13
                       (Park Drive)
4th Street             Washington           Northeast               1994 Code
4th Street             Washington           Southwest               1994 Code
5th Street             Carroll              Northeast               1994 Code
5th Street             Carroll              Southwest               1994 Code
5th Street             Doc Norris Drive     Northeast               1994 Code
5th Street             Jefferson            Southwest               1994 Code
5th Street             K. Layne Drive       Northeast               1994 Code
5th Street             K. Layne Drive       Southwest               1994 Code
5th Street             Post Office Drive    Northeast               1994 Code
5th Street             Sherman              Northeast               1994 Code
5th Street             Sherman              Southwest               1994 Code
5th Street             Washington           Northeast               1994 Code
5th Street             Washington           Southwest               1994 Code
6th Street             Carroll              Northeast               1994 Code
6th Street             Carroll              Southwest               1994 Code
6th Street             Doc Norris Drive     Southwest               1994 Code
6th Street             K. Layne Drive       Northeast               1994 Code
6th Street             K. Layne Drive       Southwest               1994 Code
6th Street             Lincoln              Northeast               1994 Code
6th Street             Sherman              Northeast               1994 Code
6th Street             Sherman              Southwest               1994 Code
6th Street             Washington           Northeast               1994 Code
6th Street             Washington           Southwest               1994 Code
7th Street             Carroll              Northeast               1994 Code
7th Street             Carroll              Southwest               1994 Code
7th Street             Doc Norris Drive     Northeast               1994 Code
7th Street             Douglas              Northwest               1994 Code
7th Street             K. Layne Drive       Northeast               1994 Code
7th Street             K. Layne Drive       Southwest               1994 Code
7th Street             Lincoln              Southwest               1994 Code
7th Street             Monroe               Southeast               97-16
7th Street             Sherman              Northeast               1994 Code
7th Street             Sherman              Southwest               1994 Code
8th Street             Carroll              Northeast               1994 Code
8th Street             Carroll              Southwest               1994 Code
8th Street             Franklin             Southwest               1994 Code
8th Street             Monroe               Northeast               1994 Code
8th Street             Monroe               Southwest               1994 Code
9th Street             Carroll              Northeast               1994 Code
9th Street             Carroll              Southwest               1994 Code
9th Street             Franklin             Northeast               1994 Code
9th Street             Franklin             Southwest               1994 Code
9th Street             Lincoln              Southwest               1994 Code
9th Street             Monroe               Northwest               97-16
9th Street             Monroe               Southeast               97-16
9th Street             Washington           Northeast               1994 Code
10th Street            Carroll              Northeast               1994 Code
10th Street            Carroll              Southwest               1994 Code
10th Street            Lincoln              Northeast               1994 Code
10th Street            Lincoln              Southwest               1994 Code
10th Street            Monroe               Northeast               1994 Code
10th Street            Monroe               Southwest               1994 Code
10th Street            Rutledge             Northeast               1994 Code
10th Street            Washington           Northeast               1994 Code
10th Street            Washington           Southwest               1994 Code
11th Street            Carroll              Northeast               1994 Code
11th Street            Carroll              Southwest               1994 Code
11th Street            Lincoln              Southeast               14-02
11th Street            Lincoln              Southwest               1994 Code
12th Street            Carroll              Northeast               1994 Code
12th Street            Carroll              Southwest               1994 Code
12th Street            Lincoln              Southeast               14-02
12th Street            Lincoln              Southwest               1994 Code
12th Street            Monroe               Northeast               1994 Code
12th Street            Rutledge             Southwest               1994 Code
13th Street            Carroll              Northeast               1994 Code
13th Street            Carroll              Southwest               1994 Code
13th Street            Rutledge             Northwest               00-12
13th Street            Rutledge             Southeast               00-12
 
5-2-2: ONE-WAY TRAFFIC:
   A.   Signs: Boulevard "Begin One Way" signs shall be placed upon the
following streets in the village:
 
Street                       At Intersection Corner                  Ord. #
Alley south of Nelson Street 4th Street      Northwest and northeast 83-13
 
   B.   One-Way Traffic:
      1.   Drivers of vehicles shall, at all times, observe the one-way traffic
in a counterclockwise direction around the square in the business district of
the village, except when temporarily posted otherwise.
      2.   Vehicles shall proceed in a northerly direction only from the alley
south of Nelson Street to K. Layne Drive at all times. (Ord. 71-10, 10-11-1971;
amd. 1994 Code)
5-2-3: NO PARKING AREAS:
   A.   No Parking: The village shall erect "No Parking" signs on the following
streets:
Street Locations Side Of Street Ord. #
Street      Locations                                     Side Of Street Ord. #
4th Street  Between Carroll Street and a point 200 feet   East and west  97-16
            south of Carroll Street
4th Street  Between Sherman Street and Harrison Street    East and west  81-8
5th Street  North of the post office driveway             East           87-5A
5th Street  South of the post office driveway at the CIPS East           87-5A
            light pole
6th Street  Between Douglas and State Route 104 (Carroll  West           81-8
            Street)
7th Street  Between Route 104 and a point 75 feet north   East           01-16
            of Route 104
8th Street  North of Douglas Street and south of State    East and west  90-1
            Route 104 (Carroll Street)
12th Street Between the alley north to Carroll Street     East           81-8
 
   B.   No Parking 8:00 A.M. To 4:00 P.M. On School Days: Boulevard "No Parking
8:00 A.M. To 4:00 P.M." signs shall be placed upon the following streets in the
village:
 
Street               Location                       Number Of Signs Ord. #
4th Street west side Between Sherman Street and the 10              83-13
                     alley south of Nelson Street
 
   C.    No Parking To Signs: Boulevard "No Parking Here To" signs shall be
placed upon the following streets in the village:
 
Street                  Before Intersection Number Of Signs          Ord. #
                        With
Alley south of Harrison 4th Street          2                        83-13
Street south side
Alley south of Harrison 4th Street          2                        83-13
Street north side
Harrison Street north   4th Street          2                        83-13
side
Harrison Street south                       1 (No parking here to
side                    4th Street          corner)                  83-13
                                            1 (No parking this side)
Nelson Street south                         1 (No parking here to
side                    4th Street          corner)                  83-13
                                            1 (No parking this side)
Nelson Street north     4th Street          2                        83-13
side
 
   D.   Library Parking Zone: The following area is designated as the library
parking zone: The area in front of the Pawnee Public Library, 615 Douglas
Street, Pawnee, Illinois. In the library parking zone, parking is permitted for
library patrons only during the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. through nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday. (Ord. 13-06, 4-22-2013)
5-2-4: WRONG WAY SIGNS:
Boulevard "Wrong Way" signs shall be placed upon the following streets in the
village:
 
Street     Location               Side Of Street Ord. #
4th Street Between K. Layne Drive East and       83-13
           and Sherman Street     west
 
5-2-5: DO NOT ENTER SIGNS:
Boulevard "Do Not Enter" signs shall be placed upon the following streets in
the village:
 
Street     Location               Side Of Street Ord. #
4th Street Between K. Layne Drive East and west  83-13
           and Sherman Street
 
5-2-6: NO TURN SIGNS:
   A.   No Right Turn Signs: Boulevard "No Right Turn" signs shall be placed
upon the following streets in the village:
 
Street                           Before Intersection With Side Of Street Ord. #
Alley between Harrison Street    4th Street               South          83-13
and Nelson Street
Alley between Sherman Street and 4th Street               South          83-13
Harrison Street
Harrison Street                  4th Street               South          83-13
K. Layne Drive                   4th Street               South          83-13
Nelson Street                    4th Street               South          83-13
Sherman Street                   4th Street               South          83-13
 
   B.   No Left Turn Signs: Boulevard "No Left Turn" signs shall be placed upon
the following streets in the village:
 
Street                  At Intersection With Side of Street Ord. #
Asphalt Road            4th Street           Northeast      83-13
South of Sherman Street                                    
K. Layne Drive          4th Street           Northeast      83-13
 
5-2-7: LEFT OR RIGHT TURN ONLY SIGNS:
Boulevard "Left or Right Turn Only" signs shall be placed upon the following
streets in the village:
 
Street         At Intersection With Corner    Ord. #
K. Layne Drive 4th Street           Northwest 83-13
 
5-2-8: SCHOOL SPEED LIMITS:
Boulevard "School Speed Limit" signs shall be placed upon the following streets
in the village:
 
Street     Location                                       Side of Street Ord. #
4th Street South side of the inter- section with Harrison East           83-13
           Street
           South side of the inter- section with the
4th Street alley between Harrison Street and Nelson       East           83-13
           Street
4th Street South side of the intersection of Nelson       East           83-13
           Street
4th Street South side of the intersection with the alley  East           83-13
           between Nelson Street and State Route 104
 
5-2-9: THROUGH TRAFFIC KEEP LEFT SIGNS:
   A.   Boulevard "Through Traffic Keep Left" signs shall be placed upon the
following streets in the village:
 
Street     Location                Side of Street Ord. #
           Between the alley south
4th Street of Harrison Street and  East           83-13
           Nelson Street
 
5-2-10: YIELD SIGNS:
Boulevard "Yield" signs shall be placed on the following streets:
Street At Intersection With Corner Ord. #
Street    At Intersection With Corner    Ord. #
Adams     9th Street           North     1994 Code
Madison   10th Street          South     1994 Code
Madison   10th Street          North     1994 Code
Madison   12th Street          North     1994 Code
Nelson    6th Street           North     1994 Code
Nelson    6th Street           South     1994 Code
Penn      8th Street           North     1994 Code
Ruthplace Sutherland Street    Northeast 1994 Code
Ruthplace Henkle Street        Southwest 1994 Code
 
5-2-11: STOP FOR CHILDREN AT CROSSWALK SIGNS:
Boulevard "Stop for Children at Crosswalk" signs shall be placed on the
following streets:
 
Street     Location            Side of Street Ord. #
           Alley between State
4th Street Route 104 (Carroll  West           1994 Code
           Street) and Nelson
           Street
4th Street Nelson Street       West           1994 Code
4th Street Harrison Street     West           1994 Code
 
5-2-12: HANDICAPPED SIGNS:
Boulevard "Handicapped" signs shall be placed on the following streets:
 
Street          Location                   Side Of Street Ord. #
                Across from alley
4th Street      between Nelson Street                    1994 Code
                and Harrison Street
6th and         The west side of                         95-25
Carroll Streets St. Mary's Catholic Church
6th and         At the northeast
Douglas Streets corner of the Village                    95-25
                Square
7th and         In front of the Pawnee                   95-25
Carroll Streets Public Library
7th and         In front of the Pawnee                   95-25
Douglas Streets Senior Citizens Center
 
5-2-13: TWENTY MILES PER HOUR ZONES:
The speed limit shall be twenty (20) miles per hour upon the entire length of
the following streets:
   Cahokia Drive
   Henkle Drive
   Illini Drive
   Iroquois Drive
   Ruth Place
   Sutherland Lane
   Tamaroa Drive (Ord. 16-09, 7-25-2016)
5-2-14: ALLEY SPEED LIMITS:
The speed limit in the following alleys shall be five miles per hour:
   The alley between Harrison and Sherman Streets and 4th and 5th Streets.
   The alley between Nelson and Harrison Streets and 4"’ and 5th Streets.
   The alley between Carroll and Nelson Streets and 4th and 10th Streets. (Ord.
23-09, 5-8-2023)
CHAPTER 3
VEHICLE SIZE AND WEIGHT 1
SECTION:
5-3-1: Weight Restriction
5-3-2: Exceptions
5-3-3: Designation Of Truck Route
5-3-4: Penalty; Enforcement
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  5-1-4 of this title for truck parking restrictions.
5-3-1: WEIGHT RESTRICTION:
It shall be unlawful, except as set forth in section
5-3-2 of this chapter, to operate any truck or other vehicle on any street in
the village when the gross weight of such truck or other vehicle exceeds twenty
thousand (20,000) pounds. (Ord. 88-8, 4-11-1988)
5-3-2: EXCEPTIONS:
The weight limit set forth in section
5-3-1 of this chapter shall not apply to school buses, moving vans, state,
county or municipally owned vehicles or vehicles used in the maintenance or
repair of streets within the village limits; nor shall the limitation apply to
State Highway 104, also known as Carroll Street. (Ord. 07-01, 4-23-2007)
5-3-3: DESIGNATION OF TRUCK ROUTE:
State Highway 104, also known as Carroll Street, is hereby designated as a
truck route. Signs designating said truck route and notifying the public of the
weight restrictions set forth in this chapter shall be erected by the village
street department as soon as possible after the effective date hereof at all
entrances to the village via a public road or street. (Ord. 07-01, 4-23-2007)
5-3-4: PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT:
Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Village police may, upon stopping a vehicle in violation of
this chapter, halt the same until the load is removed to reduce the gross
weight of the vehicle to less than twenty thousand (20,000) pounds before such
vehicle is authorized to proceed. (Ord. 88-8, 4-11-1988; amd. 1994 Code)
CHAPTER 4
ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Definitions
5-4-2: Inoperable Or Abandoned Motor Vehicles On Public Property
5-4-3: Inoperable Motor Vehicles On Private Property
5-4-4: Abandoned But Not Inoperable Motor Vehicles On Private Property
5-4-5: Other Remedies
5-4-6: Parking Of Vehicles With Expired Registration Stickers
5-4-7: Penalties And Remedies
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: As defined in section 1-101.05 of the Illinois vehicle code,
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101.05, an "abandoned vehicle" is any
vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven
in its condition or any motor vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven
(7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: As defined in section
11-40-3 of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-40-
3, an "inoperable motor vehicle" is any motor vehicle from which, for a period
of at least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels, tires, or other parts have been
removed, or on which the engine, wheels, or other parts have been altered,
damaged, or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven
under its own motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor
vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its
own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations, nor
to any motor vehicle that is kept within a building when not in use, nor an
operable historic vehicle over twenty five (25) years of age, nor a motor
vehicle on the premises lawfully engaged in the wrecking and junking of motor
vehicles.
MOTOR VEHICLE: As defined in section 1-146 of the Illinois vehicle code, a
"motor vehicle" means every vehicle which is self-propelled, except for
vehicles moved solely by human power and motorized wheelchairs.
PERSON: Any human being, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY: Any real property, public or private, within the corporate limits
within the village of Pawnee that is not a street or highway.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel. (Ord. 03-01, 1-27-2003)
5-4-2: INOPERABLE OR ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Inoperable motor vehicles which are on public property, a street or a highway,
are hereby declared a nuisance. They shall be towed or otherwise dealt with by
the police department in accordance with procedures set forth in chapter 4,
article II of Illinois motor vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-
201 et seq., which is herein incorporated by reference, together with all
future amendments thereto. (Ord. 03-01, 1-27-2003)
5-4-3: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Inoperable motor vehicles on private property are hereby declared a
nuisance.
   B.   Whenever a police officer discovers an inoperable motor vehicle on
private property, the officer shall determine the owner of record of the
property, and if the vehicle has a license plate, the owner of the vehicle. The
officer shall attempt to determine the identity of persons occupying the
property if different from the owner of record. The officer shall cause a
notice in substantially the following form to be mailed, by certified U.S.
mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery to the owner of record
of the property, and to all persons known to the officer, after reasonable
investigation, to occupy such property, and also to the owner of the motor
vehicle, if the owner is known:
   NOTICE TO REMOVE OR REPAIR INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE
   PLEASE TAKE NOTICE that the Police Department of the Village of Pawnee,
Illinois, has determined that there exists an inoperable motor vehicle,
generally described as follows and hereinafter referred to as "The Vehicle":
   Make:                          
   Model:                         
   Model Year, if known:                         
   Color:                         
   License No., if known:                    State:         
   Other identifying characteristics:    
         
         
   The Vehicle is currently located on the following property:
   Address:    
   The Vehicle is in violation of Article 5, Chapter 4 of the Village of Pawnee
Code of Ordinances, which prohibits inoperable motor vehicles on private
property within the corporate limits of the Village.
   You are hereby ordered to remove or repair such inoperable vehicle within 7
calendar days from the date of service of this Notice, if it has been hand-
delivered, or within 11 calendar days from the date of mailing of this notice,
if it was mailed by certified mail.
 
   The Pawnee Code of Ordinances provides that any person violating its
provisions is subject to a fine of not less than $250.00 nor more than $750.00
for each day a violation is allowed to continue. If the Village must prosecute
you for having an inoperable motor vehicle, it may seek fines beginning from
the date of this Notice.
   If you fail to remove or repair the inoperable motor vehicle by the date set
forth in this notice, the Village may remove the inoperable vehicle, or may
hire someone to do so. Any person ordered to repair or remove an inoperable
vehicle may have a hearing with the Chief of Police. A request for a hearing
must be made in writing and delivered to the Municipal Clerk no later than
seven days after the date of service of this notice, if served personally; or
eleven days after the date of mailing of this notice, if it was mailed. If no
hearing is requested, or if the Chief determines after the hearing that the
vehicle is indeed inoperable, the vehicle may be towed without further notice.
   Definitions: As used in this notice, "inoperable motor vehicle" means any
motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven days, the engine,
wheels, tires, or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine,
wheels, or other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so treated that
the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. "Inoperable
motor vehicle " shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered
temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to
perform ordinary service or repair operations nor to any motor vehicle that is
kept within a building when not in use, nor to any operable historic vehicles
over twenty five (25) years of age, nor to a motor vehicle on the premises
lawfully engaged in the wrecking and junking of motor vehicles.
   "Repair" means to take such action as is required to make an inoperable
motor vehicle capable of being driven under its own power.
This Notice is dated this       day of                      , 200   .
                                                    
   Signature
   C.   Notice by certified mail pursuant to this section shall be accomplished
if the village receives a return receipt from the addressee or if the certified
or regular mailing is returned "unclaimed" or "refused".
   D.   In the event that a violation of section
5-4-2 of this chapter or this section is not corrected within the time
specified in the notice, or if there is a hearing, within five (5) days after
the hearing, the police department may proceed to tow and dispose of the
inoperable motor vehicle in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter
4, article II of Illinois motor vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
4-201 et seq., which is herein incorporated by reference. (Ord. 03-01, 1-27-
2003)
5-4-4: ABANDONED BUT NOT INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Vehicles which are not inoperable, but which are abandoned in the sense of not
having been moved for seven (7) consecutive days or more and being apparently
deserted, may be removed by the police department and otherwise dealt with in
accordance with article II of section 4 of the Illinois vehicle code, but only
if:
   A.   The owner of the property on which the vehicle was abandoned is
different from the owner of the vehicle; or
   B.   The owner of the property on which the vehicle was abandoned requests
the police department to take action; and
   C.   If approved by the chief of police in his sole discretion. (Ord. 03-01,
1-27-2003)
5-4-5: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to any other remedies, the corporate authorities may at any time
instruct the village attorney to file a lawsuit in the circuit court of
Sangamon County, seeking any or all remedies available in the Illinois
municipal code respecting abatement of nuisances. The corporate authorities may
seek penalties in accordance with section
5-4-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-01, 1-27-2003)
5-4-6: PARKING OF VEHICLES WITH EXPIRED REGISTRATION STICKERS:
No person may stop, park, or leave standing upon a public street, highway, or
roadway a vehicle upon which is displayed an Illinois registration plate or
plates or registration sticker after the termination of the registration period
for which the registration plate or sticker was issued or after the expiration
date set by section 3-314 or 3-314.1 of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 03-01,
1-27-2003)
5-4-7: PENALTIES AND REMEDIES:
   A.   Any person who violates or aids and abets in the violation of section
5-4-2, 5-4-3 or 5-4-4 of this chapter shall be fined not less than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) and no more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00),
plus the cost to the village of its attorney fees and shall be required by the
court to make a disposition on the abandoned, unclaimed, or inoperable vehicle.
Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   In addition to the remedies set forth in this chapter and in article II
of chapter 4 of the Illinois motor vehicle code, the village may bring a common
law nuisance action against a person who is responsible for a nuisance as
defined in this chapter, and in connection therewith, may seek all remedies
available in law or equity in connection with such an action, and shall be
entitled as part of the action to an award of its attorney fees and costs.
   C.   A person who violates section
5-4-6 of this chapter shall be fined the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
for each violation. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 03-01, 1-27-2003)
CHAPTER 5
GOLF CARTS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Definitions
5-5-2: Operation Of Golf Carts On Village Streets
5-5-3: Equipment Requirements
5-5-4: Permits
5-5-5: Regulations And Restrictions
5-5-6: Suspensions
5-5-7: Violations
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
GOLF CART: Has the same definition as set forth in section 1-123.9 of the
Illinois vehicle code, namely, A vehicle specifically designed and intended for
the purposes of transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or
maintenance equipment while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the
play of golf, or maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or
private golf course.
VILLAGE STREETS: Any streets or public alleys within the corporate limits of
the village. (Ord. 16-04, 4-25-2016)
5-5-2: OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS ON VILLAGE STREETS:
A golf cart may be operated on village streets if:
   A.   The golf cart has the equipment set forth in section
5-5-3 of this chapter;
   B.   The operator meets permit requirements and has a current permit issued
in accordance with section
5-5-4 of this chapter;
   C.   The operator displays on the vehicle a decal issued by the police
department in accordance with section
5-5-4 of this chapter;
   D.   The operator complies with the provisions of section
5-5-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 16-04, 4-25-2016)
5-5-3: EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
No golf cart may be operated on a village street or be permitted for operation
on a village street unless it has the following equipment:
   Brakes and brake lights.
   Headlight with white light visible from five hundred feet (500') to the
front when vehicle is in operation.
   Horn.
   Rearview mirror.
   "Slow moving vehicle" emblem as defined in section 12-709 of the Illinois
vehicle code.
   Steering wheel.
   Taillight with red light visible from one hundred feet (100') to the rear
when vehicle is in operation.
   Tires.
   Turn signals, front and rear. (Ord. 16-04, 4-25-2016)
5-5-4: PERMITS:
   A.   The police department shall issue a permit for a golf cart upon
application and an inspection of the golf cart. A permit shall be initially
granted through December 31 of the year in which application is made, and
annually renewed each year thereafter for the period January 1 through December
31. The cost of the permit is thirty dollars ($30.00).
   B.   Every application for a permit or renewal shall be made on a form
supplied by the village and shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name and address of applicant;
      2.   Name of the applicant's liability insurance carrier;
      3.   The serial number, make, model and description of the golf cart;
      4.   Such other information as the village may require.
   C.   Each application shall be accompanied by:
      1.   A signed waiver of liability by applicant releasing the village and
agreeing to indemnify and hold the village harmless from any and all future
claims resulting from the operation of their golf cart on the village streets.
      2.   A photocopy of applicable liability insurance coverage card
specifically for the vehicle to be operated pursuant to the permit and for the
duration of the permit.
      3.   A nonrefundable thirty dollar ($30.00) inspection and permit fee.
   D.   Upon receipt of the application, police department will conduct an
inspection of the vehicle to ensure that the vehicle is safe to operate on
village streets and is otherwise in compliance with this chapter and with the
state of Illinois motor vehicle code.
   E.   If the application is complete and the vehicle passes inspection, the
police department shall issue the permit and give the applicant a decal to be
displayed on the golf cart. (Ord. 16-04, 4-25-2016)
5-5-5: REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
Persons operating golf carts on village streets are subject to all traffic
laws, including laws relating to driving under the influence. In addition, the
following regulations and restrictions shall apply.
Persons operating golf carts on village streets shall:
   A.   Have current liability insurance, and proof of liability insurance
readily available for inspection by police officers.
   B.   Have a current permit for the golf cart, and display the village decal
on the golf cart.
   C.   Have a current, valid Illinois driver's license or a valid out of state
driver's license.
   D.   Observe the following additional rules of the road:
      1.   Golf carts shall be operated only between sunrise and sunset.
      2.   Golf carts shall not be operated on sidewalks or in the Village
Square other than parking areas.
      3.   Golf carts may not be operated on streets and highways and roads
under the jurisdiction of the Illinois department of transportation or the
county highway department except to cross at designated streets.
      4.   Golf carts may not be operated on village streets when rain, snow,
fog or other weather conditions hinder safe operations. (Ord. 16-04, 4-25-2016)
5-5-6: SUSPENSIONS:
The chief of police may summarily suspend, for up to six (6) months, the golf
cart permit of any person found by the chief to be in violation of any
provision of this chapter. A person whose permit has been suspended may within
fourteen (14) days thereof request a hearing before the village board, and if
the board finds the suspension to have been unwarranted, the permit will be
reinstated. (Ord. 16-04, 4-25-2016)
5-5-7: VIOLATIONS:
A person charged with a violation of this chapter shall on conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) and not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
A person convicted of any second or subsequent violation of this chapter, or
violation of the Illinois vehicle code while operating a golf cart, shall have
his or her permit revoked for a period of twelve (12) months. (Ord. 16-04, 4-
25-2016)
CHAPTER 6
UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-6-1: Definitions
5-6-2: Operation Of UTVs On Village Streets
5-6-3: Equipment Requirements
5-6-4: Permits
5-6-5: Suspensions
5-6-6: Violations
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
 
                     Has the same definition as “Recreational off-highway vehicle” as set forth in
                     section 1-168.8 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, namely, any motorized off-highway
UTILITY TERRAIN      device designed to travel primarily off-highway, 64 inches or less in width,
VEHICLE (“UTV”): having a manufacturer’s dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less, traveling on 4 or
                     more non-highway tires, designed with a non-straddle seat and a steering wheel
                     for steering control, except equipment such as lawnmowers.
VILLAGE STREETS:     Any streets or public alleys within the corporate limits of the village where the
                     posted speed limit is 35 miles per hour or less. (Ord. 22-03, 3-14-2022)
 
5-6-2: OPERATION OF UTVS ON VILLAGE STREETS:
   A.   The following rules and regulations apply to a UTV being operated on a
Village Street:
      1.   Any person who operates a UTV shall adhere to all applicable state
traffic laws;
      2.   An operator of a UTV must have a valid, state-issued Driver’s
License;
      3.   UTVs must have current liability insurance, and proof of liability
insurance readily available for inspection;
      4.   UTVs may not operate on county roads or highways that are within the
Village other than to cross while travelling on a Village Street;
      5.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted to
operate a UTV;
      6.   UTVs shall have headlights and taillights on at all times;
      7.   UTVs shall not exceed thirty miles per hour (30 MPH);
      8.   Operators and passengers of a UTV must remain seated and belted when
the UTV is in operation;
      9.   Passengers under the age of eight (8) years shall be fastened into a
child safety seat or booster seat that is fastened into the UTV;
      10.   A person who operates or is in actual physical control of a UTV on
a Village Street is subject to 625 ILCS 11-500 through 11-502.1;
      11.   A UTV operator must yield the right of way to overtaking vehicles;
      12.   The maximum occupancy of UTVs travelling on Village Streets shall
be the sum of one (1) person per bucket seat and two (2) persons per bench seat
on the UTV;
      13.   UTVs shall be operated only between sunrise and sunset;
      14.   UTVs shall not be operated on sidewalks or on public property,
other than parking areas or Village Streets; and
      15.   UTVs may not be operated when rain, snow, fog or other weather
conditions hinder safe operations.
   B.   In addition to the above rules and regulations, a UTV may be operated
on Village Streets only if:
      1.   The UTV has the equipment set forth in section
5-6-3 of this chapter;
      2.   The operator meets permit requirements and has a current, readily
available permit issued in accordance with section
5-6-4 of this chapter; and
      3.   The operator displays on the UTV a decal issued by the police
department in accordance with section
5-6-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 22-03, 3-14-2022)
5-6-3: EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No UTV may be operated on a Village Street or be permitted for
operation on a Village Street unless it has the following equipment:
      1.   Brakes and brake lights;
      2.   Steering wheel;
      3.   Tires;
      4.   Horn;
      5.   A rearview mirror;
      6.   A stock muffler;
      7.   A “Slow moving vehicle” emblem as defined in section 12-709 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code on the rear of the UTV;
      8.   A headlight with white light visible from five hundred feet (500')
to the front when UTV is in operation;
      9.   A taillight with red light visible from one hundred feet (100') to
the rear when UTV is in operation;
      10.   Turn signals at the front and rear of the UTV;
      11.   Red reflectorized warning devices in the front and rear of the UTV;
and
      12.   Seatbelts for operator and passenger seats. (Ord. 22-03, 3-14-2022)
5-6-4: PERMITS:
   A.   Applications for UTV Permits shall be submitted to the Pawnee Police
Department, which shall issue Permits in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. A Permit shall be initially valid through December 31 of the year in
which it is issued, and annually renewed each year thereafter for the period
January 1 through December 31.
   B.   Applications for a permit or renewal shall be made on a form supplied
by the Village and shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name, address, and phone number of UTV owner (“applicant”);
      2.   Name, address, and phone number of up to two authorized operators of
the UTV;
      3.   Name of the applicant’s liability insurance carrier; and
      4.   The Vehicle Identification Number (VIN), make, model and description
of the UTV.
   C.   Applications for a permit or renewal shall be accompanied by:
      1.   A signed waiver by applicant and each authorized operator releasing
the Village of liability and agreeing to indemnify and hold the Village
harmless from any and all claims resulting from the operation of the UTV;
      2.   A photocopy of valid a driver’s license for applicant and each
authorized operator;
      3.   A photocopy of valid liability insurance coverage card specifically
for the UTV to be operated pursuant to the permit for the duration of the
permit;
      4.   A Certificate of Completion of the Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle
Association Safety Course from applicant and each authorized operator
(available for free at www.rohva.org); and
      5.   A nonrefundable thirty-dollar ($30.00) inspection and permit fee.
   D.   Upon receipt of the application, the Police Department will conduct an
inspection of the UTV to ensure that the UTV is in compliance with this chapter
and with the State of Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
   E.   If the application is complete and the UTV passes inspection, the
Police Department shall issue the permit and give the applicant a decal to be
displayed on the UTV. (Ord. 22-03, 3-14-2022)
5-6-5: SUSPENSIONS:
   A.   The Chief of Police may summarily suspend the UTV permit of any person
found by the Chief to be in violation of any provision of this Chapter for up
to twelve (12) months.
   B.   The Chief of Police may summarily suspend the UTV permit of the
registered UTV owner and/or authorized operator(s) found by the Chief to have
entrusted the UTV to another person who has been found to be in violation of
any provision of this Chapter for up to twelve (12) months.
   C.   A person whose permit has been suspended may, within fourteen (14) days
of suspension, request a hearing before the Village Board, and if the Board
finds the suspension to have been unwarranted, the permit will be reinstated.
(Ord. 22-03, 3-14-2022)
5-6-6: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   A person charged with a violation of this Chapter shall on conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00)
and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   B.   A person convicted of any second or subsequent violation of this
chapter or a violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code shall have his or her
permit revoked for a period of twelve (12) months. (Ord. 22-03, 3-14-2022)
TITLE 6
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Placement Of Mailboxes
6-1-2: Memorial Roadway Signage Program
6-1-3: Livestock Special Permits
6-1-4: Issuing Of Special Livestock Permits
6-1-5: Violations
6-1-1: PLACEMENT OF MAILBOXES:
No rural mail or letter box shall be placed in the ditch along any street or
roadway in the village in such a way that the placement thereof will obstruct
or otherwise interfere with the cleaning and general maintenance of said ditch.
The box must be placed so that it may be safely and conveniently served by
carriers without leaving their conveyances. (Ord. 73-10, 9-10-1973)
6-1-2: MEMORIAL ROADWAY SIGNAGE PROGRAM:
   A.   A memorial roadway signage program is hereby established, it being the
intent of the village to acknowledge the contributions of certain of its
citizens to the community of Pawnee.
   B.   Annually, the village president shall appoint an ad hoc application
review committee consisting of five (5) citizens, with the advice and consent
of the village board. The ad hoc committee shall meet to review applications
and shall make recommendations to the village board with respect to the
applications received.
   C.   An application shall be made to the village office on or before May 1
of each calendar year. The application shall include the following information:
      1.   The name of the applicant;
      2.   The name of the person being honored;
      3.   The name of the street upon which the applicant wishes to post the
memorial sign;
      4.   The length of time that the person to be honored was a resident of
Pawnee;
      5.   A narrative stating the nature of person's contributions to the
village community and why, in the opinion of the applicant, the person should
be honored.
   D.   Within sixty (60) days of the close of the application period, the ad
hoc application committee shall rank all applications for the year and submit a
recommendation to the village board as to the applications in ranked order. The
village board shall then, by motion made, seconded and adopted, announce the
winning applications for the year. There shall be no more than two (2) winning
applications each year.
   E.   The winning applicants shall submit a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee,
and the village street department shall see to the production and erection of
the memorial signs.
   F.   No person shall be honored with a memorial sign more than once.
Memorial signs shall be taken down on or about July 1 of each year and returned
to the applicant. (Ord. 10-25, 7-26-2010)
6-1-3: LIVESTOCK SPECIAL PERMITS:
No livestock, including cows, horses, mules, asses, and donkeys are permitted
to be on village property, unless the owner has obtained a special permit for
that purpose. (Ord. 21-05, 3-8-2021)
6-1-4: ISSUANCE OF SPECIAL LIVESTOCK PERMITS:
The Village Board may issue a special permit for the purpose of allowing
livestock on village property on the terms and conditions as the Board may find
appropriate in the circumstances. (Ord. 21-05, 3-8-2021)
6-1-5: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, on
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250.00) nor to exceed seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each violation. Each day during which a violation continues beyond the
specified time for correction shall constitute a separate punishable offense.
(Ord. 21-05, 3-8-2021)
CHAPTER 2
NATURAL GAS SYSTEM
SECTION:
6-2-1: Taps And Service Connections
6-2-2: Contract With Customer
6-2-3: Gas Rates
6-2-4: General Standards Governing Connections To The Gas System
6-2-5: System And Connection Requirements
6-2-6: Meter Requirements
6-2-7: Right Of Inspection
6-2-8: Meter Readings
6-2-9: Damage To Or Tampering With System
6-2-10: Liability Of Property Owner
6-2-11: Discontinuance And Renewal Of Service
6-2-12: Extensions Of Mains And Service
6-2-13: Questions And Complaints
6-2-14: Liability Of Village
6-2-15: Penalty
6-2-1: TAPS AND SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Application For Tap Or Service Connection: Any person desiring to make
a gas tap or service connection with the natural gas system of the village
shall file a written application therefor in the village utility office upon
blank forms to be provided for such purpose, signed by the owner of the
property for which such tap or service connection is desired or by duly
authorized agent of such owner. Such application shall be accompanied by
payment of the fee 1  hereinafter prescribed to cover the cost of such service
connection. In the event such application is made by an agent for said owner,
then such application shall also be accompanied by the written authority of
such owner to said agent for the making of said application.
   B.   Order For Installation: Upon the filing of such application, if the
same is in proper form and the cost advanced as herein required, an order for
the installation of service pipe, tap, meter and service connections will be
issued to the officer or employee of the village having charge of such work,
whose duty it shall be to make such installation and connection without
unnecessary delay and to return such order, immediately upon completion of the
work, with an endorsement thereon signed by such officer or employee showing
the date, place and manner in which such tap or service connections were made
and an itemized statement of the cost thereof.
   C.   Records: All applications and the orders and reports issued and
returned thereon, shall be appropriately numbered and kept on file in the
village utility office as a permanent record.
   D.   Right Of Entry: Where service lines are laid on private property, the
village shall have the right to enter upon said property for the installation
and maintenance of the proposed service lines to be installed and maintained by
the village and for the extension along or across such property for making
other service connections from the same service line. (Ord. 75-14, 6-9-1975)
   E.   Meter Deposit Charge: (Rep. by Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
   F.   Liability For Payment For Service: The services of the natural gas
system shall be deemed to be furnished to the owner of the premises and to the
occupant, and from and after the effective date hereof the occupant and the
user shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of all charges for
such services, and such services are furnished to the premises by the village
only upon the condition that the owner of the premises and the occupant thereof
and the user of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the
village and that each of said persons sign and execute the application for
service. (Ord. 82-6, 3-22-1982)
   G.   Cost Of Tap And Gas Service Connections:
      1.   For all regular three-fourths inch (3/4") taps and service
connections, the village will furnish and install a valve, service tee, service
pipe, connection, fittings, regulator, meter and necessary stopcocks for the
sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The maximum length of service line
to be installed at this cost shall be seventy five feet (75') from the property
line and such additional lengths required are to be paid for by the customer at
the rate of one dollar ($1.00) per linear foot. (Ord. 04-06, 5-24-2004)
      2.   Where service lines can be installed in a location which will permit
the servicing of two (2) customers, the maximum length to be installed from the
property line shall be one hundred fifty feet (150').
      3.   For business or industrial purposes or for special space heating
requirements requiring larger than three-fourths inch (3/4") service pipe with
incidental larger fittings, stopcocks, regulators and meters, these service
connections shall be made in a like manner and the service line in excess of
seventy five feet (75') from the property line shall be paid for at actual cost
to the village; provided, that upon application therefor, special permission
may be granted by the board of trustees authorizing the applicant to make such
service connections at their own expense under the supervision of and subject
to such reasonable conditions and regulations as may be prescribed by such
permit. None of these conditions are to be inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter.
      4.   In addition to the foregoing charges, if it is necessary for the
village to bore under a public street in order to provide gas service, the
customer shall pay the actual cost of the bore.
      5.   The foregoing fees may be varied by the village pursuant to
contracts with landowners and developers in accordance with sections
9-5-1 et seq., and 11-15.1-1.1 et seq., of the Illinois municipal code, and in
such event, the fees as agreed shall be binding upon persons purchasing
property from such landowners and developers. (Ord. 02-05, 5-13-2002)
   H.   Filing Of Appliance Application: Applicant shall file an application
for gas with the village utility office stating the equipment to be connected
and shall refile when future equipment is added, showing all equipment
installed or proposed. (Ord. 75-14, 6-9-1975; amd. 1994 Code)
   I.   Developer Rebates: Any person or firm developing a new residential
subdivision in the village and desiring to establish a natural gas distribution
system within the subdivision is eligible to participate in a rebate program
for the cost of the natural gas distribution system, as follows:
      1.   A developer who wishes to participate in the rebate program will
obtain, from the village, an estimate of the cost of the natural gas
distribution system within the subdivision.
      2.   The developer will deposit the estimated amount with the village
prior to the work proceeding.
      3.   The village will construct the natural gas distribution system. If
the actual cost exceeds the estimate, the village will bill the developer for
the difference. If the actual cost is less than the estimate, the village will
refund the difference.
      4.   When a new customer taps on to the village system, the village will
impose a special tap fee, which, in addition to the normal tap fee charged by
the village for meters and the like, will include the customer's pro rata share
(based upon the total cost divided by the number of lots served) of the cost of
the natural gas distribution system. From the special tap fee received, the
village will reimburse to the developer the pro rata share of the cost of the
natural gas distribution system.
      5.   Any developer who participates in the rebate program shall give
notice to all prospective buyers of the lots within the subdivision of the
existence of the special tap fee by placing a notice thereof in the recorded
subdivision covenants in capital letters of at least 12-point type. In the
event the developer fails to comply with this requirement, the village shall
have no obligation to impose the special tap fee or pay the rebate. (Ord. 05-
08, 4-25-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  6-2-3 of this chapter for rates.
6-2-2: CONTRACT WITH CUSTOMER:
All rules and regulations concerning the use of the facilities of the natural
gas system of the village and the consumption of gas therefrom shall become a
part of the contract with every gas customer, and every gas customer shall be
subject thereto and bound thereby. (Ord. 75-14, 6-9-1975)
6-2-3: GAS RATES:
   A.   Definitions: When used in this section, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   THERM: One hundred (100) cubic feet of natural gas delivered to a user.
   USER: One individual, partnership, association, firm, public or private
corporation or governmental agency at a single location receiving service.
   B.   Gas Rate Schedule 1 : On and after August 1, 2010, all users of gas
from the village system shall be charged and pay monthly a facilities charge
and a gas charge, as follows:
      1.   Facilities charge: Eight dollars ($8.00) per meter.
      2.   Gas charge: Fifty cents ($0.50) per therm above the wholesale cost
per therm to village in previous month, measured at the user's meter. (Ord. 10-
21, 6-28-2010)
   C.   Payment For Service And Penalties 2 : (Rep. by Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
   D.   Utility Tax Applicable: All rates charged are subject to the Illinois
gas utility tax and the same shall be due and payable upon payment of the gas
charges. (Ord. 10-21, 6-28-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 7, chapter 6, "Billing Rebates And Credits", of this code.
2 2. See title 14, chapter 1 of this code.
6-2-4: GENERAL STANDARDS GOVERNING CONNECTIONS TO THE GAS SYSTEM:
The following regulations shall govern all connections to the gas system of the
village:
   A.   The village shall make all connections to gas mains, install all
service lines, and provide the meter and all labor and materials (at the
property owner's expense) necessary for said installations. Service line
installations shall be completed in a workmanlike manner.
   B.   The final tie in for the gas line to the outlet side of the meter shall
be the property owner's responsibility and must be completed in accordance with
the guidelines set forth in the National Fire Protection Association's most
recent edition of NFPA 54: national fuel gas code, which is incorporated by
reference and made a part hereof to the same extent as if fully set forth
herein.
   C.   All customer piping and necessary venting of appliances shall be in
accordance with guidelines set forth in the National Fire Protection
Association's most recent edition of NFPA 54: national fuel gas code, as
incorporated and made a part of subsection B of this section.
   D.   To the extent anything required by this section is inconsistent with
any other provision of this chapter, this section shall control. (Ord. 15-14,
8-10-2015)
6-2-5: SYSTEM AND CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Specifications For Regular Gas Service Connections: All gas service
connections made to the gas mains of the distribution system of the village
shall be substantially as follows:
      1.   Connections:
         a.   The connection at the main shall consist of a valved service tee
of three-fourths inch (3/4") ID field pipe. Valve tees shall be welded in a
workmanlike manner to the main. The connection with the service tee shall be
made with a black iron street ell, nipple and insulated union.
         b.   Service connections, where the gas consumption will be in excess
of the capacity of the above specifications, shall be made in the manner
specified by the engineer or superintendent.
      2.   Service Lines:
         a.   Service lines shall consist of three-fourths inch (3/4") black
iron stopcock. Prior to drilling the main for gas service, the aforementioned
service line shall be tested at one hundred (100) pounds' pressure. The
regulator and meters shall be capable of handling a sufficient volume of gas to
serve the needs of the customer. All materials and construction procedure shall
conform to the latest standards of the American Gas Association.
         b.   Wherever it is necessary for service lines to cross under high
type pavements, the service line shall be installed by boring or jacking the
service line through underneath the pavement from a point six feet (6') outside
of the pavement to six feet (6') beyond the edge of the pavement.
      3.   Performance Ratings: All lines and fitting shall be capable of
withstanding a working pressure of not less than one hundred twenty five (125)
pounds per square inch and shall be so rated by the manufacturer. One fitting
of the meter swivel shall be insulated.
   B.   Connection With Private Lines:
      1.   Meter Required: Whenever a connection is made with a private line,
such service shall be metered at the point of such connection and the customer
requesting such service shall provide a satisfactory location for the placing
of such metering devices, regulators and other materials and equipment
required. Such private lines shall be subject to the inspection and approval of
the village prior to making the necessary service connections.
      2.   Right To Inspect And Demand Changes: The village shall have the
right and option to demand changes, removal or replacement of any pipe,
fixtures or apparatus which is considered to be faulty, inadequate or
hazardous; provided, however, that this provision shall not obligate the
Village in any way or manner. The Village shall have the right to refuse or to
discontinue gas service without notice to its customers if the Village finds
any apparatus or appliance in operation which would be detrimental to the
efficient operation of the existing facilities.
      3.   Electrical Ground Wires: All persons are strictly forbidden to
attach any electrical ground wire to any fixture or piping which is or may be
connected to any gas service pipe, meter or main belonging to the Village. The
Village will hold the owner of the premises responsible and liable for any
damage to its property or injury to the employees of the Village caused by such
ground wire. Any and all customers shall remove any existing ground wires
immediately, and if such ground wires are not removed after twenty four (24)
hours' written notice, the Village, through its officials, may enter the
property and remove such ground wires and the customer shall pay all costs.
   C.   Regulation of Customers' Piping, Facilities, Appliances and Necessary
Venting:
      1.   General Piping:
         a.   All house piping shall be of rigid construction.
         b.   The pipe from the outlet of the meter shall be of iron pipe of
not less than one inch (1") inside diameter and shall enter the house wall or
be securely fastened to the wall by means of suitable metal strap or clamp at a
point not more than eighteen inches (18") from the outlet connection of the
meter, and if extended along the outside wall, shall be fastened to the wall at
intervals sufficient to make the piping rigid throughout.
         c.   In instances where piping from the meter enters the wall, the
opposite end shall be securely fastened so that the pipe will not turn when
fittings at the meter are put on.
         d.   The piping from the meter through or along the wall shall
constitute and hereinafter be called "house pipe manifold".
         e.   The one inch (1") manifold will be used where the total hourly
demand for gas does not exceed four hundred (400) cubic feet per hour. Where
the total hourly demand of a building or house is in excess of four hundred
(400) cubic feet of gas per hour, the gas engineer for the Village must be
consulted for specifications for the house pipe manifold.
      2.   Pipe Manifolds:
         a.   From any house pipe manifold, pipe to the various appliances
shall be of the same dimensions as the fitting on the appliance where such
appliance is designed and approved for natural gas. Where appliances are to be
converted from liquefied petroleum gas, pipe from the manifold to the appliance
shall be of such size as would be approved by the American Gas Association for
natural gas appliances having the same B.T.U. input rating.
         b.   From the house pipe manifold, any appliance pipe may be extended
a maximum distance of forty (40) lineal feet. For each ninety degree (90o) turn
in the appliance pipe, three (3) lineal feet shall be deducted from the maximum
distance. Copper pipe may be substituted for iron pipe from the manifold to the
appliance. Copper pipe must have O.D. dimension equivalent to the I.D. of
standard iron pipe. Only type K copper pipe may be used. All copper fitting
must be of flare type only. When copper tubing is used, insulated copper or
iron fitting must be used at the meter end and appliance end of the tubing.
         c.   No connection will be made with any house type manifold that has
not been tested for leakage.
      3.   Conversion Burners:
         a.   All gas conversion burners to be installed shall be A.G.A.
approved. All designed heating plants shall be A.G.A. approved and the
manufacturer's recommendations for the installation shall be followed.
         b.   No conversion burner shall be installed in an old or inefficient
warm air furnace which is in poor repair or in an old or leaky boiler which is
in poor repair. Test for leakage shall be with oil of wintergreen or smoke bomb
on any warm air heating plant before installing a conversion burner. Furnaces
must be reset if found to be leaking.
      4.   Chimney: Before connecting a flue or vent connector to any chimney,
the chimney shall be examined to ascertain that it is properly constructed,
clear, clean and will freely conduct the products of combustion from the gas
heating appliance in question to the outer air.
      5.   Ventilation:
         a.   All appliances, excepting cook stoves, with over eight thousand
(8,000) B.T.U. per hour input rating must be vented. No unvented appliance,
excepting cook stoves, shall be placed in the same room with a gas
refrigerator. An approved type vent pipe and draft diverter shall be installed
in all gas burning space heating and water heating appliances, vent pipe shall
be installed with not less than one-half inch (1/2") rise per foot of
horizontal run. General rules for venting as prescribed by A.G.A. must be
followed.
         b.   All gas burning appliances shall be installed in a location in
which the facilities for ventilation permit satisfactory combustion of gas and
proper venting under normal conditions of use. The necessary measures shall be
taken to ascertain that the above ventilation conditions are present.
      6.   Firing Door: All positive type catches on firing door shall be
eliminated and a hinge pin and spring be installed.
      7.   Heating Plants:
         a.   All heating plants of the down draft type shall be vented by
connecting a one inch (1") black iron pipe from the highest point of the flue
passage of the heating plant to the flue pipe. The one inch (1") iron pipe
shall be welded or screwed into the furnace in a manner to assure no leakage.
         b.   A high limit control shall be installed on all heating plants. A
low water cut-off control shall be installed on all gas fired steam boilers.
      8.   Gas Shut-Off: A gas shut-off shall be installed in the fuel line
directly above the appliance manifold connection. Said shut- off shall be
plainly marked. Gas pilot line shall be connected to fuel line ahead of the
main shut-off valve.
   D.   Bulletins Incorporated: The following bulletins are incorporated herein
by reference and made a part hereof as and to the extent that they had been
fully set forth at length herein:
      1.   Standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters for the
installation of gas piping and gas appliances in buildings as contained in NBFU
No. 54; and
      2.   American standard installations of gas piping and gas appliances in
buildings, bulletin dated 1954 as published by the American Association, Inc.
   E.   Final Connection; Village Inspection: The final tie-in of the gas line
to the meter shall be made by the Village. Before the final tie is made, it
shall be the duty of the Village Gas Department to make a complete inspection.
(Ord. 75-14, 6-9-75)
6-2-6: METER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Meter Required: All gas service shall be metered with a meter of
adequate size to measure the amount of gas consumed. Meters shall be of the
positive type and shall be American Gas Association approved.
   B.   Location of Meter: All meters shall be so placed and installed as to
render the same accessible at all times for the purpose of reading and
repairing. All meters shall be set outside of the buildings wherever practical.
Indoor installations must be vented with an adequate vent extending to the
outside.
   C.   Separate Meters for Each Premises: No person shall connect any gas
service pipe or transmit gas supplied by the natural gas system of the Village
into two (2) distinct premises from one meter. Apartment buildings having
separate dwelling units may be serviced from a single meter. Duplex dwellings
shall be serviced from individual meters. Provided, however, that the Mayor and
the Board of Trustees shall have the right to establish special services or
service connections as may be necessary for large users. (Ord. 75-14, 6-9-75)
6-2-7: RIGHT OF INSPECTION:
At all reasonable hours, meters, regulators, fittings, fixtures and
appurtenances connected with the system and located on private property shall
be open for inspection by the proper officers and employees of the Village. Any
part found to be defective or not in compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter shall be immediately repaired or corrected. Service may be discontinued
at any time when conditions of the privately owned facilities create danger or
hazard. (Ord. 75-14, 6-9-1975)
6-2-8: METER READINGS:
All gas consumers shall be liable for the gas consumption as shown by the
meter. Waste, leakage or other causes not the liability of the village shall be
included under said liability. The meter reading shall be conclusive; provided,
that whenever the village shall find any meter not registering, then an average
bill may be rendered based, at the option of the village, on either the nearest
previous three (3) months' average use, when meter was in good order, or based
on the same month of the preceding year. Whenever the village shall have reason
to believe that the meter is not registering correctly, then an average bill,
as stated above, may be rendered and the meter removed for testing. If such
average bill should prove to be incorrectly estimated, either by actual testing
or by actual gas consumption after being replaced by a corrected meter, then
such bill shall be compared to the same. (Ord. 75-14, 6-9-1975)
6-2-9: DAMAGE TO OR TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM:
   A.   Damage To City Owned Equipment:
      1.   Whenever a meter, regulator or other equipment of a service
connection, which has been installed by the village, is found to have been
damaged for any cause whatsoever, such damages shall become the liability of
the customer who shall pay the village the actual cost of removal, repairing
and/or replacing of such damaged equipment.
      2.   In the event such damage has caused inaccurate metering, then such
gas bills shall be corrected in the manner previously provided for herein to
cover such period that the meter was out of order.
   B.   Tampering With System: It shall be unlawful for any person to break the
seal of any meter or in any manner make any alterations, changes or repairs on
the same or to open any mains, laterals, service pipe, stopcocks, valves or any
part thereof or otherwise tamper with or attempt to do any work on either or
any of them without authority of the village or its properly authorized agent.
Any person who shall wilfully or maliciously injure or damage any property
connected with the gas system of the village shall be subject to the penalty
hereinafter prescribed. (Ord. 75-14, 6-9-1975)
6-2-10: LIABILITY OF PROPERTY OWNER:
The property owner shall be held liable for all charges left unpaid by any
tenant where the property owner has countersigned the application for service
on the premises and the village reserves the right to shut off any gas service
where said delinquent charges are not paid by said owner. (Ord. 75-14, 6-9-
1975)
6-2-11: DISCONTINUANCE AND RENEWAL OF SERVICE 1 :
   A.   Right To Discontinue: The village reserves the right to discontinue gas
service to any premises on account of nonpayment of any charges or where the
owner or tenant of such premises has been found guilty of a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Discontinuance: Where such service is discontinued and the gas is shut
off or stopped, whether by the village or at the request of the property owner,
the gas shall not again be turned on or supplied to such premises until all
such delinquent charges due the village have been paid and there is not
existing default or violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Application For Renewal; Fee: A written application shall be filed with
the village utility office for the renewal of such gas service, which
application shall be accompanied by a reconnect fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) to pay for the shutting off and turning on of the gas supply;
provided, however, if the gas is shut off at the request of the property owner
and there were no delinquent charges or violations of the provisions of this
chapter, there shall be no charge for the renewal of the gas service.
   D.   Customer Use Of Stopcock Or Service Connection: No customer shall be
permitted to use the stopcock or the service connection for shutting off gas
while making extensions, additions or repairs to the pipe or equipment on the
premises. Such shutoff or discontinuance or interruption of service will be
made only by the village or its properly authorized employees. (Ord. 75-14, 6-
9-1975)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  14-1-8 of this code for delinquency procedures.
6-2-12: EXTENSIONS OF MAINS AND SERVICE:
   A.   Request for Extension: The Village shall not be required to extend
mains within the Village limits, unless upon application made. Such extensions
shall be at the cost of the applicant. Extension of mains outside of the
Village limits shall be subject to approval of the Board of Trustees and shall
be subject to all of the rules and regulations and provisions as provided
herein or as may be amended.
   B.   Deposit:
      1.   Where service is desired, an extension can be made if the applicant
deposits with the Village the estimated cost of making the extension. Such
deposit shall be interest free. In the event that the amount deposited is
greater or less than the actual cost of the extension, such excess or
deficiency shall be corrected prior to giving service. Extensions shall also
comply with the Village subdivision regulations if applicable.
      2.   Deposits made under the provisions of this subsection shall not
exempt the applicant from the payment of all other charges required by this
Chapter.
      3.   Amounts received by the Village for such extensions shall be
deposited in the Meter Deposit Fund and payments for refunds shall likewise be
paid from the same Fund. (Ord. 75-14, 6-9-75)
6-2-13: QUESTIONS AND COMPLAINTS:
All questions and complaints shall be made to the Gas Department of the
Village, who shall be responsible for the proper investigation. The Department
shall be required to make a full report to the customer in all such cases, a
copy of which shall be filed with the Gas Committee of the Village Board and
reported to the Board of Trustees at the next regular meeting. Any
disrespectful or unwarranted acts of the Village employees shall be reported
immediately. All employees of the Village are strictly forbidden to demand or
accept any tips, gratuity or other personal compensation for any services
whatsoever rendered during working hours. (Ord. 75-14, 6-9-75)
6-2-14: LIABILITY OF VILLAGE:
   A.   The Village shall have the right to shut off the supply of gas whenever
it is necessary to make repairs, improvements, enforce rules or for any
operating reason. In all cases, where possible, a reasonable notice of the
circumstances will be given to the customers, but in an emergency the gas may
be shut off without notice. Such necessary repairs or work will be made by the
Village as rapidly as may be practical. The Village shall not be held
responsible or liable because of any shut off or discontinuance of service for
any direct or resultant damages to any person.
   B.   In the event of such discontinuance of gas service, the Village will
make every attempt to safeguard the customer and service shall not be renewed
until the Village authorities have purged the lines and put into service all
automatic controls and pilots. The cost of purging of lines, relighting pilots
and checking automatic controls will be borne by the Village and the customer
will not be liable for any portion thereof. Where the nature of the customer's
operations are such that an interruption of service might create a hazard or
large economic loss, such customer shall provide facilities for standby service
if desired.
   C.   Whenever mains, pipes, service connections or other facilities of the
gas system are taken up, shut off or interfered with by reasons of any Village
street improvement, the Village will endeavor to maintain service so far as is
reasonably possible, but will not be directly or indirectly liable for any
interruption, poor pressure or damage of any kind either to the customers
adjacent or to other customers affected thereby. Direct damage to property due
to such operations shall be either repaired or replaced by the Village without
cost to the customer.
   D.   The Village expressly stipulates, with all customers and other persons
who may be affected by the discontinuance of service, that it will neither
insure nor be responsible or liable in any manner for any loss or damages,
direct or indirect, by any reason of any fire or any other cause, and all gas
service furnished shall also be conditional upon acts of God, inevitable
accidents, fire, strikes, riots or any other causes. (Ord. 75-14, 6-9-75)
6-2-15: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1994 Code)
ARTICLE A. ANTI-DRUG PROGRAM
SECTION:
6-2A-1: Policy Adopted
6-2A-1: POLICY ADOPTED:
A drug test policy, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance 90-12 as Exhibit A
on file in the office of the Village Clerk, is hereby approved and shall govern
the drug testing of employees of the Village gas system. (Ord. 90-12, 9-10-90)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC LIBRARY
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Library Theft
6-3-3: Prohibited Acts
6-3-4: Amnesty
6-3-5: Penalties
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
LIBRARY: Includes any public library within the corporate limits of the Village
of Pawnee.
LIBRARY CARD: A card or plate issued by a library for purposes of identifying
the person to whom the library card was issued as authorized to borrow library
material, subject to all limitations and conditions imposed on such borrowing
by the library facility issuing such card.
LIBRARY MATERIAL: Includes any book, plate, picture, photograph, engraving,
painting, sculpture, statue, artifact, drawing, map, newspaper, pamphlet,
broadside, magazine, manuscript, document, letter, microfilm, sound recording,
audio-visual material, magnetic or other tape, electronic data processing
record or other documentary, written or printed material regardless of physical
form or characteristics or any part thereof, belonging to or on loan to or
otherwise in the custody of a library.
PREMISES OF A LIBRARY: The interior of a building, structure or other enclosure
in which a library is located and in which the library keeps displays and makes
available for inspection or borrowing library material. (Ord. 92-11, 7-13-92,
eff. 8-15-92)
6-3-2: LIBRARY THEFT:
A person commits the offense of library theft when he:
   A.   Knowingly and intentionally removes any library material from the
premises of a library without authority to do so; or
   B.   Knowingly and intentionally conceals any library material upon his
person or among his belongings, while still in the premises of a library
facility and in such manner that the library material is not visible through
ordinary observation although there may be some notice of its presence, and
removes such library material beyond the last point in the premises of that
library facility at which library material may be borrowed in accordance with
procedures established by that library facility for the borrowing of library
material; or
   C.   With the intent to deceive, borrows or attempts to borrow any library
material from a library facility by 1) use of a library card issued to another
without the other's consent, or 2) use of a library card knowing that it is
revoked, cancelled or expired, or 3) use of a library card knowing that it is
falsely made, counterfeit or materially altered; or
   D.   Borrows a library material pursuant to an agreement with or procedure
established by the library for the return of such library material and
wilfully, without good cause, fails to return the library material so borrowed
in accordance with such agreement or procedure, and further, wilfully, without
good cause, fails to return such library material within ten (10) days after
receiving written notice by registered mail from the library demanding the
return of such library material. The library shall not send such notices before
a date thirty (30) days after the due date for such materials. (Ord. 92-11, 7-
13-92, eff. 8-15-92)
6-3-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Theft: No person shall commit theft of library materials.
   B.   Mutilation of Materials:
      1.   No person shall commit mutilation of library materials.
      2.   A person commits mutilation of library materials when he knowingly
tears, marks on, maliciously renders imperfect or otherwise damages or destroys
library materials. (Ord. 92-11, 7-13-92, eff. 8-15-92)
6-3-4: AMNESTY:
This Chapter shall become effective on August 15, 1992. Until that date, any
overdue library materials may be returned to the Pawnee Public Library or
replacement cost of overdue materials paid to the Pawnee Public Library and any
library patron returning such materials shall not be liable for prosecution
under this Chapter. (Ord. 92-11, 7-13-92, eff. 8-15-92)
6-3-5: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person convicted of a violation of this Chapter shall be subject to
penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code.
   B.   Each day library materials are not returned after receipt of the
registered letter as set forth in subsection
6-3-2D of this Chapter shall be deemed a continuing offense.
   C.   In addition to any fines hereunder, the offender shall be liable to
reimburse the library for replacement costs of materials not returned, plus
overdue fines established by the Board of Trustees of the library. (Ord. 92-11,
7-13-92, eff. 8-15-92; 1994 Code)
CHAPTER 4
VILLAGE SQUARE AND PAVILION
SECTION:
6-4-1: Availability For Use
6-4-2: Reservation Procedures
6-4-3: Board Of Trustees Action On Requests
6-4-4: Use Of Facilities
6-4-5: Livestock Special Permits
6-4-6: Issuing Of Special Livestock Permits
6-4-7: Violations
6-4-1: AVAILABILITY FOR USE:
Subject to the regulations set forth in this Chapter, the Village Square and
Pavilion located thereon shall be available for use by any fraternal,
educational, charitable, political, religious, civic or other group desiring
their use. (Ord. 92-17, 8-10-92)
6-4-2: RESERVATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Request: Any such group desiring to reserve the park and pavilion for
its use may do so by making a written request to the Village Board stating the
name of the group, the name, address and phone number of a responsible officer
thereof, the date and time the group desires to use the Village Square and
Pavilion, and the type of activity for which the Square and Pavilion will be
used. Such request shall be made no more than six (6) months prior to the date
requested.
   B.   Equal Opportunity: All such requests for the use of the Village Square
and Pavilion shall be honored without regard to the nature of the group and
without regard to the content of the speech, if any, to be exercised by the
organization during the event. Requests shall be approved on a first-come,
first-served basis; except, that the not-for-profit corporation known as Pawnee
Prairie Days, Inc., shall be entitled to priority for the use of the Square
during July of each year for the event known as the Pawnee Prairie Days, over
any other group desiring to use the Square. (Ord. 92-17, 8-10-92)
6-4-3: BOARD OF TRUSTEES ACTION ON REQUESTS:
Requests for the use of the Village Square and Pavilion shall be acted on by
the Village Board at the next regularly scheduled Board meeting following
receipt of the request. Requests shall be denied only for the following
reasons, and no other:
   A.   If it appears that the group is violating or will be violating any of
the laws of the United States or the State of Illinois or ordinances of the
Village.
   B.   If the group has held prior events and failed to return the Square and
Pavilion to a reasonably clean condition after the event.
   C.   If it appears that the purpose of the event is to engage in a for-
profit activity other than fund raising for bona fide fraternal, educational,
charitable, political, religious or civic purposes.
   D.   If it appears that the group is attempting to exclude others from
legitimate uses of the Village Square and Pavilion. (Ord. 92-17, 8-10-92)
6-4-4: USE OF FACILITIES:
   A.   Village Endorsement of Activities: By granting a group's request to use
the Village Square and Pavilion, the Village takes no position with respect to
the aims, if any, of any such group nor does the Village endorse any views or
beliefs of any such group or practices engaged in by such group.
   B.   Admission Charges; Booths: No group granted permission to use the
Village Square and Pavilion shall charge admission to the Village Square and
Pavilion, and all group-sponsored events shall be open to the public. Provided,
however, that a group may suggest a donation for admission to an activity, and
provided further, that a group may charge booth rental fees of up to one
hundred dollars ($100.00) to other persons or groups desiring to sell goods and
services at a fund-raising event. (Ord. 92-17, 8-10-92)
6-4-5: LIVESTOCK SPECIAL PERMITS:
No livestock, including cows, horses, mules, asses, and donkeys are permitted
to be on village streets, unless the owner has obtained a special permit for
that purpose. (Ord. 21-05, 3-8-2021)
6-4-6: ISSUANCE OF SPECIAL LIVESTOCK PERMITS:
The Village Board may issue a special permit for the purpose of allowing
livestock on village streets on the terms and conditions as the Board may find
appropriate in the circumstances. (Ord. 21-05, 3-8-2021)
6-4-7: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, on
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250.00) nor to exceed seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each violation. Each day during which a violation continues beyond the
specified time for correction shall constitute a separate punishable offense.
(Ord. 21-05, 3-8-2021)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE PARKS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Richard Schultz Memorial Park
6-5-2: Village Square Park
6-5-1: RICHARD SCHULTZ MEMORIAL PARK:
   A.   Hours: The Richard Schultz Memorial Park shall be closed at ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. daily. No person shall enter said Park or be present in said Park
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   B.   Alcoholic Beverages: No person shall possess alcoholic beverages or
motor vehicles (including, but not limited to, automobiles, motorcycles and
all-terrain vehicles, whether 2-, 3- or 4-wheeled) on the grounds of the
Richard Schultz Memorial Park without specific authorization of the Village
Board.
   C.   Penalties:
      1.   Fines: Violation of this Section shall be punishable by a fine as
follows:
         First offense   $ 30.00
         Second offense   50.00
         Third offense   100.00
      2.   Settlement Of Citation: To avoid prosecution under this Section, a
violator may, within ten (10) days of receiving a citation, settle the citation
by payment of one-half (1/2) of the specified fine at the Village Hall. The
Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to cease prosecution of any
citation settled. (Ord. 89-12, 7-10-1989; amd. Ord. 96-10, 8-12-1996)
6-5-2: VILLAGE SQUARE PARK:
   A.   Findings: Because the Village Board of Trustees has received numerous
and continuing complaints about loitering and disorderly conduct in the Village
Square Park located within the Village, it is desirable that use and occupancy
of the Park be restricted accordingly. (Ord. 81-19, 12-14-1981; amd. 1994 Code)
   B.   Hours:
      1.   The park located in the Village Square shall be closed to the
general public between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M.
      2.   Additionally, the park may be closed to "minors" (defined as persons
who have not attained the age of 18), between sunset and twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight on the order of and at the discretion of the Village President. In
such event, the Village President shall cause notice thereof to be published in
the Pawnee Post and posted at the Village Hall and in the Village Square.
      3.   No person shall enter into or be present in such park during the
hours it is closed to the general public. No minor shall enter into or be
present in the park during the hours it is closed to minors, unless the minor
is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
      4.   The Village Board may vary the hours set forth herein for special
events or purposes. (Ord. 99-9, 5-10-1999)
   C.   Penalty: Violation of this Section shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation thereof. (Ord. 81-19, 12-14-
1981; amd. 1994 Code)
CHAPTER 6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
6-6-1: Purpose And Scope
6-6-2: Definitions
6-6-3: Annual Registration Required
6-6-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
6-6-5: Action On Permit Applications
6-6-6: Effect Of Permit
6-6-7: Revised Permit Drawings
6-6-8: Insurance
6-6-9: Indemnification
6-6-10: Security
6-6-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
6-6-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
6-6-13: General Construction Standards
6-6-14: Traffic Control
6-6-15: Location Of Facilities
6-6-16: Construction Methods And Materials
6-6-17: Vegetation Control
6-6-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
6-6-19: Cleanup And Restoration
6-6-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
6-6-21: Variances
6-6-22: Penalties
6-6-23: Enforcement
6-6-24: Severability
6-6-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this Chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the Village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village
rights of way and the Village as a whole.
   B.   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This Chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights of way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this Chapter may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and
located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license or similar agreement.
   C.   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The Village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village
rights of way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the Village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the Village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this Chapter.
   D.   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the Village, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the Village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   E.   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This Chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   F.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
Chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or regulations.
   G.   Sound Engineering Judgment: The Village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this Chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this Chapter when the Village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Village to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
Section. Any term not defined in this Section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois Administrative Code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this Chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear runout area.
The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the
roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE: Code of Ordinances of the Village.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right- of-way lines of a
right of way.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this Chapter, any work that
obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including track and
rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, communications and video cables and
wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances
thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights
of way under this Chapter, except those owned by the Village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
Village Street Department Superintendent to pose an unreasonable and imminent
risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological
balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives,
radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons,
etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any Federal or State law, statute or
regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
ICC: Illinois Commerce Commission.
IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
center line of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or
for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to Sections
6-6-4 and 6-6-5 of this Chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the Village. If
no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, State or Federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly
used for utility purposes, including utility easements in which the Village has
the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the Village. "Right of way" shall not include
any real or personal Village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two (2) sentences and shall not include Village buildings, fixtures,
and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated
in the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to Section 6-6-10 of
this Chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
STREET DEPARTMENT SUPERINTENDENT: The Village Street Department Superintendent
or his or her designee.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
service, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any other
transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between
or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications
as defined in the Illinois Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
Act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 635/1 et seq. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC
sections 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village
through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the public right of way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined
in this Chapter.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
VILLAGE: The Village of Pawnee.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 98-20, 11-
9-1998)
6-6-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the Village shall register on
January 1 of each year with the Village Clerk, providing the utility's name,
address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or
more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with
emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty
four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance
as required in Section 6-6-8 of this Chapter, in the form of a certificate of
insurance. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall "construct" (as defined in this
Chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
any Village right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2)
adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the "right of way" (as defined in this
Chapter), or 4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by
the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way,
without first filing an application with the Street Department Superintendent
and obtaining a permit from the Village therefor, except as otherwise provided
in this Chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance
of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption
of the right of way.
   B.   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
Chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the Village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   C.   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made
by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the Village:
         a.   A written traffic-control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         b.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this Section unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in Section 6-6-8 of this Chapter;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in Section 6-6-
10 of this Chapter;
      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
Chapter pursuant to Section 6-6-21 of this Chapter; and
      10.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
Village.
   D.   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this Section, the permit
application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of new electric power, communications or natural gas
distribution system installation, evidence that any "Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity" has been issued by the ICC that the applicant is
required by law, or has elected, to obtain;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control, have been satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
   E.   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the Village within thirty (30) days
after the change necessitating the amendment.
   F.   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this Chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
In addition, the applicant shall agree, as a condition of permit approval to
reimburse the Village prior to construction for the actual cost of having the
application reviewed by the Village Engineer, if such a review is necessary.
The two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) application fee is waived with respect
to any telecommunications retailer that is paying the municipal or the optional
State telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to this Code
or the Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, or by
any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
(Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Street
Department Superintendent within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application does not conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Street Department Superintendent shall
reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Street
Department Superintendent is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this Chapter and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the Street Department Superintendent shall issue a permit
therefor as soon as practicable. The Street Department Superintendent may
consult with the Village Engineer with respect to any application for a permit.
   B.   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village
that it intends to commence work governed by this Chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Street
Department Superintendent shall specify the portion of the right of way upon
which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the Street Department Superintendent fails to
provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer
within either: a) ten (10) days after service of notice to the Village by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction or b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this Chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to Section 6-6-4 of this Chapter the for a
permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to
the requirements of subsection A of this Section. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this Chapter on Village rights of way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights of way.
   B.   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the Village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within ninety (90)
days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans
shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities
deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the
permit also deviates from the requirements of this Chapter, it shall be treated
as a request for variance in accordance with Section 6-6-21 of this Chapter. If
the Village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either
remove the facility from the right of way or modify the facility so that it
conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord. 98-
20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-8: INSURANCE:
   A.   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in
subsections A1 and A2 of this Section:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
         a.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         b.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         c.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
   B.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this Section may
be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or
umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   C.   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this Section to the Village within ten (10) days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.
   D.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this Section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the Village Clerk of such intent to cancel or not
to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no
event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this Section.
   E.   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this
Section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection A, or the requirements of subsections B through D of
this Section. A utility that elects to self- insure shall provide to the
Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection A of
this Section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer"
under the Workers Compensation Act.
   F.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the Village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this Section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-
1998)
6-6-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the Village and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this Chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
Chapter by the Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-10: SECURITY:
   A.   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in
an amount as set forth in this Section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this Section at the permittee's sole cost and
expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this Chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this
Chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this Chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this Chapter to perform that the Village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to
this Chapter or any other applicable law.
   B.   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the Village in
the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
Village and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the Village of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Provide a location convenient to the Village and within the State at
which it can be drawn.
   C.   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Street Department Superintendent, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs that the Village estimates are
likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where
the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Street
Department Superintendent may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the
permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each
phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for
phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
   D.   Withdrawals: The Village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written
notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund,
provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter that the Village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   E.   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security
fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
subsection C of this Section.
   F.   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the Village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection C of this Section.
   G.   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
Chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   H.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the Village with respect to
the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether
reserved by this Chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect
any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-
1998)
6-6-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Village Right To Revoke Permit: The Village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this Chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this Chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights of way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The Village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
Chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this Section.
   C.   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the Village, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the Village within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the public rights of way and restore the rights
of way to the satisfaction of the Village providing written proof of such
removal to the Village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice
of revocation.
The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time
periods provided in this subsection.
   D.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of
this Section.
   E.   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this Section, the Village or
its designee may, at the option of the Village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2)
upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the Village. The permittee shall be liable in all
events to the Village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the Village no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, including this Chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right of way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village's right
of way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 98-20, 11-
9-1998)
6-6-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic-control and construction principles,
sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards
set forth in the following IDOT publications:
      1.   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      2.   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      3.   Highway Design Manual;
      4.   Highway Standards Manual;
      5.   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      6.   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices 1 ;
      7.   Flagger's Handbook; and
      8.   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   B.   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
Chapter, the Street Department Superintendent shall determine, in the exercise
of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall
be final. If requested, the Street Department Superintendent shall state which
standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation
of a facility in the future. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 545.
6-6-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The Village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this Code.
   B.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable Federal, State, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the public rights of way.
   C.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   D.   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or
institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
Section 6-6-20 of this Chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.
   E.   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the Village. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of- way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with a minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside
the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         e.   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any
abovegrounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
   B.   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the center line as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" 1 ;
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations. (49 CFR 192.707 (1989)).
   C.   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The Village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   D.   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The Village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right of way.
      2.   The Village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right of way to be screened from view.
   E.   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the highway user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
   F.   Aboveground Installation: Aboveground facilities may be installed only
if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable.
   G.   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 83 Ill. Adm. Code 305.
6-6-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         a.   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Street
Department Superintendent from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or
jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after
boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be
clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         d.   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the Village to be preserved shall be bored under or
around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction".
         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe line testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the Street Department Superintendent.
         b.   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         c.   Drip Line: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of
any tree designated by the Village to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Street Department Superintendent, the utility, at its expense,
shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed
facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new
pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by
the Street Department Superintendent.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is
permitted under Section 6-6-21 of this Chapter, the following requirements
shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as
practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by
the Street Department Superintendent.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village.
         c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         d.   For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
Village.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: 1)
extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and 2)
cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right of way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                           Minimum Cover
Power or communication line (in general)   30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication line installed by the plowed 24 inches (0.6 m)
method
Gas or petroleum products                  30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                                 Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                           protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage   Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                       protection
 
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within Village rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois Administrative Code 305 1
entitled "Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines",
and the National Electrical Safety Code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, part 192 -
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois".
      6.   Ground-Mounted Appurtenances: Ground-mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Street Department Superintendent. With the
approval of the Street Department Superintendent, shrubbery surrounding the
appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for
ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the
surroundings.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right Of Way: All pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way
prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public
or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right of way and
other property. If material is to be stored on the right of way, prior approval
must be obtained from the Village.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the
Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of
the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the Street Department
Superintendent when emergency work is required to restore vital utility
services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction
are from sunrise to sunset.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the Village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights
of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The Village will make its
permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the Village or
by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act 2 . (Ord. 98-20,
11-9-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. Formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission.
2 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
6-6-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming shall not be considered a
normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the
issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this
Chapter.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   B.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The Village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions covered wire or other means.
   C.   Chemical Use: Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not
be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Street Department Superintendent that such spraying is the
only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   A.   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
Village, a utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within
the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the
construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Village improvement
in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights of way.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public rights of
way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the public rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this Chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The Village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of
way of the Village, as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the Municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   D.   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
public rights of way of the Village, the utility shall notify the Village
within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the Village may
direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Street
Department Superintendent determines that such removal will be in the best
interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the
Village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it,
by giving notice of abandonment to the Village, the abandoning utility shall be
deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the
facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the utility
shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain in a timely
manner and to the satisfaction of the Village. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the Street Department Superintendent. Such
cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   A.   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the Village and at the utility's expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance
with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Street Department Superintendent or his or her duly authorized agent of the
emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection
of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary
repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free
movement of traffic, the Village police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the Village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-21: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this Chapter must do so in writing to the Street
Department Superintendent as a part of the permit application. The request
shall identify each provision of this Chapter from which a variance is
requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The Street Department Superintendent
shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this
Chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   C.   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The Street Department
Superintendent may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the
variance has demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   D.   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Street Department Superintendent may require the
utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this Chapter but which carry
out the purposes of this Chapter. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times when the Village
will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the
utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this
Chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
Village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No
other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit
related cost apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a
utility who does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this Chapter.
(Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
6-6-24: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 98-20, 11-9-1998)
CHAPTER 7
RAILROADS
SECTION:
6-7-1: Raise And Lower Tracks
6-7-2: Drainage
6-7-3: Compliance
6-7-4: Nuisance
6-7-5: Penalty
6-7-1: RAISE AND LOWER TRACKS:
All railroad companies and other persons and entities owning railroad tracks
within the corporate limits of the village shall raise or lower their tracks to
conform to any grade which, at any time, is established by the corporate
authorities of the village. (Ord. 15-02, 3-9-2015)
6-7-2: DRAINAGE:
All railroad companies and other persons and entities owning railroad tracks
within the corporate limits of the village shall make, open, and repair
ditches, drains, sewers, and culverts along and under their tracks, so that
water cannot stand on their property, and so that the natural drainage of
adjacent property is not impeded. (Ord. 15-02, 3-9-2015)
6-7-3: COMPLIANCE:
The corporate authorities of the village may order railroad companies and other
persons and entities owning or operating railroads within the corporate limits
of the village to comply with sections
6-7-1 and 6-7-2 of this chapter, and if an order is disobeyed, may file suit
compelling compliance with such an order. (Ord. 15-02, 3-9-2015)
6-7-4: NUISANCE:
The village hereby declares that any railroad road bed which does not conform
to the requirements of sections
6-7-1 and 6-7-2 of this chapter, or which has not been raised or lowered to a
grade established by the village, is a nuisance. In addition to any other
remedies available to the village, the village may sue the railroad to abate
such a nuisance. (Ord. 15-02, 3-9-2015)
6-7-5: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who or which owns, leases (as lessor or lessee)
or controls a railroad which violates any provision of this chapter, or which
has failed to comply with an order of the village pertaining to drainage or
grades made pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each day a violation, or the failure to
comply with an order, continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 15-
02, 3-9-2015)
CHAPTER 8
SIGNS
SECTION:
6-8-1: Signs On Public Property
6-8-1: SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   This section does not prohibit:
      1.   A single real estate or political sign, up to six (6) square feet in
size, placed in the yard of a property owner within a public right of way,
where the property owner retains an ownership right in the underlying fee, and
which is not within ten feet (10') of any public street or within twenty five
feet (25') of the intersection of two (2) public streets.
      2.   Signs placed on public property by not for profit, fraternal, civic,
veterans and religious organizations advertising community events. Such signs
may be erected up to fourteen (14) days before the event and shall be removed
within two (2) days after the event.
      3.   Signs in any village park placed by vendors in connection with a
civic event which has been authorized by the village board;
      4.   Signs at the entrance to a subdivision identifying the subdivision
to the public.
   B.   Except as permitted in subsection A2 of this section, no person, firm
or corporation shall place, cause to be placed or permit to be placed, any
sign, billboard, placard or other advertisement, upon any property owned by the
village of Pawnee or within any public right of way owned by the village of
Pawnee.
   C.   Village police officers and public works employees shall have the
authority to remove, or cause to be removed: 1) any signs which are in
violation of this section; and 2) signs, whether permitted or prohibited by
this section, as required in their discretion for mowing of or maintenance on
public properties. Village employees shall have no obligation to replace a sign
that has been removed or to notify the owner thereof of its removal.
   D.   Persons found to have violated this section shall be subject to a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). Each day a sign remains on public property in violation of
this section shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 15-05, 4-27-2015, eff. 6-1-
2015)
TITLE 7
WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 1
COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
SECTION:
7-1-1: Systems Combined
7-1-1: SYSTEMS COMBINED:
The existing waterworks system in its entirety, together with all additions,
improvements and extensions thereto that may hereafter be made, and the
existing sanitary sewerage system in its entirety, together with all additions,
improvements and extensions thereto that may hereafter be made, of the Village,
be and the same are hereby declared to be a combined system, and the combined
waterworks and sewerage system shall be maintained and operated as a single
utility, and charges or rates shall be established for the use of such combined
system 1 , which shall be reasonable and commensurate with the services
provided by said combined system and shall be sufficient to maintain and
operate, provide an adequate depreciation fund and pay the principal and
interest on any revenue bonds which may be issued, which by their terms are
made payable from the revenues of such combined system. (Ord. 71-5, 5-17-71)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 5 of this Title for rates and charges.
CHAPTER 2
WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION
SECTION:
7-2-1: State Plumbing Code Adopted
7-2-2: Notice To Customer; Backflow Prevention Device Installation
7-2-3: Approval Of Water Supply
7-2-4: Surveys And Investigations
7-2-5: Right Of Entry For Inspector
7-2-6: Disconnection Of Service For Violation; Reconnection Fee
7-2-7: Responsibility For Cost Of Cleanup
7-2-8: Cross Connection Control
7-2-9: Hydrants
7-2-10: Penalties
7-2-11: Tampering With Or Damage To Village Water Meter
7-2-1: STATE PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
All plumbing henceforth installed within the Village shall be installed in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code
890, which is hereby adopted by reference. The Clerk shall keep three (3)
copies of said Code on file and available for public use, inspection and
examination. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-1991)
7-2-2: NOTICE TO CUSTOMER; BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE INSTALLATION:
If in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the
Superintendent of Water, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary
for the safety of the public water supply system, the Superintendent of Water
shall give notice to the water customer to install such an approved device
immediately. Such water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an
approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois
Plumbing Code and all applicable local regulations and shall have inspections
and tests made of such approved devices upon installation and as required by
the Illinois Plumbing Code and local regulations. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-1991)
7-2-3: APPROVAL OF WATER SUPPLY:
No person shall establish or permit to be established, or maintain or permit to
be maintained, any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water
supply other than the regular public water supply of the Village may enter the
supply or distribution system of said Municipality, unless such private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of
such supply shall have been approved by the Superintendent of Water and the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-1991)
7-2-4: SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS:
The Superintendent of Water shall cause surveys and investigations to be made
of industrial and other properties served by the public water supply to
determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may
exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record
and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years or as often as the
Superintendent of Water deems necessary. Records of such surveys shall be
maintained and available for review for a period of at least five (5) years.
(Ord. 91-20, 12-9-1991)
7-2-5: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTOR:
The Village Water Department shall hire a cross connection control device
inspector or shall train an existing employee to perform such function. The
cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
or distribution system of the Village for the purpose of verifying the presence
or absence of cross connections. The Water Superintendent or his authorized
agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served
by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the
Village for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer
regarding the required cross connection control inspection. On demand the
owner, lessee or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the
Superintendent of Water any information which he may request regarding the
piping system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such
information, when demanded shall, within the discretion of the Superintendent
of Water, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-1991)
7-2-6: DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE FOR VIOLATION; RECONNECTION FEE:
The Superintendent of Water of the Village is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service
to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this
chapter is known to exist and to take such other precautionary measures as he
may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored
until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and until a reconnection fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) is paid to the Village. The Superintendent of Water may disconnect a
customer on oral notice if there is in the Superintendent's opinion an imminent
danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system. Such action
shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. There
may be immediate disconnection without notice to any party to prevent actual or
anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply; provided
that, in the reasonable opinion of the Superintendent of Water or the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent actual or
potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the
public water supply, the Superintendent of Water, or its agents or assigns
shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which
may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with
the terms of this chapter, whether or not said termination was with or without
notice. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-1991)
7-2-7: RESPONSIBILITY FOR COST OF CLEANUP:
Any consumer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination through
backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an
illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired
device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup of
the potable water supply. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-1991)
7-2-8: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
The regulations of chapter 3 of this title are adopted and shall govern the
Village's Cross Connection Control Program. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-1991)
7-2-9: HYDRANTS:
   A.   No person other than authorized employees and agents of the Village and
the Pawnee Fire Protection District shall open any valve on a fire hydrant or
flushing hydrant for any purpose whatsoever unless it is necessary to avert an
imminent danger to life or property.
   B.   Any person other than an authorized employee or agent of the Village
and the Pawnee Fire Protection District who for any reason opens any valve on a
fire or flushing hydrant, or causes another person to do so, or damages a
hydrant either purposefully or by accident, shall be liable to the Village for
the retail value of the water lost or consumed if the amount can be accurately
ascertained, or a flat charge of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), if the
retail value of water lost or consumed cannot be accurately ascertained. If any
such person has a water account with the Village, the charges for water lost or
consumed shall be added to the account. The flat charge set forth in this
section is effective on January 1, 2011, and shall automatically increase on
January 1 of each year according to any increase in the consumer price index
for urban consumers as published by the United States Department of Labor,
Bureau of Labor Statistics, during the previous year.
   C.   Fire hydrants and flushing hydrants shall not be used for temporary
water supplies except when fitted with a temporary meter by authorized Village
employees after a customer has established temporary service through the
Village office. (Ord. 10-32, 12-14-2010)
7-2-10: PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or chapter 3 of this title
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 10-
32, 12-14-2010)
7-2-11: TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGE TO VILLAGE WATER METER:
   A.   No person shall tamper at any time with an installed water meter, water
meter pit, remote meter reading device, or any other portion of the water
system.
   B.   If damage occurs, either intentionally or through negligence or in any
other fashion, to any water meter, remote reading device or any other portion
of the Village's water system located on a customer's premises, the person or
persons liable on the account shall be responsible for the cost of repair or
replacement. The Village shall make the necessary repair or replacement and the
cost thereof shall be added to the customer's bill next following the date of
the repair.
   C.   If the customer believes that the damage to the water meter, remote
reading device or other component of the water system was the fault of the
Village, the customer may pay the bill under protest and may seek a refund from
the Village Board, which will consider that matter at a meeting within the
month following the customer's payment under protest.
   D.   The cost of replacing or repairing Village owned meters, remote reading
equipment and other components of the Village water system shall include not
only the cost of the materials, but the applicable labor, including any
overtime, incurred by the Village in making the repair. (Ord. 17-04, 2-27-2017)
CHAPTER 3
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
7-3-1: Purpose, Application And Policy
7-3-2: Definitions
7-3-3: Water System
7-3-4: Cross Connection Prohibited
7-3-5: Surveys And Investigations
7-3-6: Where Protection Is Required
7-3-7: Type Of Protection Required
7-3-8: Backflow Prevention Devices
7-3-9: Inspection And Maintenance
7-3-10: Booster Pumps
7-3-11: Violations; Penalty
7-3-1: PURPOSE, APPLICATION AND POLICY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
      1.   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system.
      2.   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety.
      3.   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's potable water systems.
   B.   Application: These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises
served by the public potable water supply system of the village. (Ord. 91-20,
12-9-1991)
   C.   Policy: The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for
protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow
or back siphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service
connection. If, in the judgment of the superintendent of water or his
authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary
for the safety of the public water supply system, the superintendent of water
shall give notice to the consumer to install and thereafter maintain such
approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the premises.
The consumer shall immediately install and shall thereafter maintain such
approved device or devices at his own expense; failure, refusal or inability on
the part of the consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall
constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such
device or devices have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of
installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required in subsection
7-3-5D4 of this chapter for a period of at least five (5) years. (Ord. 05-01,
1-10-2005)
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
these regulations:
AGENCY: Illinois environmental protection agency.
APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes or streams or process fluids or used water. These waters may be polluted
or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over
which the water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the
distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method or type of construction intended
to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for backflow
prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency.
CONSUMER or CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of any
premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located on the customer's premises. A
building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2)
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into another.
   A.   Direct Cross-Connection: A cross-connection formed when a water system
is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
   B.   Indirect Cross-Connection: A cross- connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A double check valve
assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the water tightness of each check valve.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-
being of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means
a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing
Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of Illinois Administrative Code 604.
PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension
of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures,
appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including
without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of private water
supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to,
within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work
or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to
and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing includes all
piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a building drain and a
sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or buildings
where a person or persons live, work, or assemble from the point of connection
of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system
five feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois Administrative
Code 604 for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
PROCESS FLUID(S): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically
or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollutional or system hazard if introduced into the public
or a consumer's potable water system. This includes but is not limited to:
   A.   Polluted or contaminated waters.
   B.   Process waters.
   C.   Used water originating from the public water supply system which may
have deteriorated in sanitary quality.
   D.   Cooling waters.
   E.   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams or irrigation systems.
   F.   Chemicals in solution or suspension.
   G.   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes or for fire fighting purposes.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which
regularly serve at least twenty five (25) persons at least fifty (50) days per
year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a
"noncommunity water supply".
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a
minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the
two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow
and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks
shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check
valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall
operate to maintain the pressure between the check valve at less than the
supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located
at each end of the device and each device shall be fitted with properly located
test cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at
the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system
regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and
must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of
all cross-connection control devices and methods located within that customer's
piping system. The survey must be in written form and should not be an actual
plumbing inspection.
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's
water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no
longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water system. (Ord.
91-20, 12-9-91)
7-3-3: WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the
public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
   B.   The public water supply shall consist of the source facilities and the
distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the potable water
system under the control of the Superintendent of Water up to the point where
the consumer's water system begins.
   C.   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
   D.   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water
system.
   E.   The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-91)
7-3-4: CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED:
   A.   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   B.   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion
of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the Agency.
   C.   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-91)
7-3-5: SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS:
   A.   The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved cross-connection device inspector for the inspection of the presence
or absence of cross-connections within the consumer's premises and testing,
repair and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the
consumer's premises.
   B.   On request by the Superintendent of Water or his authorized
representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping
system or systems or water use within the customer's premises. The consumer's
premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the Superintendent of Water
for the verification of information submitted by the inspection consumer to the
public water supply custodian regarding cross- connection inspection results.
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system through
which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable
water system. All cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must
be conducted in accordance with 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/3 (1).
   D.   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow into
the public water system by ensuring that:
      1.   All cross-connections are removed or approved cross- connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage.
      2.   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.
      3.   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a
cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
      4.   Testing and Records:
         a.   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
         b.   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be
available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with 415 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/4.
         c.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of CCCDI and type and date of repairs.
         d.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
            (1)   Date of each test;
            (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test;
            (3)   Test results;
            (4)   Repairs and servicing required;
            (5)   Repairs and date completed; and
            (6)   Servicing performed and date completed. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-91)
7-3-6: WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED:
   A.   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections made
after the effective date of these regulations to the public water supply as
described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890 and the
Agency's regulations, 35 Illinois Administrative Code 680. In addition, an
approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to
a consumer's water system serving premises, where in the judgment of the
Superintendent of Water, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply
system exist.
   B.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      1.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the Superintendent of Water and
the source is approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      2.   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources of systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the Superintendent of Water.
      3.   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the Superintendent of Water and the cross- connection control device inspector,
are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist.
      4.   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey.
      5.   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or reestablished.
   C.   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois
Administrative Code 890 and the Agency's regulations, 35 Illinois
Administrative Code 653. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device
shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving,
but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the
Superintendent of Water determines that no actual or potential hazard to the
public water supply system exist:
      1.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
      2.   Laboratories.
      3.   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
      4.   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations.
      5.   Food or beverage processing plants.
      6.   Chemical plants.
      7.   Metal plating industries.
      8.   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
      9.   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
      10.   Car washes.
      11.   Pesticide or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks.
      12.   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-
91)
7-3-7: TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED:
   A.   The type of protection required under Section 7-3-6 of this Chapter
shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
      1.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that could
cause a severe health hazard.
      2.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
      3.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause a
pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
   B.   The type of protection required under subsection
7-3-6B4 of this Chapter shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or
an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
   C.   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
      1.   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other
chemicals.
      2.   Water is pumped into the system from another source.
      3.   Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source, or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source.
      4.   There is a connection whereby another source can be connected to the
fire safety system. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-91)
7-3-8: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   A.   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works
Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering or American National
Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specification.
   B.   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with 35
Illinois Administrative Code 653.802 and only as specified by the Research
Foundation for Cross- Connection Control of the University of Southern
California or applicable industry specifications. Maintenance as recommended by
the manufacturer of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance
manual shall be available on-site. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-91)
7-3-9: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer's instructions.
      1.   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that
a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the
service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter.
      2.   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time
of installation and at least annually thereafter and required service performed
within fifteen (15) days.
      3.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer and required service performed within five (5)
days.
   B.   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
   C.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester and type and date of repairs.
   D.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      1.   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      2.   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      3.   Test results;
      4.   Repairs or servicing required;
      5.   Repairs and date completed; and
      6.   Servicing performed and date completed.
   E.   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay.
   F.   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Superintendent of Water. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-91)
7-3-10: BOOSTER PUMPS:
   A.   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure
cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the Superintendent of
Water, at least once a year, that the device is operable. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-91)
7-3-11: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
   A.   Discontinuance of Water Service: The Superintendent of Water shall deny
or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water
service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by
these regulations is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner
acceptable to the Superintendent of Water or if it is found that the backflow
prevention device has been removed or bypassed or if an unprotected cross-
connection exists on the premises or if a low pressure cut-off required by
these regulations is not installed and maintained in working order.
   B.   Correction of Prohibited Conditions: Water service to such premises
shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such
conditions or defects in conformance with these regulations and to the
satisfaction of the superintendent of water and the required reconnection fee
is paid 1 .
   C.   Penalty: See section
7-2-10 of this title for penalty provisions. (Ord. 91-20, 12-9-1991)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  7-2-6 of this title for reconnection fee.
CHAPTER 4
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definitions
7-4-2: Use of Public Sewers Required
7-4-3: Private Sewage Disposal
7-4-4: Building Sewers and Connections
7-4-5: Use of Public Sewer
7-4-6: Protection from Damage
7-4-7: Powers and Authority of Inspectors
7-4-8: Storm Sewer
7-4-9: Violation and Penalties
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the content specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this Chapter shall be as follows:
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
   Administrator: The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
   Federal Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et
seq.) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of Amendments of
1972 (Pub. L. 92-500 and Pub. L. 93-243).
   Federal Grant: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II - Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
   Approving Authority: The Superintendent of the Sewer Department of the
Village.
   Village: The Village of Pawnee.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
Administrator or, where appropriated by the Director, after enactment of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972, to regulate the discharge
of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the Federal Act.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, Municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
SEWER TYPES AND APPURTENANCES:
   Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
   Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface and ground water drainage.
   Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
Village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the Village boundaries
that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the Village
sanitary system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with
Village funds.
   Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both and into which storm, surface and ground waters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
   Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   Storm Water Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
SHALL/MAY: Shall is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
   Director: The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   State Act: The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970 1 .
   State Grant: The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution
Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the
State of Illinois.
TREATMENT:
   Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution
control plant".
TYPES OF CHARGES:
   Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
   Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and coverage of (loan, bond, etc.) outstanding and shall
be computed by dividing the annual debt service by the number of users
connected to the wastewater facilities.
   Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
   Sewerage Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewerage system.
   Surcharge: The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in Section 7-4-5 of this
Chapter.
   Useful Life: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated and shall be twenty (20) years from the date
of start-up of any wastewater facilities constructed with a State grant.
   User Charge: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance.
   Wastewater Service Charge: The charge per quarter or month levied on all
users of the wastewater facilities as set forth in Section 7-5-1 of this Title.
USER TYPES:
   Control Manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the Village
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
   Industrial User: Any nongovernmental user of publicly-owned treatment works
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, office of
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following
divisions:
    A.   Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.
   B.   Division B - Mining.
   C.   Division D - Manufacturing.
   D.   Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary
Services.
   E.   Division I - Services.
A user in the Divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined by the
Superintendent of the Sewer Department that it will introduce primarily
segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL or NONINDUSTRIAL USER: Any user of the treatment works
not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an industrial user as
provided for in this Section.
USER CLASS: The type of user either "residential or commercial" (nonindustrial)
or "industrial", as defined herein.
WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
   BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20o) Celsius, expressed in
milligrams per liter.
   Effluent Criteria: Defined in any applicable "NPDES permit".
   Floatable Oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   Garbage, Properly Shredded: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters)
in any dimension.
   Industrial Waste: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   Major Contributing Industry: An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that:
   A.   Has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average work
day; or
   B.   Has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by the
Municipal system receiving the waste; or
   C.   Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under section 307(a) of the Federal Act; or
   D.   Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
   Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is one one-thousandth (0.001) gram of the constituent in one
thousand (1,000) ml of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly,
parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the
results of water and wastewater analysis.
   pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in "Standard
Methods".
   PPM: Parts per million by weight.
   Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other wastewater treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing seventeen one-hundredths
(0.17) pounds of BOD and twenty one-hundredths (0.20) pounds of suspended
solids.
   Sewage: Used interchangeably with "wastewater".
   Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
   Standard Methods: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater" published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   Suspended Solids: Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
   Unpolluted Water: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint, of course,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
ground water, surface water and storm water that may be present.
   Water Quality Standards: Defined in the "Water Pollution Regulations of
Illinois".
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
WATERCOURSE AND CONNECTIONS:
   Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
   Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently. (Ord. 76-3, 5-10-76)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 30 ILCS 405/1.
7-4-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Unlawful Deposits: It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private
property within the Village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
Village, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   B.   Discharge into Waters: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural
outlet within the Village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Village,
any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Chapter.
   C.   Privies and Cesspools Prohibited: Except as hereinafter provided, it
shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   D.   Connection to Public Sewer Required: The owner of all houses, buildings
or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other
purposes situated within the Village and abutting on any street, alley or right
of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located any public
sanitary (or combined) sewer of the Village, is hereby required, at his
expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter within ninety (90) days after date of official
notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within one hundred feet
(100') of the property line. (Ord. 76-3, 5-10-76)
7-4-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Use of Private Sewer: Where a public sanitary sewer is not available
under the provisions of subsection
7-4-2D of this Chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this Section.
   B.   Permit Required; Fee: Before commencement of construction of a private
sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by
the chairman of the Sewer Committee of the Village Board. The application for
such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Village which the
applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information
as are deemed necessary by the chairman of the Sewer Committee of the Village
Board. A permit and inspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be
paid to the Village at the time the application is filed.
   C.   Inspections of Work: A permit for a private sewage disposal system
shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent of the Sewer Department. He shall be allowed
to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the Superintendent of the Sewer
Department when the work is ready for final inspection and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within seventy
two (72) hours of the receipt of written notice by the Superintendent of the
Sewer Department.
   D.   Compliance with Authorities: The type, capacities, location and layout
of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of
the State Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act 1  and Code and with the State
Environmental Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private
sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where
the area of the lot is less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet. No septic
tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   E.   When Public Sewer Becomes Available:
      1.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection
7-4-2D of this Chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this Chapter and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
      2.   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within sixty (60) days and the private sewage disposal
system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or
dirt.
   F.   Maintenance of Facilities: The owner shall operate and maintain the
private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no
expense to the Village.
   G.   Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this Section shall
be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed
by the Village. (Ord. 76-3, 5-10-76; 1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.
7-4-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Superintendent of the Sewer Department.
   B.   Compliance with Other Laws and Standards: All disposal by any person
into the sewer system is unlawful, except those discharges in compliance with
Federal Standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act and more stringent
State and local standards.
   C.   Classes of Permits; Fee: There shall be two (2) classes of building
sewer permits: 1) for residential and commercial service, and 2) for service to
establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his
agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the Village. The
permit and inspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a residential or
commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the Village at the time the
application is filed. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization,
must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics and type of activity.
   D.   Conditions on Issuance of Permit: A building sewer permit will only be
issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated
that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and
wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately
and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   E.   Costs and Expenses: All costs and expenses incident to the installation
and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify the Village from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
   F.   Separate Building Sewers: A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building; except, that where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
   G.   Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the
Superintendent of the Sewer Department to meet all requirements of this
Chapter.
   H.   Conformance with Codes: The size, slope, alignment, materials of
construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other
applicable rules and regulations of the Village. In the absence of code
provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of the "American Society of Testing Materials,
Wastes Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9" and "Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois" shall apply.
   I.   Elevation: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to
the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in
which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which
is approved in accordance with this Section and discharged to the building
sewer.
   J.   Connection to Runoff or Ground Water: No person(s) shall make
connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or
other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building
drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary
sewer.
   K.   Connection with Public Sewer: The connection of the building sewer into
the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing
Codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the "American Society of
Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9"
and "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois". All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Superintendent of the Sewer Department before installation.
   L.   Inspection and Supervision of Connection: The applicant for the
building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent of the Sewer Department
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent
of the Sewer Department or his representative.
   M.   Excavations: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village.
(Ord. 76-3, 5-10-76; 1994 Code)
7-4-5: USE OF PUBLIC SEWER:
   A.   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   B.   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers
or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent of the Sewer Department.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on
approval of the Superintendent of the Sewer Department, to a storm sewer,
combined sewer or natural outlet.
   C.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five- tenths
(5.5) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, mild containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
   D.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the Superintendent of the Sewer Department that such wastes can harm
either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent of the Sewer Department will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant
and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances
prohibited are:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees (150o) Fahrenheit (65o C).
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two degrees and one hundred fifty degrees (32o - 150o)
Fahrenheit (0° and 65o C).
      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Superintendent of the Sewer Department.
      4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or
similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the Superintendent of the Sewer Department for such materials.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Superintendent of the Sewer Department as necessary after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the State,
Federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving waters.
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent of the
Sewer Department in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
      8.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine and five- tenths
(9.5).
      9.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time, except as permitted by the Superintendent of the Sewer Department
in compliance with applicable State and Federal regulations.
      10.   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time, except as
permitted by the Superintendent of the Sewer Department in compliance with
applicable State and Federal regulations.
      11.   Materials which exert or cause:
         a.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).
         b.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
         c.   Unusual BOD, biochemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
         d.   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
      12.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
   E.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged
to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in subsection D of this Section and/or which are in
violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in chapter 1, EPA Rules
and regulations, subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128 - Pretreatment
Standards, Federal Register Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and
any amendments thereto, and which, in the judgment of the Superintendent of the
Sewer Department may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent of the Sewer
Department may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of subsection K hereof.
If the Superintendent of the Sewer Department permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent of
the Sewer Department and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws.
   F.   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent of the Sewer Department, they are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or
any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except, that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent of the Sewer Department and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   G.   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
by the owner at his expense.
   H.   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the Superintendent of the Sewer Department, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install
a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the Superintendent of the Sewer Department. The manhole shall be installed by
the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
   I.   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this Chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the Village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of
laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the
Village, but no less than once per year the industry must supply a complete
analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that
compliance with the Federal, State and local standards are being met. The owner
shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the Village
at such times and in such manner as prescribed by the Village. The owner shall
bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the
Village. At such times as deemed necessary, the Village reserves the right to
take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
   J.   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample should be taken. Normally, but
not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24 hour
composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab
samples.)
   K.   No statement contained in this Section shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the Village and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the Village for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in
accordance with Section 7-5-2 of this Title by the industrial concern;
provided, such payments are in accordance with Federal and State guidelines for
user charge system and industrial cost recovery system. (Ord. 76-3, 5-10-76)
7-4-6: PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. 76-3, 5-
10-76)
7-4-7: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   Right of Entry: The Superintendent of the Sewer Department and other
duly authorized employees of the Village, the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials
and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes
of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter. The Superintendent of the Sewer Department
or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes,
including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other
industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
   B.   Observation of Rules; Indemnification of Property Owner: While
performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection A
above, the Superintendent of the Sewer Department or duly authorized employees
of the Village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to
the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the Village employees and the Village shall indemnify
the company against loss or damage to its property by Village employees and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company
to maintain safe conditions as required in subsection
7-4-5H of this Chapter.
   C.   Easements: The Superintendent of the Sewer Department and other duly
authorized employees of the Village bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the Village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved. (Ord. 76-3, 5-10-76; 1994 Code)
7-4-8: STORM SEWER:
   A.   Discharge of Sewage and Wastewater Prohibited: The discharge of
sanitary sewerage and industrial wastewater into any storm sewer receptacles
and system within the Municipal boundaries of the Village by any person is
hereby prohibited.
   B.   Penalties: Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be
subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 74-14, 11-
25-74; 1994 Code)
7-4-9: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Unless otherwise provided, any person found to be violating any
provision of this Chapter, except Section 7-4-6, shall be served by the Village
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated on such notice, permanently cease all
violations. The Village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result
of any violation of any provision of this Chapter.
   B.   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection A hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be
subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code.
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall become
liable to the Village for damages caused by reason of such violation. (Ord. 76-
3, 5-10-76; 1994 Code)
CHAPTER 5
WATER AND SEWER FEES, RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
7-5-1: Combined System Rates Established
7-5-2: Special Rates And Charges
7-5-3: Purchased Water Adjustment (Rep. by Ord. 94-16, 11-28-1994)
7-5-4: Connection Charges
7-5-5: Water Service Deposit 1  (Rep. by Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
7-5-6: Liability For Charges
7-5-7: Payment Of Bills; Delinquencies; Lien 2  (Rep. by Ord. 14-17, 10-27-
2014)
7-5-8: Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  14-1-3 of this code.
2 2. See title 14, chapter 1 of this code.
7-5-1: COMBINED SYSTEM RATES ESTABLISHED:
There are hereby established for bills rendered on or after July 1, 2019, the
following rates and charges for the use of and for the services supplied by the
combined waterworks and sewerage system of the village, said rates to be based
on the amount of water supplied to each premises and then be calculated on a
monthly basis including charges for sewerage service rendered by said combined
system.
   A.   Base Water Rate; Inside Village. The minimum water rate for water
service inside the corporate limits of the Village shall be Twenty One dollars
per meter served, for usage not exceeding one thousand five (1,500) gallons.
Thereafter the rate shall be one dollar and thirty-six cents ($1.36) per one
hundred gallons of water use measured at the meter. To these charges shall be
added a purchased water adjustment charge calculated in accordance with
subsection F of this section.
   B.   Base Water Rate; Outside Village. The minimum water rate for water
service outside the corporate limits of the Village shall be twenty-two dollars
($22.00) per meter served, for usage not exceeding one thousand five (1,500)
gallons. Thereafter the rate shall be one dollar and thirty-six cents ($1.36)
per one hundred gallons of water use measured at the meter. To these charges
shall be added a purchased water adjustment charge calculated in accordance
with subsection F. of this section.
   C.   Bulk Rate: The bulk water rate charge for water service supplied to all
premises located within or outside of the village shall be twenty five cents
($0.25) per thirty (30) gallons supplied.
   D.   Sewer Rate; Inside Village:
      1.   Except as set forth in subsection E of this section, the minimum
monthly charge for sewer service within the village shall be nine dollars
ninety cents ($9.90) for each water meter, based upon water usage not exceeding
one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons. Thereafter, the sewer rate shall be
thirty eight cents ($0.38) per one hundred (100) gallons of water use measured
at the meter.
      2.   No sewer services are available outside the village.
   E.   Commercial Sewer Rate: There is hereby established a rate and charge
classification for sewer service provided to commercial users. "Commercial",
for the purpose of this subsection, is defined as any business or commercial
enterprise providing retail sales on a continuing basis and using fifteen
thousand eight hundred (15,800) gallons of water or more each month. Commercial
users shall pay flat charges, as follows:
 
15,800 - 40,000 gallons $ 54.00
40,001 - 50,000 gallons 64.80
50,001 - 60,000 gallons 75.60
60,001 - 70,000 gallons 86.40
70,001 - 80,000 gallons 97.20
80,001 - 90,000 gallons 108.00
 
   F.   Purchased Water Adjustment Charge: There is hereby established a
purchased water adjustment charge, which will be automatically added to or
subtracted from the water rates set forth in subsections A and B of this
section. The purchased water adjustment charge shall be calculated as the
difference between two dollars fifty five cents ($2.55) per thousand gallons
and the rate actually charged by the Otter Lake water commission to the village
and as adjusted from time to time. The base water rate shall be adjusted
assuming one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons of use. (Ord. 10-21, 6-28-
2010; amd. Ord. 19-05, 4-22-2019)
7-5-2: SPECIAL RATES AND CHARGES:
The president and board of trustees reserve the right to establish special
rates and charges for large users and governmental users commensurate with the
extent of services rendered and the proportionate expenses allocable thereto.
(Ord. 87-6, 4-6-1987)
7-5-3: PURCHASED WATER ADJUSTMENT:
(Rep. by Ord. 94-16, 11-28-1994)
7-5-4: CONNECTION CHARGES:
   A.   Connection Charges Established: Connection charges for connection to
the village waterworks and sewer systems within the village limits shall be as
follows:
 
                                      Customer will pay actual cost of labor
For any water line larger than 1 inch and material for construction, in
                                      addition to a $750 connection fee
For a 1 inch water line               $750.00
For a 3/4 inch water line             500.00
For any in-village single family      200.00
residence waste water sewer tap
For any other waste water sewer tap   1,000.00
 
However, for a property that has already been tapped to the main and has a pit
installed at the time of application for connection to the water system within
the village limits, the water line connection charge shall be as follows:
 
For a 1 inch water line   $500.00
For a 3/4 inch water line 400.00
 
In addition, should the connection require installation by the village of any
service line longer than thirty feet (30'), the customer shall pay the
village's actual cost of installation of any such line, including the cost of
materials and labor and burden rate.
   B.   Connections Outside Village Limits: Connection charges for connections
to the waterworks or sewerage system for customers outside the village limits
shall be negotiated but shall not be less than the amounts in subsection A of
this section. For such connections, the connection charge shall bear a
reasonable relationship to the cost to the village of providing service outside
the village limits. The connection charge may, at the sole discretion of the
village board, be collected in installments designed to recoup the village
costs for providing extraterritorial service.
   C.   Cost Of Bore: In addition to the foregoing charges, if it is necessary
for the village to bore under a public street in order to provide water or
sewer service, the customer shall pay the actual cost of the bore.
   D.   Reference: The foregoing fees may be varied by the village pursuant to
contracts with landowners and developers in accordance with sections
9-5-1 et seq., and 11-15.1-1.1 et seq., of the Illinois municipal code, and in
such event, the fees as agreed shall be binding upon persons purchasing
property from such landowners and developers.
(Ord. 02-05, 5-13-2002; amd. Ord. 11-1, 3-14-2011; Ord. 20-10, 4-27-2020; Ord.
22-07, 5-9-2022)
7-5-5: WATER SERVICE DEPOSIT 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  14-1-3 of this code.
7-5-6: LIABILITY FOR CHARGES:
   A.   Joint Liability: The services of the combined waterworks and sewerage
system shall be deemed to be furnished to the owner of the premises and to the
occupant and the user, and from and after the effective date hereof the owner
and the occupant and the user shall be jointly and severally liable for the
payment of all charges for such services, and such services are furnished to
the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the
premises and the occupant thereof and the user of the services are jointly and
severally liable therefor to the village and that each of said persons signs
and executes the application for service.
   B.   Notice: A copy of ordinance 87-6, properly certified by the village
clerk, shall be filed in the office of the recorder of deeds of Sangamon
County, and such filing shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of
their liability for services supplied to any consumer or user of the services
of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the village or their
properties. (Ord. 87-6, 4-6-1987; amd. 1994 Code)
7-5-7: PAYMENT OF BILLS; DELINQUENCIES; LIEN 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 14, chapter 1 of this code.
7-5-8: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 6
BILLING REBATES AND CREDITS
SECTION:
7-6-1: Billing Rebates And Credits
7-6-1: BILLING REBATES AND CREDITS:
   A.   Whenever the Village or a customer discovers that there has been an
error in billing for any utility services, or in the event of a customer's
request for an adjustment of a utility bill due to a water service break or
other cause, any rebate or credit issued by the Village shall be limited to a
time period beginning on a date two (2) years prior to discovery of the error
or the customer's request for an adjustment.
   B.   When an error in billing is discovered, or in the event a customer's
request for an adjustment of a utility bill is honored, the Village shall issue
a cash rebate only if the service is discontinued. In all other cases, the
Village shall credit the amount overpaid by the customer against subsequent
utility bills.
   C.   The policies set forth in this Title shall apply to all Village
utilities: gas, water and sewer. However, since each utility has a separate
fund within the Village Treasury, any credit or rebate shall be solely against
the fund which received the overpayment. (Ord. 98-3, 2-23-1998)
TITLE 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Adoption Of Building Codes
8-1-2: Permit Applications And Inspections
8-1-3: Exceptions To Adoption By Reference
8-1-4: Resolution Of Conflicts Among Building Codes
8-1-5: Adoption Of Property Maintenance Code
8-1-6: Enforcement Of Property Maintenance Code
8-1-7: Responsibility For Compliance With Codes
8-1-8: Penalties
8-1-9: Grandfather Clause
8-1-1: ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODES:
   A.   Pursuant to section
1-3-1 of the Illinois municipal code, the 2012 edition of the international
building codes as published by the International Code Council (the "IBC"), is
hereby adopted as the building code of the village of Pawnee. The IBC shall
control all matters concerning the construction, alteration, addition, repair,
removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy, and maintenance of all buildings
and structures, other than one- and two-family dwellings.
   B.   Pursuant to section
1-3-1 of the Illinois municipal code, the 2012 edition of the international
residential code for one- and two-family dwellings as published by the
International Code Council (the "IRC"), is hereby adopted by reference as the
one- and two-family dwelling code of the village of Pawnee. The IRC shall
control all matters concerning construction, prefabrication, alteration,
repair, use, occupancy, and maintenance of detached one- or two-family
dwellings and one- family townhouses not more than three (3) stories in height,
and their accessory structures. (Ord. 12-13, 8-27-2012)
8-1-2: PERMIT APPLICATIONS AND INSPECTIONS:
Notwithstanding anything contained to the contrary in the IBC and IRC, the
village's building permit review shall be limited to a review in accordance
with section
9-7-1 of this code. The village shall not itself perform any building
inspections or issue occupancy permits as set forth in the IBC and IRC. (Ord.
12-13, 8-27-2012)
8-1-3: EXCEPTIONS TO ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
Certain sections of the IBC and IRC adopted by reference in this chapter shall
be of no force and effect, as follows:
   A.   Any provision of the IBC and IRC pertaining to penalties for violation
thereof.
   B.   Any section of the IBC and IRC pertaining to construction inspection
and inspection fees.
   C.   Any section of the IBC and IRC pertaining to appeals.
   D.   Any provision of any of the IBC and IRC relating to plumbing. The
current edition of the state of Illinois plumbing code shall control all
matters relating to plumbing. (Ord. 12-13, 8-27-2012)
8-1-4: RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTS AMONG BUILDING CODES:
In the event of conflicts among the IBC and IRC adopted pursuant to this
chapter, or among IBC and IRC and this chapter, the following rules shall
apply:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall prevail over the provisions of IBC
and IRC.
   B.   The Illinois plumbing code shall prevail over the provisions of IBC and
IRC.
   C.   The IRC shall prevail over the IBC with respect to one- and two-family
dwellings.
   D.   In the event of any other conflict, the most stringent requirement
shall apply. (Ord. 12-13, 8-27-2012)
8-1-5: ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
   A.   Pursuant to section
1-3-1 of the Illinois municipal code, the 2015 edition of the international
property maintenance code as published by the International Code Council,
including appendix A, "Boarding Standards", is adopted as the property
maintenance code of the village of Pawnee. The international property
maintenance code shall control matters concerning conditions and maintenance of
all property, buildings and structures by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use; and
the demolition of such existing structures as are provided therein; except if
such matters are otherwise provided for in this section or in other ordinances
or statutes or rules or regulations of the village of Pawnee, Illinois.
   B.   The village clerk shall place on file in the village utility office,
one copy of the international property maintenance code, 2015 edition, and
shall make the code available for public use, inspection and examination.
   C.   The following sections of the international property maintenance code
are not adopted by reference and shall be of no force and effect:
      1.   Section 103.5, or any other section relating to fees.
      2.   Sections 111.1 through 111.8, or any other sections pertaining to
appeals of decisions of the code official.
      3.   Any provision relating to penalties, which are subject to section
8-1-8 of this chapter.
   D.   Persons aggrieved by an order of the code official with respect to the
property maintenance code may appeal to the village board at a regular meeting
thereof held within thirty (30) days of the decision. Thereafter, such persons
may seek appropriate relief in the circuit court. (Ord. 16-02, 2-8-2016)
8-1-6: ENFORCEMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
In addition to its enforcement by the village, the international property
maintenance code may be enforced within the corporate limits of the village by
the Sangamon County public health department pursuant to an intergovernmental
agreement. (Ord. 12-13, 8-27-2012)
8-1-7: RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE WITH CODES:
No person shall violate any provision of the IBC, the IRC or the international
property maintenance code. No person who owns, occupies or controls real
property within the corporate limits of the village shall suffer or permit a
violation of the IBC, the IRC or the international property maintenance code on
such property. (Ord. 12-13, 8-27-2012)
8-1-8: PENALTIES:
   A.   The provisions of this section replace any penalty provisions contained
in the IBC, the IRC, or the international property maintenance code.
   B.   Any person who shall violate the provisions of the IBC, the IRC or the
property maintenance code, and each person who owns, occupies or controls real
property within the corporate limits of the village and suffers or permits a
violation of the IBC, the IRC or the property maintenance code, shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. In addition to this penalty, the village may utilize other
statutory or common law remedies deemed appropriate by a court of law,
including, but not limited to, injunctive relief, preliminary injunctive
relief, and obtaining a temporary restraining order.
   C.   Any structure, or any part thereof, constructed or maintained not in
accordance with this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance, subject to
abatement in accordance with law. (Ord. 12-13, 8-27-2012)
8-1-9: GRANDFATHER CLAUSE:
   A.   Except to the extent that compliance by the IBC or IRC has previously
been mandated by state law, no existing building or structure not in compliance
with the IBC or IRC as of the effective date hereof, and no building, the
foundation of which has been laid as of the effective date of this chapter or
any amendment hereto which is completed within six (6) months of the effective
date of this chapter or the amendment, shall be deemed to be in violation of
this chapter by reason of continuation of the noncomplying condition; nor is
any owner required to bring any such structure into compliance with the IBC or
the IRC.
   B.   Existing buildings not in compliance with the international property
maintenance code as of the effective date hereof shall be brought into
compliance on or before September 15, 2012. (Ord. 12-13, 8-27-2012)
CHAPTER 2
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definition
8-2-2: Nuisance Declared; Abatement Procedures
8-2-3: Dangerous Buildings Prohibited; Penalty
8-2-1: DEFINITION:
As used herein, the term "dangerous building" includes:
   A.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which is dangerous
to the public health because of its construction, age, lack of proper repair or
any other cause or condition which causes or aids or may cause or aid in the
spread of disease, or the harboring and spread of rodents, insects or other
vermin, or garbage, debris, and other hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy
substances or materials, or which causes or may cause injury to the health of
the occupants of it or of neighboring structures.
   B.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of
faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is
especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard.
   C.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, by reason
of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is
liable to cause injury or damage by collapse or fall of any part of such
structure.
   D.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of
its condition or because of lack of doors or windows is available to and is
frequented or may be frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who are
not lawful occupants of such structure or poses an attractive nuisance to
children. (Ord. 98-9, 5-27-1998)
8-2-2: NUISANCE DECLARED; ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: Every dangerous building and every uncompleted and
abandoned building in the village is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Pursuant
to section
11-31-1 of the Illinois municipal code, the president and the board of trustees
of the village are empowered to demolish, repair, or enclose or cause the
demolition, repair, or enclosure of dangerous and unsafe buildings or
uncompleted and abandoned buildings within the territory of the village and may
remove or cause the removal of garbage, debris, and other hazardous, noxious,
or unhealthy substances or materials from those buildings.
   B.   Notice: Whenever the village president or the village trustee with
jurisdiction over building and zoning is of the opinion, based upon a viewing
of the premises that any building or structure in the village is a "dangerous
building" as defined in this chapter, or is an "unsafe structure" or structure
having "unsafe equipment" or "structure unfit for human occupancy" as those
terms are defined in the international property maintenance code, or is an
uncompleted and abandoned building, they may cause written notice to be served
upon the owner thereof and upon the occupant thereof, if any, by certified
mail, registered mail or personal service. Where, upon diligent search, the
identity or whereabouts of the owner or owners of the building, including the
lienholders of record, is not ascertainable, notice mailed to the person or
persons in whose name the real estate was last assessed is sufficient notice
under this section. Notice by certified or regular mail pursuant to this
section shall be accomplished if the village receives a return receipt from the
addressee or if the certified or regular mailing is returned "unclaimed" or
"refused". Such notice shall state that the building has been declared to be in
a dangerous condition, that such dangerous condition must be removed or
remedied by repairing or altering the building or by demolishing it and that
the condition must be remedied at once. Such notice may be, but is not required
to be, in the following form:
      To                                (owner-occupant of the premises) of the
premises known and described as                         .
      You are hereby notified that pursuant to Section 8-2-2 of the Village of
Pawnee Code of Ordinances your building located at the above- described
premises has been condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous building after
inspection by                                            .
      The causes for this decision are (here insert the facts as to the
dangerous condition).
      You have fifteen (15) days from the date of service of this notice
(which, in the case that this notice was mailed by certified or registered
mail, is the date the notice was mailed) to remedy this condition or demolish
the building immediately or the Village will proceed to take legal action to do
so.
      You may also be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100) per day nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750) per day for
each day the building has been or shall remain in dangerous condition. In
addition, the Village may further avail itself of all of the remedies set forth
in Section 11-31-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
   C.   Unknown Address Of Owner: If the owner of the premises concerned is
unknown or if his address is unknown, service of any notice provided for in
this chapter may be made by posting a copy thereof on the premises and by
publishing one time a copy thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within
the village.
   D.   Remedy Of Condition: If the person receiving such notice has not
complied therewith within fifteen (15) days from the time when the notice is
served upon such person by personal service or by certified mail, the zoning
administrator or other officer of the village directed by the president and
board of trustees, may proceed to remedy the condition or demolish the
dangerous building by filing a lawsuit in the circuit court seeking any or all
remedies available under section
11-31-1 of the Illinois municipal code, including, but not limited to, the
following:
      1.   An order authorizing action to be taken by the village with respect
to a building if the owner or owners of the building, including the lienholders
of record, after at least fifteen (15) days' written notice by mail so to do,
have failed to put the building in a safe condition or to demolish it;
      2.   A fine as set forth in section
8-2-3 of this chapter;
      3.   An order requiring the owner or owners of record to demolish,
repair, or enclose the building or to remove garbage, debris, and other
hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or materials from the building;
      4.   A judgment against the owner or other person causing the dangerous
condition for the payment of the village's costs and reasonable attorney fees
in connection with the village's enforcement of this chapter.
It shall not be a defense to an action brought pursuant to this chapter that
the building is boarded up or otherwise enclosed, although the court may order
the defendant to have the building boarded up or otherwise enclosed.
   E.   Additional Remedies: In addition to the actions authorized by this
chapter, the village officials may proceed under any and all of the provisions
of the Illinois municipal code, including section
11-31-1, which authorizes imposition of a lien when the village is compelled to
take action; and section
11-31-2, which authorizes an injunction to require compliance with building,
fire, health and safety standards. (Ord. 12-08, 6-11-2012)
8-2-3: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS PROHIBITED; PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
building in the village and it shall be unlawful for a record owner, occupant
or person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in
a dangerous condition or to occupy such building or permit it to be occupied
while it is or remains in a dangerous condition. Any person convicted of a
violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by imposition of
a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per offense. Every day a building shall be
maintained or permitted to exist in a dangerous condition shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 12-08, 6-11-2012)
CHAPTER 3
DEMOLITION PERMITS
SECTION:
8-3-1: General
8-3-2: Surface Connections
8-3-3: Notice To Adjoining Owners
8-3-4: Permit Required For Demolition
8-3-5: Standards Governing Demolition
8-3-6: Closure And Capping Of Sewer Lines
8-3-7: Safety
8-3-8: Nuisance
8-3-9: Penalties
8-3-1: GENERAL:
No person shall demolish or remove a structure within the village, except in
compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 00-04, 3-13-2000)
8-3-2: SURFACE CONNECTIONS:
Before a structure is demolished or removed, the owner or agent shall notify
all utilities having service connections within the structure, such as water,
electric, gas, sewer and other connections. A permit to demolish or remove a
structure shall not be issued until release is obtained from the utilities,
stating that the respective service connections and appurtenant equipment, such
as meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe
manner. (Ord. 00-04, 3-13-2000)
8-3-3: NOTICE TO ADJOINING OWNERS:
Only after written notice has been given by the applicant to the owners of
adjoining lots and to the owners of any facilities of which the temporary
removal is necessitated by the proposed work, shall a permit be granted for the
removal of a building or structure. (Ord. 00-04, 3-13-2000)
8-3-4: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR DEMOLITION:
   A.   No demolition or removal of the building shall be commenced until a
permit has been obtained from the zoning administrator. The zoning
administrator shall provide an application for demolition permits, which
application shall contain, as a minimum: 1) the name, address, and telephone
number of all owners of record of the property in which the structure is
located; 2) the identity of the contractor or person performing the demolition
work; 3) the likely date of commencement and completion of the work; and 4)
identification of all utilities present at the site, together with a statement
that arrangements have been made with the utility companies as stated in
section
8-3-2 of this chapter. The zoning administrator shall issue the permit if the
zoning administrator finds that the requirements of this chapter are met.
   B.   In addition, for demolition of all structures other than residential
structures of four (4) or less dwelling units, the zoning administrator shall
require, as a condition of the permit, evidence that the applicant has provided
ten (10) days' advance notice to the Illinois environmental protection agency
in accordance with the national emission standard for hazardous air pollutants
("NESHAP"). (Ord. 03-11, 8-11-2003)
8-3-5: STANDARDS GOVERNING DEMOLITION:
   A.   Whenever a building or structure is removed, the job site shall be left
free and clear of any debris and in a safe condition, and all debris, building
materials graded and leveled and the like which are not salvageable shall be
disposed of in an approved, licensed landfill.
   B.   If however, new construction is to be erected at the demolition site,
the site need not be graded nor leveled. The owner or contractor must submit an
application for a building permit for the new structure within thirty (30) days
after completion of demolition, and in no event shall any demolition site be
left ungraded or not leveled for a period of more than ten (10) days unless
actual construction shall commence thereon. (Ord. 00-04, 3-13-2000)
8-3-6: CLOSURE AND CAPPING OF SEWER LINES:
Closure and capping of sewer lines in connection with a demolition shall be
performed by the village sewer department. (Ord. 00-04, 3-13-2000)
8-3-7: SAFETY:
All demolition shall be performed in a safe manner in such a way as to ensure
that no debris falls outside the boundaries of the lot on which the structure
is located. (Ord. 00-04, 3-13-2000)
8-3-8: NUISANCE:
Any demolition within the village that is carried on without a permit or
otherwise in violation of this chapter is deemed a nuisance. The village may,
in addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, file suit to abate
the nuisance in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 00-04, 3-13-2000)
8-3-9: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be liable to the
client of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation. Each day a violation occurs or
is carried on, constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 00-04, 3-13-2000)
TITLE 9
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Title
9-1-2: Intent and Purpose
9-1-3: Rules for Construction of Language
9-1-4: Definitions
9-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known, cited and referred to as the VILLAGE OF PAWNEE
ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   This Title is adopted for the purpose of:
      1.   Promoting and protecting the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, prosperity, morals and general welfare of the people.
      2.   Securing adequate light, pure air and safety from fire and other
dangers.
      3.   Conserving the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
Village.
   B.   To these ends this Title is designed to set up and accomplish certain
standards and objectives by:
      1.   Organizing the Village into districts regulating and restricting
therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of any
buildings, structures or land, whether for residence, office, business,
manufacturing or other specific uses.
      2.   Regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings and other
structures.
      3.   Establishing, regulating and limiting the building or setback lines
along streets, alleys or property lines.
      4.   Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of the lot area and
determining the areas of open space within and surrounding such buildings.
      5.   Providing for certain conditional permitted uses.
      6.   Regulating the size, type and location of signs.
      7.   Requiring accessory off-street parking and loading facilities.
      8.   Defining and limiting the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies as provided herein.
      9.   Providing for the change and amendment of such regulations and
boundaries of the respective districts.
      10.   Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this
Title or of any amendment thereto. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-1-3: RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE:
The language set forth in the text of this Title shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules for construction:
   A.   The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
   B.   The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future,
the present.
   C.   The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive.
   D.   The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter.
   E.   All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot. If a
fraction is one-half (1/2) or less, the integral foot next below shall be
taken.
   F.   Whenever a word, a phrase or a term defined hereinafter appears in the
text of this Title, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the
definition thereof. The word "lot" shall include the words "piece" and
"parcel"; the word "building" shall include all other structures of every kind
regardless of similarity to buildings, and the phrase "used for" shall include
the phrases "arranged for", "intended for", "maintained for", "designed for"
and "occupied for". Synonyms in common usage of certain words, phrases or terms
are shown parenthetically. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, phrases and terms whenever they occur in this Title shall
be interpreted as herein defined:
AGRICULTURE: Land, including necessary buildings and structures, which shall be
used for agriculture including, but not limited to, farming, dairying,
pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and animal and
poultry husbandry, as well as the necessary accessory uses; provided, however,
that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the
normal agricultural activities, and provided further, that the above uses shall
not include the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other
animals.
ALLEY: A public way with a width not exceeding twenty feet (20') in right of
way used primarily as a service access to the rear or side of a property which
abuts on a street.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care,
observation or treatment of domestic animals.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION: Any building, structure, land, area or other
premises or portion thereof, used for the sale at retail of motor vehicle
fuels, oils or for servicing (minor repairs) or lubricating motor vehicles,
which activity may be accompanied by accessary sales and uses.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any area of land where two (2) or more motor vehicles
not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not
being restored to operation or any land, building or structure used for the
wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles, or parts thereof, not in running
condition.
BASEMENT: A portion of a building located partly underground, but having less
than one-half (1/2) its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade
of the adjoining ground.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or shore lines
of waterways or corporate boundary lines.
BUILDABLE AREA: The specified portion of lot immediately in back of the front
yard setback.
BUILDING: Any structure which is built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
any persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind and which is
permanently affixed to the land.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building not attached to a principal
building, the use of which is incidental and customary to that of the principal
building. Includes sheds of sixty five (65) square feet or more floor area
regardless of whether the shed has a foundation.
BUILDING AREA: The area bounded by the exterior dimensions of the outer walls
at the ground line.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space or from other buildings or other structures by a permanent
roof and by exterior or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal
entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which the principal use of the
lot on which it is located is conducted.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located in the
place where it is, or where it is intended to be placed or affixed.
BULK: The terms used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or
structures and the location of same with respect to one another, and including
the following:
   A.   Size and height of buildings;
   B.   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
streets or to other buildings;
   C.   Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area
ratio);
   D.   All open spaces allocated to buildings;
   E.   Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
BUSINESS: Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is
exhibited or sold or which occupies time, attention, labor and materials or
where services are offered for compensation.
CARPORT: A roofed accessory building or structure providing space for the
parking of motor vehicles and lattice, or other material. When attached to a
principal building, a carport shall be considered a part of the principal
building and subject to all applicable bulk regulations for the district in
which it is located.
CELLAR: The portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and
having one-half (1/2) or more than one-half (1/2) of its clear floor-to-ceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CLUB or LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide
members paying dues, which owns, hires or leases a building or portion thereof,
the use of such premises being restricted to members or their guests.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of a building or
structure measured at the center of such front. Where no curb level has been
established, it shall be deemed to be the established level of the center line
of the street surface in front of a building or structure, measured at the
center line of such front.
DECK: A patio which has been raised above ground level.
DISTRICT: A section or part of the incorporated or unincorporated portion of
the Village for which the use regulations are uniform.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment which accommodates patrons'
automobiles, at which the occupants may be served.
DWELLING: A residential building, or portion thereof, but not including hotels,
motels, rest homes, rooming houses, tourist homes or trailers.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A residential building which is entirely surrounded by open
space on the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY (APARTMENT): A building or portion thereof containing
three (3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED: A dwelling joined to one other dwelling by a party
wall.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A residential building containing one dwelling unit,
including detached, semi-detached and attached dwellings.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX): A residential building containing two (2)
dwelling units, including detached, semi-detached and attached dwellings.
DWELLING UNIT: A group of rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling, which
are arranged, designed, used or intended for use exclusively as living quarters
for one family and not more than an aggregate of two (2) roomers and which
includes complete kitchen facilities permanently installed.
DWELLINGS, ATTACHED (GROUP, ROW AND TOWN HOUSES): A dwelling joined to two (2)
other dwellings by party wall.
ERECT: The act of placing or affixing a component of a structure upon the
ground or upon another such component.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group
of not more than five (5) persons not so related, together with his or their
domestic servants or gratuitous guests, maintaining a common household in a
dwelling unit.
FENCE: A barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion, to mark a boundary or
to create a sense of privacy or security.
FENCE, PRIVACY or SOLID: A fence, including solid entrance and exit gates,
which effectively conceals from view, from adjoining property and streets,
materials that are stored and activities conducted behind such fence.
FLOOD PLAIN AREA: The SFHA or special flood hazard area as defined in Title 11,
Chapter 1 of this Code.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS (to determine floor area ratio: For the purpose of
determining floor-area ratio, the floor area of a building or buildings shall
be the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of such building
or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the
center line of party walls separating two (2) buildings; in particular, "gross
floor area" shall include:
   A.   Basement space, if at least one-half (1/2) of the basement story height
is above the established curb level.
   B.   Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor.
   C.   Floor space used for mechanical equipment where the structural headroom
exceeds seven and one-half feet (71/2'), except equipment, open or enclosed,
located on the roof, i.e., bulkheads, water tanks and cooling towers.
   D.   Attic floor space where the structural headroom exceeds seven and one-
half feet (71/2').
   E.   Interior balconies and mezzanines.
   F.   Enclosed porches, but not terraces and breezeways.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS (to determine off-street parking requirements): For the
purpose of determining requirements for off-street parking and off-street
loading, the floor area shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of the building, or portion thereof, devoted to such use,
including accessory storage areas located within selling or working space, such
as counters, racks or closets, and any basement floor area devoted to retailing
activities, to the production or processing of goods or to business or
professional offices. However, "floor area" for purposes of measurement for
off-street parking spaces shall not include: floor area devoted primarily to
storage purposes (except as otherwise noted herein); floor area devoted to off-
street parking or loading facilities, including aisles, ramps and maneuvering
space or basement floor area other than are devoted to retailing activities, to
the production or processing of goods or to business or professional offices.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The numerical value obtained through dividing the gross floor
area of a building or buildings by the total area of the lot or parcel of land
on which building or buildings are located.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal
building which is intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles
of the family or families resident upon the premises, and in which no business,
service or industry connected directly or indirectly with automotive vehicles
is carried on.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any building where automotive vehicles are painted, repaired,
rebuilt, reconstructed and/or stored for compensation.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any gainful occupation or profession engaged in by the
occupant of a dwelling at or from such dwelling, without altering the essential
character of the neighborhood, and with the following restrictions: a) persons
engaging in home occupations shall not permit the employment of an additional
personnel other than the members of the immediate family in the performance of
such services; b) there shall be no exterior display, no exterior signs and no
exterior storage of equipment or materials used in connection with a home
occupation; and c) persons engaging in home occupations shall require patrons
to park off street and shall not allow patrons to park on the street. Examples
of typically permissible home occupations include, but are not limited to, the
following: art studio, dressmaking, professional offices of a clergyman,
lawyer, physician, dentist, architect, engineer or accountant and teaching,
with musical, dancing and other instruction, limited to two (2) pupils at a
time. Examples of impermissible home occupations include, but are not limited
to, the following: clinic or hospital, public stable or dog kennel or
restaurant.
JUNKYARD: An open area or fenced in enclosure, where used or secondhand
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or
handled including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper,
rags, rubber tires and bottles. A junkyard includes an auto wrecking yard, but
does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which two (2) or more dogs, cats or other
mammals commonly kept as pets, at least four (4) months of age, are: a) kept or
bred for sale; b) kept or boarded for or on behalf of any party who or which is
not the owner of such animals; or c) kept or boarded for or on behalf of any
party who or which is not the owner or lessee of the lot or premises.
LOADING, OFF STREET: A space, accessible from a street, alley or way, in a
building or on a lot, for the use of trucks while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials.
LODGING ROOM: A room rented as sleeping and living quarters but without cooking
facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of rooms
without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping accommodations
shall be counted as one lodging room.
LOT: A parcel of land, whether legally described or subdivided as one or more
lots or parts of lots, located within a single block and which is occupied or
intended for occupancy by one principal building or principal use, together
with any accessory buildings and such open spaces as are required by this title
and having its principal frontage upon a street.
LOT AREA: The area of horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through
front, side and rear lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a
single street, the interior angle of which is one hundred thirty five degrees
(135o) or less.
LOT, DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate
ownership; except, that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting
street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley right
of way line.
LOT LINE, FRONT: That boundary of a lot which is along an existing or dedicated
street. The owner of a corner lot may select either street lot line as the
front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR: That boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is, or is
approximately, parallel to the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less
than ten feet (10') in length or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear
lot line shall be deemed to be a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot;
parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT, MOBILE HOME: The area assigned to a mobile home in a mobile home park.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially
a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more
or less parallel public streets and which is not a corner lot. On a through
lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT, WIDTH: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot
measured within the lot boundaries or the minimum distance between the side lot
lines within the buildable area.
MOBILE HOME: A structure other than a modular home, designed for permanent
habitation and so constructed as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily
or permanently attached to its frame, from the place of its construction to the
location or subsequent locations at which it is intended to be a permanent
habitation and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for
one or more persons. The term "mobile home" shall include manufactured homes
constructed after June 30, 1976, in accordance with the federal "national
manufactured housing construction and safety standards act of 1974". Such
mobile homes, by law, have affixed to them a red metal label prescribed by the
United States department of housing and urban development.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A tract of land or two (2) or more contiguous tracts of land
upon which contain sites with the necessary utilities for five (5) or more
independent mobile homes for permanent habitation either free of charge or for
revenue purposes and shall include any building, structure, vehicle or
enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such mobile
home park. Separate ownership of contiguous tracts of land shall not preclude
the tracts of land from mobile home parks if they are maintained and operated
jointly. Neither an immobilized mobile home nor a motorized recreational
vehicle shall be construed as being a part of a mobile home park.
MODULAR HOME: A factory built home which is: a) subject to regulation by the
Illinois department of public health; and b) not built on a permanent chassis.
By law a modular home must have affixed to it a yellow seal in the shape of the
state of Illinois on the electrical panel box or a similar seal of the state of
Indiana. A modular home on a permanent perimeter foundation extending below the
frost depth qualifies as a single-family structure in any zone in which single-
family structures are allowed. Should the Illinois department of public health
approve a factory built home with a permanent chassis, such a home is not
considered a "modular home" under this title, but rather is considered a
"mobile home" under this title.
MOTEL: A building containing lodging rooms having adjoining individual
bathrooms where each lodging room has a doorway opening directly to the
outdoors and where more than fifty percent (50%) of the lodging rooms are for
rent to transient tourists for a continuous period of less than thirty (30)
days.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or premises in which freight is received or
dispatched by motor vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any self-propelled wheeled vehicle designated or intended
primarily for the transportation of persons or goods along public streets,
alleys or other public ways.
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and/or address of a building or the name
of an occupant thereof.
NURSING HOME: See Rest Home.
OPEN SALES LOT: Any land used or occupied for but not limited to the purpose of
buying and selling secondhand passenger cars and/or trucks, motor scooters,
motorcycles, boats, trailers, aircraft and monuments, and for the storing of
same prior to sale.
PATIO: A recreation area adjoining a residential structure, which is either
paved or constructed of flagstones or the like, which is not raised above the
ground level and which is not covered with a roof or other structure.
PLAN COMMISSION: The Pawnee Zoning Board of Appeals 1  acting as the Planning
Commission.
PORCH: A covered or roofed entrance to a building or covered or roofed patio or
deck.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: Any publicly-owned open area including, but not limited to,
the following: parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, beaches, waterways,
parkways and streets.
REFUSE: All waste products resulting from human habitation, except sewage.
RESIDENCE: The act or condition of residing or dwelling in a place.
REST HOME (NURSING HOME): A private home for the care of children or the aged
or infirm or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such a home
does not contain equipment for surgical care or for the treatment of disease or
injury, nor does it include maternity care or care for mental illnesses or
infirmities.
RETAIL: Retail refers to the sale of relatively small quantities of commodities
and services directly to customers.
ROOMING HOUSE (TOURIST HOME): A building, or portion thereof, containing
lodging rooms which accommodate three (3) or more persons who are not members
of the keeper's family and where lodging rooms or meals, or both, are provided
for compensation.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A method of disposing of refuse by spreading and covering
with earth to a depth of two feet (2') on the top surface and one foot (1') on
the sides of the bank.
SETBACK, FRONT YARD: The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the
front line or side line of the building and nearest the street line,
disregarding steps or patios.
SHED: A storage structure not intended for dwelling purposes or for storage of
automobiles.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display or illustration, which is
affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building or
other outdoor surface or piece of land and which directs attention to any
object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or
business. Each display surface of a sign shall be considered to be a sign.
However, this Title does not regulate signs located completely within an
enclosed building unless such signs are exposed to view from a street.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment not necessarily sold upon the premises where such sign
is located or to which it is affixed. A double face or V-type sign, erected on
a single supporting structure where the interior angle does not exceed one
hundred thirty five degrees (135o) shall, for the purpose of computing square-
foot area, be considered and measured as a single face sign.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession
conducted or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon the
premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, FLASHING: Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
maintained stationary and/or constant in intensity and color at all times when
such sign is in use. For the purpose of this Title, any moving, illuminated
sign shall be considered a flashing sign.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF: The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign and in no case passing
through or between any adjacent elements of same. However, such perimeter shall
not include any structural elements lying outside the limits of such sign and
not forming an integral part of the display.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: A sign which is directly or indirectly lighted.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, the space between the
floor and the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted as a story for
the purposes of this Title when more than one-half (1/2) of such basement
height is above the adjacent ground level.
STREET (AVENUE, PLACE, ROAD, TERRACE, PARKWAY, BOULEVARD or COURT): A right of
way of a required width, which affords a primary means of access to abutting
property.
STREET LINE: The dividing line between a lot and a contiguous street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the
supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or
exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent
location on the ground, or attached to something having a permanent location on
the ground. A sign, billboard or other advertising medium detached or
projecting shall be construed to be a structure.
TOURIST HOME: A building which contains a single dwelling unit and in which
meals or lodging or both are provided or offered to transient guests for
compensation.
TRAILER: A vehicle without motive power, designed for carrying persons or
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. Includes "trailer", "semi-
trailer" and "travel trailer" as defined in the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code 2 .
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: A subordinate use which is clearly and customarily incidental
to the principal use of a building or premises and which is located on the same
lot as the principal building or use, except for such accessory parking
facilities as are specifically authorized to be located elsewhere.
USE, NONCONFORMING: Any lawfully established use of a building or premises
which, on the effective date hereof, does not comply with all of the applicable
use (no bulk) regulations of the zoning district in which such building or
premises shall be located. For the purpose of this title, any use lawfully
established on the effective virtue of lacking off street parking or loading
facilities as required hereinafter for new uses, shall not be deemed a
nonconforming use.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
YARD: An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its
lowest level to the sky. A yard extends along a line and at right angles to
such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the
zoning district in which such lot is located.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line
between side lot lines.
YARD, REAR: The portion of the yard on the same lot with the principal
building, located between the rear line of the building and the rear lot line
extending for the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and rear
yards.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: A person appointed by the president and board of trustees
to administer this title on a day to day basis. The zoning administrator shall
be a person other than a member of the board of trustees.
ZONING BOARD: The Pawnee zoning board of appeals 3 . (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993;
amd. Ord. 96-9, 8-12-1996; Ord. 08-10, 6-23-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 9-7-3 of this Title.
2 1. S.H.A. 625 ILCS 5/1-187, 5/1-209 and 5/1-210.01.
3 1. See section
  9-7-3 of this title.
CHAPTER 2
DISTRICT REGULATIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Allowable Use of Land or Buildings
9-2-2: Control Over Use
9-2-3: Control Over Bulk
9-2-4: Conditional Permitted Uses
9-2-5: Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses
9-2-6: Yards, General
9-2-7: Permitted Obstructions in Required Yards
9-2-8: Mobile Home Parks and Trailers
9-2-9: Establishment of Districts
9-2-10: Procedure for Zoning of Territory to be Annexed or Annexed Territory
9-2-11: Incorporation of the Zoning Map
9-2-12: Exemptions
9-2-13: Flood Plain Area
9-2-14: Separability
9-2-15: Special Provisions
9-2-1: ALLOWABLE USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS:
The following uses of land or buildings listed below are allowed in the
districts indicated hereinafter under the conditions specified in this Title:
   A.   Uses lawfully established on the effective date hereof.
   B.   Permitted uses as designated in Chapter 3 of this Title.
   C.   Conditional permitted uses as designated in Chapter 3 of this Title.
(Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-2-2: CONTROL OVER USE:
In all districts, after the effective date hereof, and subject to the
provisions as set out in Chapter 4 of this Title on nonconforming uses:
   A.   Any tract of land may be used.
   B.   Any lawfully existing or new building or other structure may be used,
relocated, enlarged, converted, extended, reconstructed or altered.
   C.   The use of any lawfully established existing building or other
structure or tract of land may be continued, changed, extended or enlarged for
any use or conditional permitted use allowed by the regulations for the
district in which such building or other structure or tract of land is located
and for no other purpose and shall conform to all other regulations set forth
in the applicable regulations of this Title, including the requirements set
forth in Chapter 5 of this Title for accessory off-street parking spaces and
off-street loading spaces. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-2-3: CONTROL OVER BULK:
In all districts, after the effective date hereof and subject to the provisions
of Chapter 4 of this Title on nonconforming uses, any new building or other
structure shall conform to all the bulk, height and area requirements set forth
in the regulations for the district in which such building or other structure
is located and to all other applicable regulations of this Title. (Ord. 93-11,
6-14-93)
9-2-4: CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Procedures of Review of Conditional Permitted Uses: To provide for the
location of special classes of uses which are desirable for the public welfare
within a given district or districts but which are potentially incompatible
with typical uses herein permitted within them, a classification of conditional
uses is hereby established. Procedures for conditional uses are set forth in
Chapter 7 of this Title.
   B.   Existing Conditional Permitted Uses: Where a use exists on the
effective date hereof and it is classified as a conditional use in the district
in which it is located by this Title, it shall be considered to be a lawful
conditional use. Additions or alterations to existing buildings or land
improvements for expansion of lawful conditional uses may be made within the
area of the lot included in the ownership existing at the time of adoption of
this Title, and they shall be subject to yard floor area ratio and building
height requirements set forth in this Title for permitted uses in the district
in which they are located. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-2-5: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
   A.   Accessory buildings, structures and uses shall be compatible with the
principal uses and shall not be established prior to the establishment of the
principal use, and shall not include within the Village limits the keeping,
propagation or culture of pigeons, poultry or livestock whether or not for
profit.
   B.   No accessory buildings or structure, unless it conforms with the
requirements of accessory buildings for conditional uses, shall be erected or
altered at, nor moved to, a location within ten feet (10') of the nearest wall
of the principal building, nor within the required area of a front or side
yard. An accessory building, structure or use in a rear yard shall be not less
than three feet (3') from any property line; except, that on a corner lot, a
reversed corner lot or a through lot, such accessory building, structure or use
shall be set back from the property line adjoining a street the distance
required herein for a specific permitted or conditional use.
   C.   No accessory building, structure or use shall 1) encroach upon that
side yard of a corner lot which is adjacent to the street; 2) encroach upon
that side of a reversed corner lot which is adjacent to the street; 3) encroach
upon that part of a rear yard, or of a through lot, which is within thirty five
feet (35') from the street line abutting the rear lot line; or 4) encroach upon
a front yard, except as permitted herein for specific use.
   D.   No building or structure, accessory to dwelling uses, shall have more
than one story nor exceed seventeen feet (17') in height unless otherwise
permitted. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-2-6: YARDS, GENERAL:
   A.   All yards and other open spaces allocated to a building (or group of
buildings comprising one principal use) shall be located on the same lot as
such building. The maintenance of yards and other open space and minimum lot
area legally required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the
owner of such building or of the property on which it is located, as long as
the building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, other
open space or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by virtue of
change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, other
open space or minimum lot area requirements for any other building.
   B.   No improved lot shall hereafter be divided into two (2) or more lots
and no portion of an improved lot shall be sold unless all improved lots
resulting from each such division or sale shall conform with all the applicable
bulk regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located.
   C.   No yards, now or hereafter provided, for a building existing on the
effective date hereof shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced
if already less than, the minimum yard requirements of this Title for
equivalent new construction.
   D.   For lots platted before September 8, 1975, on one side of a street
where setbacks are maintained on lots occupying more than fifty percent (50%)
of such street frontage, between intersecting streets or a distance of one
thousand eight hundred feet (1,800'), whichever is less, the setback shall be
no less than the average of the existing setbacks. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-2-7: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS:
No obstructions shall be permitted in any required yard, except as follows:
   A.   In Any Yards: Marquees and awnings adjoining the principal building
overhanging roof eaves; chimneys, if they do not exceed ten percent (10%) of
the depth of the yard; and ornamental light standards, domestic television and
radio antennas, flag poles, arbors, trellises, trees, shrubs, coin-operated
telephone, permitted signs and outdoor fuel-dispensing equipment. On corner
lots, obstructions not higher than thirty inches (30") above curb level, if
located in that portion of a required front yard or side yard situated within
twenty feet (20') of the lot corner formed by the intersection of any two (2)
street lines.
   B.   In Side Yards: Open accessory off-street parking spaces, except in a
side yard abutting a street.
   C.   In Rear Yards: Enclosed, attached or detached off-street parking
spaces; open off-street parking spaces; accessory sheds; tool rooms; and any
farm accessory building, or any similar structures customarily accessory to the
principal use; and balconies, breezeways and open porches. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-
93)
9-2-8: MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAILERS:
The following regulations shall apply to mobile homes and trailers:
   A.   A mobile home shall not be considered to be permissible as an accessory
building.
   B.   No mobile home or trailer shall be parked, stored or occupied for
living purposes except:
      1.   In an approved mobile home park; provided, that public or community
sewer and water facilities are available for each mobile home and that each
existing mobile home lot contains at least three thousand (3,000) square feet
of lot area.
      2.   For a period not to exceed one year, on property for which a zoning
permit for the construction of a dwelling or dwellings has been issued, and on
which construction is actively carried forward to completion within the
aforesaid one year.
      3.   A mobile home or trailer may be used as a temporary office or
shelter incidental to construction or development of a premises on which the
trailer is located only during the time construction or development is actively
underway. No trailer may be stored or parked on any lot on the village square
at any time, except in strict compliance with this section. Each day a trailer
remains stored or parked on any lot in violation of this section shall be
considered a separate violation of this Title. Violations of this subsection
B.3. shall carry fines as set forth in Section 3-1-6 of this Code.
      4.   A trailer may be stored in a garage or rear yard; provided, that it
be licensed in accordance with the statutes of the State for movement on
highways, that it be stored in a condition in which it can be moved at any time
without removing blocks or making adjustments, other than hitching and
retracting landing gears, and that it not be used for living, sleeping or
commercial purposes while stored. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93; amd. Ord. 23-04, 2-13-
2023)
9-2-9: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this Title, the following
districts are hereby established:
   Residence Districts
      R-1 Residence District
      R-2 Residence District
      R-3 Residence District
   Office District
      O General Office District
   Business Districts
      B-1 Retail Business District
      B-2 Service Business District
      B-4 Retail Business district
   Industrial District
      I Industrial District
   Agricultural District
      A Agricultural District
   Mobile Home Districts
      RM-3 Mobile Home Parks - Individual Lots
      RM-4 Mobile Home Parks - Leased Lots
(Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-2-10: PROCEDURE FOR ZONING OF TERRITORY TO BE ANNEXED OR ANNEXED TERRITORY:
All land which may hereafter become a part of the Village as a result of
annexation shall be classified and placed in the R-1 Single-Family Residence
Zoning District, unless otherwise provided pursuant to a valid annexation.
(Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-2-11: INCORPORATION OF THE ZONING MAP:
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this Title are set
forth in the Zoning District Map, dated November 2, 1990, and hereby
incorporated as a part of this Title. All properties designated R-2 on said Map
are hereby designated R-3. The Zoning Map, including all amendments thereto,
shall be as much a part of this Title as is fully set forth and described
herein. Said Map shall be filed with the office of the Village Clerk and shall
be made available to public reference at all times during which those offices
are open. Said Map shall be updated from time to time by the Zoning
Administrator as changes occur. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-2-12: EXEMPTIONS:
The following uses are exempted by this Title and permitted in any district:
   A.   Poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains,
valves or other similar distributing equipment for telephone, cable television
or other communications and electric power, gas, water and power lines;
provided, that the installation shall conform, when applicable, with Federal
Communications Commission and Federal Aviation Agency rules and regulations and
other authorities having jurisdiction.
   B.   The height limitation for the following buildings or structures or
parts thereof are hereby exempt from the limitations set forth in this Title:
      1.   Agricultural buildings - barns, silos and grain elevators, but not
including dwellings.
      2.   Chimneys and flagpoles.
      3.   Radio and television antennas and towers.
      4.   Water tanks and standpipes. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-2-13: FLOOD PLAIN AREA:
No building or structure shall be erected within the flood plain area except in
conformance with the Village Flood Plain Ordinance 1 . (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 11, Chapter 1 of this Code.
9-2-14: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that if any of the
provisions of this Title or the application thereof to any lot, building,
structure or tract of land are declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to
be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part or to be applicable to any person
or situation, the effect of such decision shall be limited to the provision or
provisions which are expressly stated in the decision to be invalid or
ineffective or to the lot, building or other structure or tract of land
immediately involved in the controversy. All other provisions of this Title
shall continue to be separately and fully effective, and the application of
such provision to other persons or situations shall not be affected. (Ord. 93-
11, 6-14-93)
9-2-15: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
For purposes of this Title, the required width of side yards shall be not less
than five feet (5') for those lots legally described as Lots 32, 34, 35, 36,
37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, and 47 of Lewis Pape Addition to the
Village of Pawnee. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
CHAPTER 3
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-3-1: R-1 Residence District
9-3-2: R-2 Residence District
9-3-3: R-3 Residence District
9-3-4: Office District
9-3-5: B-1 Retail Business District
9-3-6: B-2 Service Business District
9-3-7: B-4 Retail Business District
9-3-8: RM-3 Mobile Home District
9-3-9: RM-4 Mobile Home District
9-3-10: A-1 Agricultural Districts
9-3-11: Industrial District
9-3-12: Summary Table of District Regulations
9-3-1: R-1 RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: This District is intended to provide a suitable open character
for single-family detached dwellings at low densities and community facilities
and public open spaces which serve the residents of this District or are
benefitted by an open residential environment.
   B.   Permitted Uses:
      1.   Single-family detached dwellings, including modular homes.
      2.   Churches, when located not less than twenty feet (20') from
adjoining lot lines in a residential district.
      3.   The following institutional uses; provided, that principal buildings
shall be located not less than thirty feet (30') from adjoining lot lines in a
residential district:
         a.   Schools, public, denominational or private, to be used for
nursery, elementary, junior and senior high, with adjacent space for
playgrounds, athletic fields, dormitories and other accessory uses required for
operation.
         b.   Public open space, including customary public parks.
         c.   Seminaries, convents, monasteries and similar religious
institutions, including dormitories and other accessory uses required for
operation.
      4.   Home occupations.
      5.   Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to
exceed duration of construction.
      6.   Accessory uses, customarily incidental to the above uses. Accessory
uses shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
         a.   Conservatories for plants and flowers and other service
buildings.
         b.   Separate living quarters for domestic servants employed on the
premises.
   C.   Conditional Permitted Uses:
      1.   Colleges or universities, but not business colleges or trade
schools.
      2.   Public or private outdoor recreation centers, such as fishing ponds,
hunt and gun clubs, conservation clubs, archery ranges, picnic grounds, par-
3 golf courses (but not including commercially operated driving ranges or
miniature golf courses) and accessory buildings or structures for
administration, operation, maintenance and club house or pavilion facilities,
including sale of food and soft drinks; provided, that accessory buildings are
located not less than one hundred fifty feet (150') from any residential
property line. Lighting for operation of recreational uses at night is not
permitted.
      3.   Rest homes, hospitals and sanitariums for human beings only.
      4.   Public service uses:
         a.   Electric and telephone substations.
         b.   Filtration plants, pumping stations and water reservoirs.
         c.   Sewage treatment plants.
         d.   Railroad passenger stations.
         e.   Police and fire stations.
         f.   Telephone exchange, radio and television transmitting or relay
stations and antenna towers.
      5.   Nurseries and greenhouses, including wholesale sales and incidental
seasonal retail sales of plant materials and crops, a substantial percentage of
which are grown on the premises.
      6.   Municipal buildings and civic centers.
   D.   Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: There shall be a minimum of nine thousand
(9,000) square feet of lot area for a single-family dwelling unit.
   E.   Lot Width: Not less than eighty feet (80') at the buildable area for a
single-family structure.
   F.   Yard Regulations:
      1.   Front Yards: Not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
      2.   Side Yards:
         a.   For single-family structures, there shall be two (2) side yards,
each of which shall be not less than ten feet (10') wide, except where a side
yard adjoins a street, it shall be at least twenty five feet (25') wide;
provided, however, that the owner of a lot platted of record and having a
dwelling structure thereon on September 8, 1975, may extend the existing
structure to within three feet (3') of the side lot; except, that if the side
lot line adjoins a street, such structure may not be extended closer than
twenty feet (20') to such side lot line. For duplex structures existing as of
January 1, 1993, there shall be two (2) side yards, each of which shall be not
less than fifteen feet (15') wide, except where a side yard adjoins a street,
it shall be at least twenty five feet (25') wide.
         b.   Notwithstanding all other side yard lot width and lot area
requirements, on any lot platted of record on September 8, 1975, the date of
enactment of the Zoning Ordinance, which has a width of less than sixty feet
(60') but not less than forty feet (40'), in an R-1 Single-Family Residential
District, a single-family detached dwelling may be constructed on up to sixty
seven percent (67%) of the width of the lot; provided, however, that one side
yard be ten feet (10') in width. When such a lot is adjacent to a side street
the ten foot (10') side yard must be adjacent to the side street.
         c.   On such a lot an accessory building, structure or use in a rear
yard shall not be constructed less than two feet (2') from the side lot line;
except, that on a lot adjacent to a side street an accessory building,
structure or use shall not be constructed closer than fifteen feet (15') to the
side street.
      3.   Rear Yards: Not less than thirty feet (30') in depth.
   G.   Height Regulation: No structure shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty
five feet (35') in height.
   H.   Sign Regulations:
      1.   Illuminated nameplate and identification signs are permitted subject
to the following:
         a.   Area and Content; Residential: There shall be not more than one
nameplate, not exceeding one square foot in area, for each dwelling unit,
indicating the name and/or address of the occupant. On a corner lot, two (2)
such nameplates for each dwelling unit, one facing each street, shall be
permitted.
         b.   Area and Content; Nonresidential: For nonresidential buildings, a
single identification sign, not exceeding nine (9) square feet in area and
indicating only the name and address of the building, may be displayed. On a
corner lot, two (2) nine (9) square feet in area signs, one facing each street,
shall be permitted.
         c.   Projection: No sign shall project beyond the property line into
the public way.
         d.   Height: No sign shall project higher than one story or ten feet
(10'), whichever is lower, above the curb level.
      2.   Unilluminated "For Sale" and "For Rent" signs are permitted.
      3.   Unilluminated signs accessory to parking area are permitted.
      4.   Illuminated nonflashing church bulletins and institutional
identification signs are permitted. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
   I.   Accessory Building Limitations:
      1.   A rear yard may contain: a) an accessory building consisting of a
two (2) car garage accessory building occupying an area of not more than five
hundred seventy six (576) square feet, or b) accessory buildings which, in the
aggregate, occupy an area no greater than the smaller of: 1) one thousand eight
hundred (1,800) square feet or 2) fifteen percent (15%) of the area of such
rear yard. Such accessory buildings may be used for off street parking without
regard to parking space limitations in chapter 5, "Off Street Parking And
Loading Regulations", of this title. (Ord. 08-10, 6-23-2008)
      2.   Any accessory building used for parking or storage of motor vehicles
or trailers (whether designed or used for living and sleeping purposes or for
transportation of objects, including, but not limited to, goods, boats,
snowmobiles, farm implements, motorcycles and camping gear) shall be provided
with a driveway as required in subsection
9-5-5A2 of this title.
      3.   Nothing in this subsection I shall be construed as affecting or
waiving any regulation pertaining to lot lengths, lot widths, lot areas, lot
lines or setbacks, yard regulations, height regulations, obstruction
regulations, permitted uses or conditional permitted uses. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-
1993)
      4.   Accessory buildings may be used in the conduct of home occupations,
but only in areas zoned R-2 and R-3. (Ord. 99-12, 6-14-1999)
9-3-2: R-2 RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: This district is intended to provide a suitable open character
for single- and two-family detached dwellings at low densities and community
facilities and public open spaces which serve the residents of this district or
are benefitted by an open residential environment.
   B.   Permitted Uses:
      Uses permitted in the R-1 district.
      Duplexes.
   C.   Conditional Permitted Uses: Conditional permitted uses permitted in the
R-1 district.
   D.   Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit:
      1.   There shall be a minimum of nine thousand (9,000) square feet of lot
area for a single-family dwelling unit.
      2.   There shall be a minimum of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet of
lot area for a two-family structure.
   E.   Lot Width: Not less than eighty feet (80') at the buildable area for a
single-family structure and not less than one hundred feet (100') for duplex
structures.
   F.   Yard Regulations:
      1.   Front Yards: Not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
      2.   Side Yards:
         a.   For single-family structures, there shall be two (2) side yards,
each of which shall be not less than ten feet (10') wide, except where a side
yard adjoins a street, it shall be at least twenty five feet (25') wide;
provided, however, that the owner of a lot platted of record and having a
dwelling structure thereon on September 8, 1975, may extend the existing
structure to within three feet (3') of the side lot; except that, if the side
lot line adjoins a street, such structure may not be extended closer than
twenty feet (20') to such side lot line. For duplex structures there shall be
two (2) side yards, each of which shall be not less than fifteen feet (15')
wide, except where a side yard adjoins a street, it shall be at least twenty
five feet (25') wide.
         b.   Notwithstanding all other side yard lot width and lot area
requirements, on any lot platted of record on September 8, 1975, the date of
enactment of the zoning ordinance, which has a width of less than sixty feet
(60') but not less than forty feet (40'), in an R-1 single-family residential
district, a single-family detached dwelling may be constructed on up to sixty
seven percent (67%) of the width of the lot; provided, however, that one side
yard be ten feet (10') in width. When such a lot is adjacent to a side street
the ten foot (10') side yard must be adjacent to the side street.
         c.   On such a lot an accessory building, structure or use in a rear
yard shall not be constructed less than two feet (2') from the side lot line;
except, that on a lot adjacent to a side street, an accessory building,
structure or use shall not be constructed closer than fifteen feet (15') to the
side street.
      3.   Rear Yards: Not less than thirty feet (30') in depth.
   G.   Height Regulation: No structure shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty
five feet (35') in height.
   H.   Sign Regulation: In accordance with the sign regulations in the R-
1 District.
   I.   Accessory Building Limitations: Same as in the R-1 District. (Ord. 93-
11, 6-14-93)
9-3-3: R-3 RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: This District, formerly known as the R-2 Residence District,
under the 1975 Pawnee Zoning Ordinance, is designed to provide for all types of
residential buildings, in order to permit a broad range of housing types, with
appropriate standards as to density, open space and spacing the buildings. This
District also includes community facilities and public open space uses, which
serve the residents of the District or which are benefitted by an open
residential environment. All properties zoned R-2, as of the effective date
hereof, are hereby designated R-3.
   B.   Permitted Uses:
      1.   Uses permitted in the R-2 District.
      2.   Multiple-family and other attached dwelling units.
      3.   Public libraries, museums, art galleries.
   C.   Conditional Permitted Uses: Those conditional permitted uses permitted
in the R-1 District.
   D.   Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit:
      1.   There shall be a minimum of nine thousand (9,000) square feet of lot
area for a single-family dwelling unit structure.
      2.   There shall be a minimum of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet of
lot area for a two-family dwelling unit structure.
      3.   The minimum amount of lot area per dwelling unit for multiple-family
(more than 2) dwelling unit structures shall be six thousand (6,000) square
feet per dwelling unit structure.
   E.   Lot Width: Front Yards: Not less than sixty feet (60') at the buildable
area.
   F.   Yard Regulations:
      1.   Front Yards: Not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
      2.   Side Yards:
         a.   For single-family structures, there shall be two (2) side yards,
each of which shall be not less than ten feet (10') wide, except where a side
yard adjoins a street, it shall be at least twenty five feet (25') wide;
provided, however, that the owner of a lot platted of record and having a
dwelling structure thereon on September 8, 1975, may extend the existing
structure to within three feet (3') of the side lot line; except, that if the
side lot line adjoins a street, such structure may not be extended closer than
twenty feet (20') to such side lot line.
         b.   For duplex and multiple-family structures there shall be two (2)
side yards, each of which shall be not less than fifteen feet (15') wide,
except where a side yard adjoins a street it shall be at least twenty five feet
(25') wide.
         c.   Notwithstanding all other side yard lot width and lot area
requirements, on any lot platted of record on September 8, 1975, the date of
enactment of the Zoning Ordinance, which has a width of less than sixty feet
(60') but not less than forty feet (40'), in an R-2 Single-Family Residential
District, a single-family detached dwelling lot; provided, however, that one
side yard be ten feet (10') in width.
         d.   When such a lot is adjacent to a side street the ten foot (10')
side yard must be adjacent to the side street.
         e.   On such a lot an accessory building, structure or use in a rear
yard shall not be constructed less than two feet (2') from the side lot line;
except, that on a lot adjacent to a side street an accessory, building,
structure or use shall not be constructed closer than fifteen feet (15') to the
side street.
      3.   Rear Yards: Not less than thirty feet (30') in depth.
   G.   Height Regulation: No structure shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty
five feet (35') in height.
   H.   Sign Regulation: In accordance with regulations set forth in the R-
1 District herein.
   I.   Accessory Building Limitations: Same as in the R-1 District. (Ord. 93-
11, 6-14-93)
9-3-4: OFFICE DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: It being the opinion of the Village that the Office District
is an obsolete zoning category, no rezonings to this District will be allowed.
Since certain properties were zoned "O" prior to this Title, those properties
shall be permitted to continue the uses as set forth in this Section.
   B.   Permitted Uses:
      1.   Offices devoted to professional and public activities.
      2.   Other business offices not involving sale of merchandise or
commodities.
      3.   Restaurants, cafeterias or refreshment stands operating within the
building for use of regular occupants of the building only.
      4.   Temporary buildings for construction purposes, for a period not to
exceed the duration of active construction.
      5.   Multiple-family dwelling units.
   C.   Floor Area Ratio:
      1.   For offices, not to exceed one and zero-tenths (1.0).
      2.   For multiple-family residences, not to exceed one and zero-tenths
(1.0).
   D.   Lot Area:
      1.   For offices, not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot
area for each structure.
      2.   For multiple-family residences, the minimum amount of lot area per
dwelling unit shall not be less than the following:
 
Min. Lot Area for Each Type of Dwelling Unit in Square Dwelling Unit on the Lot
Feet
4 bedroom                                              3,000
3 bedroom                                              2,700
2 bedroom                                              2,400
1 bedroom efficiency                                   2,100
 
   E.   Lot Width: For offices, not less than fifty feet (50') at the buildable
area.
   F.   Yard Regulations:
      1.   Front Yards: Not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
      2.   Side Yards: Two (2) side yards totalling fourteen feet (14'), one of
which shall be at least nine feet (9') wide and one at least five feet (5')
wide, except where a side yard adjoins a street, it shall be at least twenty
five feet (25') wide.
      3.   Rear Yards: There shall be a rear yard not less than twenty five
feet (25') in depth.
   G.   Height Regulation: No structure shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height.
   H.   Sign Regulations:
      1.   Illuminated nameplate and identification signs not attached to
buildings are permitted subject to the following:
         a.   Area and Content; Nonresidential: For nonresidential buildings, a
single identification sign, not exceeding nine (9) square feet in area and
indicating the name and address of the building may be displayed. On a corner
lot, two (2) nine (9) square feet in area signs, one facing each street, may be
displayed.
         b.   Projection: No sign shall project beyond the property line into
the public way.
         c.   Height: No sign shall project higher than one story or ten feet
(10'), whichever is lower, above the curb level.
      2.   Illuminated nameplate and identification signs attached to a
building are permitted when affixed flat to the surface thereof. No such sign
shall extend above or beyond the walls of said building. Such signs when
affixed flat against building walls shall not project therefrom more than
eighteen inches (18").
      3.   Illuminated or unilluminated signs accessory to parking areas are
permitted, not to exceed six (6) square feet in area. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
9-3-5: B-1 RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: This district is designed to provide for a wide range of
retail stores, office buildings and amusement and service activities which
occupy prime retail frontage in an intensively developed business area, with
less impact on adjacent districts than the B-2 district, but allowing greater
impact on adjacent districts than a B-4 district. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
   B.   Permitted Uses:
      Antique shops.
      Art and school supply stores.
      Bakeries (not more than 50 percent of the floor area to be devoted to
processing).
      Banks and financial institutions.
      Barbershops.
      Beauty shops.
      Bicycle stores, sales, rental and repair.
      Book and stationery stores.
      Camera and photographic supply stores.
      Candy and ice cream stores.
      Carpet and rug stores.
      China and glassware stores.
      Clothes pressing establishments.
      Clothing stores.
      Clubs and lodges - private, fraternal and religious.
      Coin and philatelic stores.
      Computer hardware and software sales.
      Currency exchanges.
      Custom dressmaking.
      Department stores.
      Drugstores.
      Dry cleaning and laundry receiving establishments without processing.
      Dry cleaning establishments - retail only - having not more than five (5)
employees, and dry cleaning equipment not to exceed eighty (80) pounds'
capacity.
      Dry goods stores.
      Dwelling unit and lodging rooms, above the first floor only.
      Electrical and household appliance stores.
      Flower shops and conservatories.
      Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets and delicatessens.
      Frozen food shops, including locker rentals.
      Furniture shops.
      Furrier shops.
      Garden supply and seed stores.
      Gift shops.
      Hardware stores.
      Hobby shops.
      Indoor firing ranges.
      Interior decorating shops.
      Jewelry stores.
      Laundries - automatics self-service type or hand, employing not more than
two (2) persons in addition to one owner or manager; provided, that laundry
machines shall not exceed ten (10) pounds' capacity each.
      Leather goods and luggage stores.
      Liquor store - retail sales.
      Loan offices.
      Locksmith shops.
      Mail order service stores.
      Medical and dental clinics.
      Meeting halls.
      Museums, art galleries and libraries (public).
      Musical instrument sales and repair shops.
      Newspaper offices, not including printing.
      Office supply stores.
      Offices devoted to business activities.
      Optician and optometrist offices.
      Paint and wallpaper stores.
      Photograph studios.
      Physical culture and health services, gymnasiums, reducing salons.
      Picture framing stores.
      Post offices.
      Radio and television broadcasting studios.
      Restaurants without entertainment or dancing.
      Schools devoted to music or dance.
      Sewing machine sales and services household machines only.
      Shoe and hat repair shops.
      Shoe stores.
      Sporting goods stores.
      Tailor shops.
      Taverns and cocktail lounges, without entertainment and dancing.
      Telegraph offices.
      Telephone booths, outdoor.
      Temporary buildings for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed
the duration of active construction.
      Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
      Toy shops.
      Variety shops.
      Vending machines.
      Video arcades.
      Video rental and sales.
      Wearing apparel shops.
      Wholesale establishments, with storage of merchandise limited to samples
only.
      Accessory uses to the above permitted uses. Such accessory uses shall not
include the keeping or propagation of pigeons, poultry or livestock, whether or
not for profit. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993; amd. Ord. 12-20, 8-27-2012)
   C.   Conditional Permitted Uses:
      Animal hospitals.
      Churches.
      Convents, monasteries, seminaries and similar religious institutions.
      Greenhouses.
      Health centers.
      Kennels.
      Other business uses similar to permitted uses listed in subsection B of
this section.
      Parking lots and storage garages for motor vehicles.
      Public service uses:
      Electric distribution centers.
      Filtration plant, pumping stations and water reservoirs.
      Fire and police stations.
      Telephone exchanges, radio and television transmitting or relay stations
and antenna towers.
      Other similar uses.
      Recreation buildings and community centers.
      Schools devoted to business or trade. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993; amd. Ord.
08-10, 6-23-2008)
   D.   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed one and zero-tenths (1.0).
   E.   Lot Area: Not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet
of lot area for each business establishment.
   F.   Yard Regulations:
      1.   Front Yards: None.
      2.   Side Yards: None.
      3.   Rear Yards: Not less than twenty feet (20') in depth; except, that
in the case where off street parking and off street loading facilities are
provided and where the building does not exceed one story in height and where
the floor area ratio does not exceed twenty five one-hundredths (0.25), the
rear yard may be reduced to five feet (5').
      4.   Transitional Yard:
         a.   Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line in
an adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided along such lot line.
Such yard shall be not less than twenty feet (20') in width.
         b.   Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an
adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line.
Such yard shall be not less than thirty feet (30') in depth.
         c.   Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with a
front lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residence district, a yard equal
in depth to the minimum front yard required by this title on such a residential
lot shall be provided along such frontage or side lot lines for a distance of
at least twenty five feet (25'), including the width of an intervening alley
from such residential lot.
   G.   Height Regulation: No structure shall exceed sixty five feet (65') in
height.
   H.   Sign Regulations: Business signs and advertising devices are permitted,
subject to the following conditions:
      1.   General Application:
         a.   No sign shall be permitted within twenty feet (20') of any
residential district boundary line.
         b.   No freestanding business or advertising sign shall be erected or
relocated within fifteen feet (15') of any street or highway, within three feet
(3') of any driveway or parking area or within twenty five feet (25') of the
intersection of two (2) or more streets.
         c.   Signs on awnings shall be exempted from the limitations imposed
by this title on the projection of signs from the face of the wall of any
building or structure; provided, that any sign located on an awning shall be
affixed flat to the surface thereof and shall indicate only the name and/or
address of the establishment. No such sign shall extend vertically or
horizontally beyond the limits of said awning.
      2.   Spacing: Advertising signs on any controlled access route must be
spaced at least three hundred thirty feet (330') apart on either side of the
road. All advertising signs must be kept at least five hundred feet (500') away
from an entrance or exit to a controlled access route.
      3.   Illumination: Signs may have constant or flashing illumination;
provided, that any such signs that are located in direct line of vision of any
traffic control signal shall not have contrasting or flashing illumination of
red, green or amber color. Where a sign is illuminated by light reflected upon
it, direct rays of light shall not beam upon any part of any existing
residential building, nor into a residential district or into a street.
      4.   Area: The gross surface area in square feet of all signs on a lot
shall not exceed ten (10) times the linear feet of frontage of such lot. Each
side of the lot that abuts upon a street may be included as separate frontage.
      5.   Projection: No sign shall project more than eight feet (8') from the
face of the wall of any building or structure nor project higher than the
building height. Freestanding sign structures shall be located not less than
fifteen feet (15') from a lot line adjoining a street.
   I.   Supplementary Regulations:
      1.   All business, service, storage, merchandise, display and, where
permitted, repair and processing, shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed
building, except for off street automobile parking, off street loading and open
sales lots in districts where permitted.
      2.   Unless otherwise permitted herein for specified uses, goods sold
shall consist primarily of new merchandise and any goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail, primarily on the premises. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-
1993)
9-3-6: B-2 SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: This district is designed to furnish general business and
necessary commercial and semicommercial services in support of retail
functions. Since these service establishments often involve objectional
influences, such as noise, vibration, smoke or other particulate matter, heat,
humidity, glare, odor, danger of fire or other objectional influences, they are
incompatible with residential uses.
   B.   Permitted Uses:
      Uses permitted in the B-1 district.
      Amusement establishments -- bowling alleys, pool halls, dance halls,
gymnasiums, indoor swimming pools and skating rinks.
      Auction rooms.
      Automobile accessory stores.
      Automobile service stations.
      Blueprinting and photocopying establishments.
      Building material sales without outdoor storage.
      Cartage and express facilities providing for storage goods, motor trucks
and other equipment in an enclosed structure.
      Caskets and casket supplies and crematories.
      Catering establishments.
      Clothing and costume rental establishments.
      Contractor's and construction offices.
      Employment agencies.
      Exterminating shops.
      Feed stores.
      Frozen food lockers.
      Fuel and ice sales, retail only.
      Garages, public servicing automotive vehicles, but not including body
repair or repainting.
      Greenhouses.
      Hotels.
      Job printing shops with presses having not more than fourteen inch by
twenty inch (14" x 20") beds.
      Laboratories for medical, dental, research and testing purposes.
      Laundries.
      Locksmith shops.
      Machinery sales establishments.
      Mail order houses.
      Monument sales.
      Motels and lodging houses. Dwelling units may be located on the ground
level.
      Motor vehicle and motor vehicle equipment sales.
      Orthopedic and medical appliance stores.
      Outdoor and commercial advertising sign shops.
      Parking lots and garages for automobiles.
      Pet shops.
      Physical, culture establishments, gymnasiums, reducing salons, massage
salons and parlors.
      Plumbing showrooms and shops.
      Radio and television service and repair shops.
      Recording studios.
      Recreation buildings, community centers.
      Restaurants, including live entertainment and dancing.
      Schools devoted to business or trade.
      Taverns, including live entertainment and dancing.
      Taxidermists.
      Telephone booths, outdoors.
      Theaters, including drive-ins.
      Trailer sales.
      Typewriter and adding machine sales and service establishments.
      Undertaking establishment and funeral parlors.
      Vending machine sales and service establishments.
      Accessory uses to the above permitted uses. Such accessory uses shall not
include the keeping or propagation of pigeons, poultry or livestock, whether or
not for profit. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
   C.   Conditional Permitted Uses:
      Conditional uses allowed in the B-1 district.
      Animal hospitals.
      Automobile laundries.
      Kennels.
      Open sales lots, including sales of used cars.
      Outdoor amusement establishments -- fairgrounds, permanent carnivals,
kiddie parks, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, and other similar
amusement centers and places of assembly such as stadiums and arenas.
      Secondhand stores and rummage shops. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993; amd. Ord.
08-10, 6-23-2008)
   D.   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed one and two-tenths (1.2).
   E.   Lot Area: As in the B-1 retail business district herein.
   F.   Yard Regulation: As in the B-1 district.
   G.   Height Regulation: No structure shall exceed sixty five feet (65') in
height.
   H.   Sign Regulations: Business signs and advertising devices are permitted,
subject to the following conditions:
      1.   General Application:
         a.   No sign shall be permitted within twenty feet (20') of a
residential district boundary line.
         b.   No freestanding business or advertising sign shall be erected or
relocated within three feet (3') of a driveway, parking area or within twenty
five feet (25') of the intersection of two (2) or more streets unless it is a
business sign and shall have its lowest elevation ten feet (10') above the curb
level.
         c.   Signs on awnings shall be exempt from the limitations imposed by
this title on the projection of signs from the face of the wall of any building
or structure; provided, that any sign located on an awning shall be affixed
flat to the surface thereof. Further, no such sign shall extend vertically or
horizontally beyond the limits of said awning.
      2.   Spacing: Advertising signs on any controlled access route must be
spaced at least three hundred thirty feet (330') apart on either side of the
road. All advertising signs must be kept at least five hundred feet (500') away
from an entrance or exit to a controlled access route.
      3.   Illumination: Signs may have constant or flashing illumination;
provided, that any such signs that are located in direct line of vision of any
traffic control signal shall not have contrasting or flashing illumination of
red, green or amber color. Where a sign is illuminated by light reflected upon
it, direct rays of light shall not beam upon any part of any existing
residential building nor into a residential district or into a street.
      4.   Area: The gross surface area in square feet of all signs on a lot
shall not exceed ten (10) times the linear frontage of the lot, and each side
of the lot which abuts a street may be included as separate frontage.
      5.   Projection:
         a.   A business sign when affixed to a building shall not project more
than eight feet (8') from the face of the wall of any building or structure. A
business sign not affixed to a building shall be not nearer than fifteen feet
(15') from a lot line adjoining a street; except, that a sign having its lowest
elevation ten feet (10') above the ground level and supported on standards or
portable signs not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area that do not unduly
obstruct the pedestrian or motorist view may be located within three feet (3')
of such lot line.
         b.   A business sign may be located on a building roof; provided, it
is not higher than six feet (6') above the building height.
         c.   Advertising signs when affixed flat against the building walls
shall not project therefrom more than eighteen inches (18") nor project higher
than the building height. Freestanding sign structures shall be located not
less than fifteen feet (15') from a lot line adjoining a street. No advertising
sign shall be located within one hundred feet (100') of a residential district
boundary line. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
9-3-7: B-4 RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: This district is designed to provide for convenient retail and
service establishments which, due to the nature and type of uses, have minimal
impact on adjacent residential uses and provide for a buffer between the
residential areas and other uses more intensive in scope.
   B.   Permitted Uses:
      1.   Uses permitted in R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts.
      2.   Restaurants, including drive-in establishment restaurants.
      3.   Retail stores, primarily devoted to sales of goods, including:
         a.   Antique shops.
         b.   Art and school supply stores.
         c.   Bicycle stores -- sales, rental and repair.
         d.   Book and stationery stores.
         e.   Camera and photographic supply stores.
         f.   Candy and ice-cream stores.
         g.   Carpet and rug stores.
         h.   China and glassware stores.
         i.   Coin and stamp stores.
         j.   Computer hardware and software sales and services.
         k.   Department stores.
         l.   Electrical and household appliance stores.
         m.   Flower shops.
         n.   Food stores, convenience stores, grocery stores, meat markets and
delicatessens.
         o.   Furniture and cabinet stores.
         p.   Furrier stores.
         q.   Garden supply and seed stores.
         r.   Gift shops.
         s.   Hardware stores.
         t.   Hobby shops.
         u.   Jewelry stores.
         v.   Leather goods and luggage stores.
         w.   Musical instrument sales and repair shops.
         x.   Newspaper offices, not including printing.
         y.   Office supply stores.
         z.   Optical stores.
         aa.   Paint and wallpaper stores.
         ab.   Photography studios.
         ac.   Picture framing stores.
         ad.   Sewing machine sales and service household machines.
         ae.   Shoe stores.
         af.   Sporting goods stores.
         ag.   Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
         ah.   Wearing apparel shops.
         ai.   Toy shops.
         aj.   Variety shops.
         ak.   Video sales and rental stores.
      4.   Offices devoted to business activities.
      5.   Post offices and governmental buildings.
      6.   Uses accessory to above permitted uses, not including the keeping of
pigeons, poultry or livestock.
   C.   Conditional Permitted Uses: Other business uses similar to permitted
uses listed above.
   D.   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed one and zero-tenths (1.0).
   E.   Lot Area: Not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area
for each business establishment; residential lot areas as in R-1 District.
   F.   Yard Regulations:
      1.   Front Yards: Not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
      2.   Side Yards: Not less than five feet (5').
      3.   Rear Yards: Not less than twenty feet (20') in depth; except, that
in the case where off-street parking and off-street loading facilities are
provided and where the building does not exceed one story in height and where
the floor area ratio does not exceed twenty five one-hundredths (0.25), the
rear yard may be reduced to five feet (5').
      4.   Transitional Yard:
         a.   Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line in
an adjacent resident district, a yard shall be provided along such lot line.
Such yard shall be not less than twenty feet (20') in width.
         b.   Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an
adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line.
Such yard shall be not less than thirty feet (30') in depth.
         c.   Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with a
front lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residence district, a yard equal
in depth to a minimum front yard required by this Title on such a residential
lot shall be provided along such frontage or side lot lines for a distance of
at least twenty five feet (25'), including the width of an intervening alley
from such residential lot.
   G.   Height Regulation: No structure shall exceed sixty five feet (65') in
height.
   H.   Sign Regulations: Business signs and advertising devices are permitted,
subject to the following conditions:
      1.   General Application:
         a.   No sign shall be permitted within twenty feet (20') of any
residential district boundary line.
         b.   No freestanding business or advertising sign shall be erected or
relocated within fifteen feet (15') of any street or highway, within four feet
(4') of any drive or parking area or within twenty five feet (25') of the
intersection of two (2) or more streets.
         c.   Signs on awnings shall be exempted from the limitations imposed
by this Title on the projection of signs from the face of the wall of any
building or structure; provided, that any sign located on an awning shall be
affixed flat to the surface thereof and shall indicate only the name and/or
address of the establishment. So such sign shall extend vertically or
horizontally beyond the limits of said awning.
      2.   Illumination: Signs may have constant or flashing illumination;
provided, that any such signs that are located in direct line of vision of any
traffic-control signal shall not have contrasting or flashing illumination of
red, green or amber color. Where a sign is illuminated by light reflected upon
it, direct rays of light shall not beam upon any part of any existing
residential building nor into a residential district or into a street.
      3.   Area: The gross surface area in square feet of all signs on a lot
shall not exceed ten (10) times the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. Each
side of the lot that abuts upon a street may be included as separate frontage.
      4.   Projection: No sign shall project more than eight feet (8') from the
face of the wall of any building or structure nor project higher than the
building height. Freestanding sign structures shall be located not less than
fifteen feet (15') from a lot line adjoining a street.
   I.   Supplementary Regulations:
      1.   All business, service, storage, merchandise display and where
permitted, repair and processing shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed
building, except for off-street automobile parking, off-street loading and
drive-in facilities.
      2.   Unless otherwise permitted herein for specified uses, goods sold
shall consist primarily of new merchandise and any goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail, primarily on the premises.
      3.   If a lot is adjacent to a residential area, any alley between the
lot and residential area shall not be used by the public for ingress to or
egress from the lot. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93; 1994 Code)
9-3-8: RM-3 MOBILE HOME DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: To accommodate mobile home subdivisions on lots of record sold
to individual mobile home owners where such use is determined as being
compatible with the area.
   B.   Permitted Uses:
      1.   Mobile homes.
      2.   Churches.
      3.   Public open space.
      4.   Schools, public and private.
   C.   Conditional Permitted Uses: Same as in the R-1 District.
   D.   Minimum Lot Area Per Unit:
      1.   Five thousand (5,000) square feet/D.U. if public sewer and water are
available.
      2.   Forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet/D.U. if
no sewer and water are available.
   E.   Minimum Lot Area for Classification:
      1.   Thirty thousand (30,000) square feet if public sewer and water are
available.
      2.   Forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet if no
sewer and water are available.
   F.   Minimum Lot Width Per Mobile Home: Fifty feet (50').
   G.   Yard Regulations:
      1.   Front Yard: Twenty feet (20').
      2.   Side Yard:
         a.   Total: Ten feet (10'); fifteen feet (15') if adjacent to a public
street, alley or building.
         b.   Minimum Per Side: Five feet (5'); ten feet (10') if adjacent to a
public street, alley or building.
      3.   Rear Yard: Fifteen feet (15').
   H.   Supplemental Regulations: All RM-3 Districts if they qualify as mobile
home parks under State law 1 , shall be designed, operated and maintained in
accordance with regulations of the Illinois Department of Public Health, which
as of the date of this Title, are codified at 77 Illinois Administrative Code,
sections 860, et seq. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 210 ILCS 115/2.5.
9-3-9: RM-4 MOBILE HOME DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: To accommodate mobile homes in mobile home parks which remain
in single ownership and establish certain standards to help insure public
health and safety in such developments.
   B.   Permitted Uses: Same as in the RM-3 District.
   C.   Conditional Permitted Uses: Same as in the R-1 District.
   D.   Minimum Lot Area Per Unit:
      1.   Three thousand (3,000) square feet per dwelling unit if public sewer
and water are available.
      2.   Forty five thousand five hundred sixty (45,560) square feet if no
sewer or water are available.
   E.   Minimum Lot Width Per Mobile Home: Twenty five feet (25').
   F.   Yard Regulations:
      1.   Front Yard Setback: Each mobile home site shall abut or face on a
private or public driveway or roadway.
      2.   Side Yards:
         a.   Total: Ten feet (10'); fifteen feet (15') if adjacent to a public
street, alley or building.
         b.   Minimum Per Side: Five feet (5'); ten feet (10') if adjacent to a
public street, alley or building.
      3.   Rear Yard: Fifteen feet (15').
   G.   Supplementary Regulations: All mobile home parks shall be designed,
maintained and operated in accordance with Illinois Department of Public Health
regulation which, as of the date of this Title, are codified at 77 Illinois
Administrative Code, sections 860, et seq. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-3-10: A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Purpose: It being the opinion of the Village that agricultural
districts are an obsolete zoning category, no rezonings to the Agricultural
District A-1 category will be allowed. Since certain properties were zoned A-
1 prior to this Title, those properties shall be permitted to continue the uses
set forth in this Section.
   B.   Permitted Uses: General agricultural use, including crops and hay,
gardening and pasture for horses only, but such use as pasture shall be limited
to not more than one horse per acre, not to exceed six (6) horses for any
single tract.
   C.   Structures: Usual farm buildings shall be permitted, but none shall be
nearer than twenty five feet (25') to the front, back or side yards of the
tract.
   D.   Additional Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall include all of those
permitted in the R-1 Residential District. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-3-11: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
      1.   Uses permitted in the I District are subject to the following
condition that residential uses are not permitted, except for watchmen's
quarters.
      2.   The following uses are permitted in the I District:
         a.   Any establishment engaged in production, processing, cleaning,
servicing, testing, repair or storage of materials, goods or products;
provided, operations conform with the general requirements applicable to this
District set forth in this Section.
         b.   The following additional uses; provided, that operations conform
with applicable general requirements set forth in this Section.
            (1)   Auto laundries.
            (2)   Automobile service stations.
            (3)   Building material sales with outside storage.
            (4)   Cartage and express facilities.
            (5)   Contractors, architects and engineers offices, shops and
yards.
            (6)   Dry-cleaning establishments.
            (7)   Dwelling units for watchmen and their families, when located
on the premises where employed.
            (8)   Fuel and ice sales.
            (9)   Garages for storage, repair and servicing of motor vehicles.
            (10)   Greenhouses, wholesale.
            (11)   Highway maintenance shops and yards.
            (12)   Laundries.
            (13)   Lodges and offices of labor organization.
            (14)   Mail order houses.
            (15)   Medical and dental equipment manufacturing.
            (16)   Motor freight terminals.
            (17)   Municipal or privately-owned recreational buildings or
community centers.
            (18)   Packing and crating.
            (19)   Printing.
            (20)   Public utility and service uses as follows:
               (A)   Bus stations, bus terminals, bus turnarounds (off street),
bus garages and bus lots.
               (B)   Electric substations.
               (C)   Fire stations.
               (D)   Gas regulator stations.
               (E)   Police stations.
               (F)   Radio and television towers.
               (G)   Railroad passenger stations.
               (H)   Telephone exchanges, telephone transmission equipment
buildings and microwave relay towers.
               (I)   Utility service substations - electric, gas, telephone and
water.
               (J)   Waterworks - reservoirs, pumping stations and filtration
plants.
            (21)   Publishing establishments.
            (22)   Radar installations and towers.
            (23)   Radio and television studios, and towers for transmitting
and receiving.
            (24)   Rest houses, hotels and camps for railroad labor, consisting
of sleeping, lodging, eating and related facilities provided for railroad
personnel on railroad property.
            (25)   Restaurants, including the sale of liquor in conjunction
therewith.
            (26)   Stadiums and arenas, open or enclosed.
            (27)   Taverns.
            (28)   Telephone booths.
            (29)   Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period
not to exceed the duration of such construction.
            (30)   Temporary real estate tract offices for the purposes of
conducting the sale of lots of the tract upon which such tract office is
located, for a period not to exceed two (2) years.
            (31)   Trade schools.
            (32)   Weighing stations.
            (33)   Accessory uses incidental to and on the same lot and zoning
district as the principal use. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
            (34)   Adult uses, pursuant to a permit granted in accordance with
title 12 of this code. (Ord. 01-15, 10-22-2001)
   B.   Conditional Permitted Uses:
      1.   Airports, private and commercial, including heliports and other
aircraft landing fields, runways, flight strips and flying schools, together
with hangars, terminal buildings and other auxiliary facilities.
      2.   Air, railroad and water freight terminals, railroad switching and
classification yards, repair shops and roundhouses.
      3.   Automobile or other vehicle testing grounds.
      4.   Automobile wrecking yards, except no automobile wrecking yards shall
be operated within one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') of any
residence district.
      5.   Extraction of sand, gravel or other raw materials.
      6.   Institutions for the care or treatment of alcoholics, drug addiction
patients or the mentally ill or retarded.
      7.   Junkyards, except no junkyard shall be operated within one thousand
three hundred twenty feet (1,320') of any residence district.
      8.   Parks and playgrounds.
      9.   Penal institutions.
      10.   Planned developments for manufacturing.
      11.   Racetracks.
      12.   Sewage treatment plants - municipal.
      13.   Theaters - automobile and drive ins.
      14.   Accessory uses incidental and on the same lot and zoning district
as the principal use.
   C.   Yard Regulations:
      1.   Front Yards: Not less than thirty feet (30') in depth.
      2.   Side Yards: On a corner lot, a side yard adjoining a street shall be
not less than thirty feet (30') in depth.
      3.   Rear Yards: Not less than twenty feet (20') in depth; except, that
in the case where off street parking and off street loading facilities are
provided and where the building does not exceed one story in height and where
the floor area ratio does not exceed twenty five one-hundredths (0.25), the
rear yard may be reduced to five feet (5').
      4.   Transitional Yards:
         a.   Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot in an
adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided along such side lot line.
Such yard shall be not less than thirty feet (30') in width.
         b.   Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an
adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line.
Such yard shall be not less than fifty feet (50') in depth.
         c.   Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line in an
adjacent business or residence district, a yard shall be provided along such
rear lot line. Such yard shall not be less than fifty feet (50') in depth.
         d.   Where the extension of a front or side lot line of an adjacent
lot located in a residence district, a yard equal in depth to the minimum front
yard required by this title on such adjacent residential lot shall be provided
along such front or side lot lines for a distance of at least twenty feet
(20'), including the width of an intervening alley from such residential lot.
   D.   Regulation Along Business And Residence District Boundary Lines:
      1.   In the I district, on properties or portions thereof located
directly across a street from a business or residence district, if any point on
the exterior surface of any building or structure is at a greater height than
thirty five feet (35') above curb level, such point projected vertically upon
the ground shall, in no case, be nearer to a business or residence district
boundary line than a horizontal distance equal to one and one-half (11/2) times
the height of such point from curb level.
      2.   In the I district, on properties or portions thereof located
adjacent to a side or rear property line in a business or residence district,
if any point on the exterior surface of any building or structure is at a
greater height than thirty five feet (35') above curb level, the vertical
projection of such point upon the ground shall, in no case, be nearer to the
side or rear lot line of any property in the adjacent business or residence
district than a horizontal distance equal to the height of such point above
curb level.
   E.   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed one and seven-tenths (1.7).
   F.   Sign Regulations: Signs shall be permitted subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   Area: The gross area in square feet of all signs on a lot shall not
exceed twenty (20) times the lineal frontage in feet of such lot. However, the
gross area of all flashing signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) times the lineal
feet of frontage of such lot.
      2.   Projection: No sign shall project more than eight feet (8') from the
face of the wall of any building or structure.
      3.   Spacing: Advertising signs on any controlled access route must be
spaced at least three hundred thirty feet (330') apart on either side of the
road. All advertising signs must be kept at least five hundred feet (500') away
from an entrance or exit to a controlled access route.
   G.   Supplementary Regulations: Regulations for screening of junkyards and
automobile wrecking yards. Any land construed to be used for the purpose of
automobile wrecking yards of junkyards shall be completely screened by a solid
wall or uniformly painted solid fence at least eight feet (8') in height, and
open storage is restricted to a height that does not exceed that of the
enclosing fence. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
9-3-12: SUMMARY TABLE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
SUMMARY TABLE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
 R-1 R-2 R-3 O B-1/ B-2 B-4 RM3 RM4 A I
           R-1   R-2    R-3        O     B-1/ B-2 B-4    RM3   RM4   A    I
Setbacks:                                                          
Front yard  25    25     25         25    None     25     20    None  25   30
(ft.)
Side yard   10    10     10         9     None     5      10    10    25   None
(ft.)                                                     total total
Side yard                                                 15    10
street      25    25     25         25    None     5      total total 25   30
(ft.)
Back yard   30    30     30         25    20       20     15    15    25   20
(ft.)
                                                                  
Minimum lot       9,000  9,000                            5,000 3,000
size        9,000 single single     5,000 2,500    10,000 D.U.  D.U.  None None
(sq. ft.)
                12,000 12,000                                       
                  duplex duplex
                      6,000                                        
                         D.U. multi
                                                                  
Height      35    35     35         35    65       65     35    35    None None
(ft.)
                                                                  
Min. lot    80    80     60         50    None     None   50    25    None None
width (ft.)       single
                100                                                
                  duplex
 
NOTE: This summary is intended for a quick reference only. Many of the items on
this summary are subject to additional qualifications and limitations. The full
text of the zoning ordinance should be consulted in each instance, and shall
control over this summary.
(Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
CHAPTER 4
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
SECTION:
9-4-1: Statement of Purpose
9-4-2: Authority to Continue Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and Uses
9-4-3: Exempted Buildings, Structures and Uses
9-4-4: Restrictions of Nonconforming Uses
9-4-5: Elimination of Nonconforming Uses
9-4-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide for the regulation of
nonconforming uses, buildings and structures. It is not the purpose of this
Section to deprive the owner of any existing property of its use or maintenance
for the purpose to which it is lawfully devoted at the time of the adoption
hereof, but to provide for the regulation and, if necessary, the gradual
elimination of uses, buildings or structures which are incompatible with the
character of the districts in which they are located. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-4-2: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
Any nonconforming building, structure or use which existed lawfully at the time
of the adoption hereof and which remains nonconforming, and any such building,
structure or use which shall become nonconforming upon the adoption hereof or
of any subsequent amendment hereto, may be continued in accordance with the
regulations which follow. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-4-3: EXEMPTED BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
   A.   A nonconforming building, structure or use lawfully established on the
effective date hereof shall not be subject to the provisions of this Section
solely by reason of being nonconforming with respect to the standards
prescribed in this Title for:
      1.   Floor area.
      2.   Yards (front, side or rear).
      3.   Lot area per dwelling unit.
      4.   Lot width.
      5.   Ground floor area.
      6.   Off-street parking and loading spaces.
   B.   No building designed and used as a dwelling which was legally
established on the effective date hereof in any district shall be subject to
elimination because of the provision of this Section. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-4-4: RESTRICTIONS OF NONCONFORMING USES:
Any lawful existing use which does not conform with the regulations of the
District in which it is located shall be subject to the following provisions:
   A.   A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged nor shall it be extended to
occupy an area greater than the area occupied by such use on the effective date
hereof.
   B.   A nonconforming use shall not be moved, in whole or in part, to any
other position of the lot occupied by such use on the effective date hereof.
   C.   If a nonconforming use of land ceases for a period of six (6) months or
more and if the building or structure thereon are adaptable to a use permitted
in the district in which it is located, then a subsequent use of land must
conform to the regulations specified by this Title for the district in which it
is located.
   D.   Should a nonconforming use or structure or building, which is designed
or intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in which it is
located, deteriorate or be damaged or destroyed by fire or other casualty or
act of God to the extent that the cost of the restoration to the condition in
which it was before the occurrence will exceed fifty percent (50%) of the cost
of the restoration of the entire building new, then it shall not be restored
unless said building or structure or use shall conform to all of the
regulations in the district in which it is located.
   E.   A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use
when such nonconforming use is located in a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended for a
use permitted in the district in which it is located. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-4-5: ELIMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision in this Title, if a nonconforming
use ceases for six (6) months, it may not in any event be revived.
   B.   In a residential district where a building or structure is adaptable to
a permitted use in the district in which it is located and where a use lawfully
existed on September 8, 1975, but is permitted only in a business or
manufacturing district, such use shall be entirely discontinued on or before
September 8, 1995.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Title, no mobile home
located in a residential district shall be replaced with another mobile home.
(Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
CHAPTER 5
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-5-1: General Uses
9-5-2: Required Off-Street Parking Spaces for All Uses
9-5-3: Required Off-Street Loading
9-5-4: Restrictions on Location and Use of Off-Street Parking and Loading
Facilities
9-5-5: Additional Regulations for Required Off-Street Parking and Loading
Facilities
9-5-6: Other Regulations for Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities
9-5-1: GENERAL USES:
The regulations in this Chapter apply to all zoning districts and are adopted
for the following purposes:
   A.   To provide necessary off-street parking and loading spaces in
connection with all new residential, commercial and industrial development,
including the enlargement and/or the extension of existing residential,
commercial or industrial development within the incorporated limits of the
Village and the unincorporated territory within one and one-half (11/2) miles
of the corporate limits of Pawnee.
   B.   To provide for higher standards of all types of development within the
Village of Pawnee.
   C.   To reduce traffic congestion resulting from the use of public streets
as places for storage of private vehicles.
   D.   To alleviate substantial amounts of vehicular traffic that circulates
through and parks within residential areas for access to and from commercial
and industrial development.
Terms closely associated with this Chapter include, and shall be taken to mean:
ACCESSORY: Subordinate or incidental to the principal use.
EXTENSIONS, MAJOR REPAIRS OR SUBSTANTIAL ALTERATIONS: Reconstruction activities
increasing the floor area, seating capacity, number of dwelling units or some
other factor affecting the off-street parking or loading requirements
established hereinafter when the cost thereof, including all material and
labor, is found by the Zoning Administrator to be in an amount equal to or in
excess of twenty five percent (25%) of the last tax valuation of the pertinent
buildings or structures by the Sangamon County Assessor's Office, as equalized
by the Department of Revenue, State of Illinois.)
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE: An on-the-property space for temporary parking of a
commercial motor vehicle which is loading and unloading merchandise or
materials and which has direct access to a street, alley or other appropriate
means of access. Such space shall not be less than ten feet (10') wide and
fifty feet (50') long and shall not have less than seventeen feet (17') of
vertical clearance, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE: An on-the-property space of not less than one hundred
eighty (180) square feet of appropriate dimensions for parking an automobile,
exclusive of the access drives or aisles thereto. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-5-2: REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES FOR ALL USES:
In all districts in the Village, no building or structure shall be erected and
no extension, major repairs or substantial alterations shall be made to an
existing building or structure, unless there is already in existence upon the
lot, or unless provision is made for the location on the lot concurrently with
such erection or change, off-street parking space in accordance with
regulations and requirements set forth hereinafter:
   A.   Single-Family Dwellings: Not less than one off-street parking space for
each dwelling unit but no more than four (4) parking spaces for each single-
family dwelling unit.
   B.   Two-Family Dwellings: Not less than two (2) nor more than four (4) off-
street parking spaces for each two-family dwelling.
   C.   Multiple-Family Dwellings: Not less than one off-street parking space
for each dwelling unit, except at least twenty (20) parking spaces for
multiple-family dwellings containing twenty (20) or more dwelling units, plus
two (2) parking spaces for each additional three (3) dwelling units over twenty
(20) dwelling units.
   D.   Rooming or Lodging Houses: Not less than two (2) off-street parking
spaces, plus one off-street parking space for each three (3) persons for whom
living accommodations are provided.
   E.   Hotels, Motels and All Similar Places Offering Overnight
Accommodations: Not less than one off-street parking space for each lodging
room or dwelling unit.
   F.   Mobile Home Parks: Not less than one off-street parking space for each
mobile home.
   G.   Community Facility Uses:
      1.   Churches or Similar Places of Worship: Not less than one off-street
parking space for each eight (8) seats or at least one off-street parking space
for each one hundred (100) lineal inches of seating space.
      2.   Civic, Cultural or Historical Institutions (Nonboarding): Not less
than one off-street parking space for each eight hundred (800) square feet of
floor area used or intended to be used by the public.
      3.   Clubs and Lodges: Not less than two (2) off-street parking spaces,
plus one off-street parking space for each seven (7) seats in accordance with
design capacity of the main meeting room.
      4.   Community Center or Recreational Buildings: Not less than one off-
street parking space for each three (3) employees, plus not less than one off-
street parking space for each eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area
used by or intended to be used by the public.
      5.   Schools, Elementary or Junior High, Public or Private: Not less than
one off-street parking space for each two (2) faculty members and other full-
time employees.
      6.   Schools, High or Senior High, Public or Private: Not less than one
off-street parking space for each ten (10) students.
      7.   Public Tennis Courts (Outdoors): Not less than one off-street
parking space for each two (2) courts.
   H.   Amusement Facilities:
      1.   Amusement Parks, Golf Driving Ranges, Miniature Golf Courses: Not
less than one off-street parking space for each six hundred (600) square feet
of lot area to be used by the public. In the case of golf driving ranges,
requirements apply only to portion of range used for tees.
      2.   Dance Halls, Gymnasiums, Pool Halls, Swimming Pools: Off-street
parking spaces shall be provided equal in number to thirty percent (30%) of the
capacity in persons for such establishments.
   I.   Automotive Services, Drive-In Retail Establishments:
      1.   Automotive Service Stations (Filling Station; Gas Station): Not less
than one off-street parking space for each two (2) employees, plus one off-
street parking space for the owner or manager.
      2.   Car Wash: Not less than one off-street parking space for each three
(3) employees, plus one off-street parking space for the owner or manager and,
in addition, reserve parking spaces equal in number to three (3) times the
maximum capacity (greatest number of automobiles undergoing some phase of
washing at the same time) of the car wash.
   J.   Public Utility or Public Service Facilities: Gas or electric
substations, police and fire stations, radio or television stations, telephone
exchanges and water or sewerage pumping stations and freight stations, public
transit or truck terminals and other similar facilities: not less than one off-
street parking space for each two (2) employees, as related to the working
period when the maximum number of persons are employed on the premises.
   K.   Office Building and Retail or Service Establishments:
      1.   Professional, Governmental and Wholesale Offices as Well as Business
Offices, Retail or Service Establishments: Not less than one off-street parking
space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area used or intended to
be used for service to the public as customers, patrons and clients, plus at
least one additional off-street parking space for each two (2) employees.
      2.   Dental, Medical, Chiropractic or Osteopathic Offices or Clinics: Not
less than one off-street parking space for each examining or treatment room,
plus one off-street parking space for each doctor and employee in the building.
   L.   Schools: Business, Dance, Music and Trade: Not less than one off-street
parking space for each two (2) employees, plus one additional off-street
parking space for each five (5) students, based on the maximum number of
students attending classes on the premises at any one time during any twenty
four (24) hour period.
   M.   Wholesale, Manufacturing and Industrial Plants: (Including warehouse
and storage buildings and yards, contractor equipment and lumber yards,
blueprinting, printing engraving, soft drink, bottling plants, breweries,
fabricating plants, research laboratories, and all other establishments devoted
to producing, processing, cleaning, servicing, treating or repairing materials,
goods or products.) Not less than one off-street parking space for each three
(3) employees, as related to the working period when the maximum number of
persons are employed on the premises. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-5-3: REQUIRED OFF-STREET LOADING:
In all districts, no building or structure shall be erected and no extensions,
major repairs or substantial alterations shall be made to an existing building
or structure in any district unless there is already in existence upon the lot
or unless provision is made for the location on the lot concurrently with such
erection or change, off-street loading space in accordance with minimum
requirements set forth hereinafter:
   A.   Rooming or Lodging: No less than one off-street loading space for each
building having ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square
feet of floor area, plus one additional off-street loading space for each
additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof.
   B.   Multiple Family Residence, Hotels, Motels, Private Clubs and Lodges,
Tourist Homes and Cabins, Transient Trailer Parks and all Other Similar Places
Offering Overnight Accommodations: Not less than one off-street loading space
for each building having ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred fifty thousand
(150,000) square feet of floor area, plus one additional off-street loading
space for each additional one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of
floor area or portion thereof.
   C.   Community Facility Uses, Such as Aquariums; Art Galleries; Libraries;
Museums; Auditoriums; Assembly Halls; Churches; Civic, Cultural or Historical
Institutions; Clubs (Nonbusiness); Colleges, Junior and Senior; Universities;
Community Centers; Recreational Buildings; Convents; Hospitals; Sanitariums;
Nursing Homes; Schools and Similar Institutions: Not less than one off-street
loading space for each building having ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred
fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of floor area, plus additional off-street
loading spaces for each one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of
floor area or fraction thereof.
   D.   Amusement Facility Uses such as Fairgrounds, Race Tracks, Bowling
Alleys, Dance Halls, Gymnasiums, Theaters (Indoor) and Similar Uses: Not less
than one off-street loading space for each building having ten thousand
(10,000) to one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of floor area,
plus additional off-street loading spaces for each one hundred fifty thousand
(150,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof.
   E.   Public Utility and Public Service Facility Uses:
      1.   Airports, Railroad Passenger and Freight Stations, Public Transit,
Bus and Motor Freight Terminals, Post Offices: Not less than one off-street
loading space for each building having ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred
fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of floor area, plus one additional off-
street loading space for each additional one hundred fifty thousand (150,000)
square feet of floor area or portion thereof.
   F.   Banks and Business Offices (Nonretail) including Professional and
Government Offices, Medical Clinics: Not less than one off-street loading space
for each building having ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet of floor area, plus one additional off-street loading
space for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor
area or portion thereof.
   G.   Retail or Service Establishments and Eating and Drinking
Establishments: Off-street loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with
the following schedule:
 
Square feet of Floor Area Minimum Number of Spaces
5,000 - 10,000         1
10,001 - 25,000           2
25,001 - 40,000           3
40,001 - 100,000          4
 
For each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area,
or fraction thereof in such a building, one additional off-street loading space
shall be provided.
   H.   School; Business, Dance, Music or Trade: Not less than one off-street
loading space for each building having ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred
fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of floor area, plus one additional off-
street loading space for each additional one hundred fifty thousand (150,000)
square feet of floor area or portion thereof.
   I.   Wholesaling, Manufacturing and Industrial Plant, Including Warehouse
and Storage Buildings and Yards, Contractor Equipment and Lumber Yards,
Blueprinting, Printing, Engraving, Soft Drink Bottling Plants, Breweries,
Fabricating Plants, Research Laboratories, and All Other Establishments Devoted
to Producing, Processing, Cleaning, Servicing, Treating or Repairing Materials,
Goods or Products: At least one off-street loading space for each building
having five thousand (5,000) to forty thousand (40,000) square feet of floor
area; at least two (2) off-street loading spaces for each building having forty
thousand (40,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area;
plus one additional off-street loading space for each additional one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. (Ord. 93-11,
6-14-93; 1994 Code)
9-5-4: RESTRICTIONS ON LOCATION AND USE OF OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
FACILITIES:
   A.   Restrictions on Off-Street Parking Facilities Location and Use: In
connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or
substantially altered and which requires off-street parking spaces, such off-
street parking space shall be provided in accordance with the following
restrictions:
      1.   Location: Parking spaces required for single- or two-family dwelling
units shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling served. Parking spaces
required for all other uses, in the Village of Pawnee, which were established
after September 8, 1975, shall be located on the same lot as the use served.
Uses other than single- or two-family dwellings which were in existence on
September 8, 1975, which are subsequently altered or enlarged and new uses in
the Village may be served in accordance with requirements of this Title, by
off-street parking facilities located on land other than the lot on which the
building or use served is located; provided, such facilities are located within
three hundred feet (300') walking distance from the main entrance to the use
served.
      2.   Use: Except as may otherwise be provided for parking trucks or in
connection with special uses, off-street parking facilities, required as
accessory to uses listed herein, shall be solely for the parking of passenger
automobiles of patrons, clients, occupants or employees.
   B.   Restrictions on Off-Street Loading Facilities Location and Use: In
connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or
substantially altered and which requires the receipt or distribution of
materials or merchandise by trucks or other similar motor vehicles, off-street
loading spaces shall be provided with not less than the minimum requirements
specified herein.
      1.   Location: All required off-street loading spaces shall be located on
the same lot as the use to be served and no portion of the vehicles shall
project into a street, alley or other public right of way. In an industrial
district, no off-street loading space for vehicles of more than two (2) ton
capacity shall be located less than fifty feet (50') from any residential
district nor shall it be located in a required front yard or side yard.
      2.   Use: Except as may otherwise be provided for parking trucks or in
connection with special uses, off-street loading facilities, required as
accessory to uses listed herein, shall be solely for the receipt or
distribution by private, public or commercial motor trucks of materials or
merchandise. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-5-5: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
FACILITIES:
In connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or
substantially altered and which requires off-street parking and loading spaces,
such off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with
the additional regulations hereinafter specified.
   A.   Additional Off-Street Parking Regulations:
      1.   Size: A required off-street parking space shall be at least nine
feet in width and at least twenty feet in length (9' x 20'), exclusive of
access drives, aisles, ramps, columns and office or work area. Such space shall
have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7').
      2.   Access:
         a.   Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon
an alley or driveway. Means of access shall be subject to review by the Village
Engineer.
         b.   A parking area containing four (4) or more off-street parking
spaces shall have vehicular access to it over a street, alley or driveway
containing all-weather, hard-surfaced pavement. The location and route of
access to such a parking area shall be identified. No driveway access to public
property shall have a width exceeding twenty four feet (24'), exclusive of
curbs.
      3.   Repair and Service: No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall
be permitted in off-street parking area, other than the owner of a lot
repairing his own vehicle. No gasoline or motor oil shall be sold in
conjunction with any accessory parking facilities unless such facilities are
located within a completely enclosed building, in which case gasoline and motor
oil may be sold to the users of such facilities within such building; provided,
that no advertising sign is visible from outside the building, and provided
further, that all gasoline pumps shall be effectively screened from view from
the street.
      4.   Computation: When determination of the number of off-street parking
spaces required by this Title results in a requirement of a fractional space,
any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less may be disregarded, while a fraction in
excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one off-street parking space.
      5.   In Yards: Off-street parking spaces may be located in required
yards, except no vehicle shall be parked closer than five feet (5') from the
street.
      6.   Collective Provisions for Nonresidential Uses: Off-street parking
facilities for separate uses may be provided collectively if the total number
of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the separate requirements of
each such use and if all regulations governing the location of accessory
parking spaces in relation to the use served are observed. But no off-street
parking space, or portion thereof, shall serve as the required space for more
than one use unless otherwise authorized in accordance with this Title.
      7.   Design and Maintenance:
         a.   Surfacing: Except for single-family dwellings, all open off-
street parking areas shall be improved with a compacted macadam base or
equivalent, of not less than four inches (4") thick, with an asphaltic concrete
surface or a comparable hard-surfaced all-weather material.
         b.   Open and Enclosed Parking Spaces: Off-street parking spaces,
located on the same lot as occupied by the principal use, may be open to the
sky or enclosed in a building.
         c.   Screening and Landscaping: All open off-street parking spaces
containing more than four (4) parking spaces shall be effectively screened for
privacy, light and sound on each side and adjoining or fronting on any
residential or institutional use by a solid wall or solid fence not less than
six feet (6') in height and shall have wheel stops of masonry, steel or timber
placed not nearer than five feet (5') from the street line in districts where a
front yard is not required or from side lot lines.
         d.   Lighting: Illumination of an off-street parking area shall be
arranged so as not to reflect rays of light into adjacent residential districts
and streets. All lighting shall be extinguished no later than thirty (30)
minutes after the close of business of the principal use being served, except
as may be otherwise authorized by the Village Board.
   B.   Additional Off-Street Loading Regulations:
      1.   Size: A required off-street loading space shall be at least ten feet
in width and at least fifty feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering
space, and shall have vertical clearance of at least seventeen feet
(10'x50'x17').
      2.   Access: Each required off-street loading space shall be designed
with means of motor vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movements.
      3.   Repair and Service: Neither storage of any kind nor repair work or
service of any kind on motor vehicles shall be permitted within any required
loading space.
      4.   Design and Maintenance Surfacing:
         a.   Surfacing: All open off-street loading spaces shall be improved
with a compacted macadam base not less than eight inches (8") thick or
equivalent, with not less than two inches (2") of asphaltic-concrete surfacing
or a comparable all-weather, dustless material.
         b.   Allocated Spaces: Space allowed to any off-street loading space
shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for
any off-street parking facilities or portions thereof. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
9-5-6: OTHER REGULATIONS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES:
The number of off-street parking or loading spaces required upon the erection
or substantial alteration of a building shall not be reduced, except upon
written approval of the Zoning Administrator after proof that, by reason of
diminution in floor area, seating, number of employees or change in other
factors controlling the requirements for off-street parking or loading spaces,
the proposed reduction is consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.
Whenever an increase in floor factors or change in the use of a building or
structure creates a need for an increase of more than twenty five percent (25%)
of the number of off-street parking or loading spaces as determined by the
requirements of this Chapter, more off-street parking or loading facilities
shall be provided within six (6) months. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
CHAPTER 6
MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Satellite Dish Antenna and Earth Station Regulations
9-6-2: Swimming Pool Regulations
9-6-3: Porch, Deck and Shed Regulations
9-6-4: Fences
9-6-5: Solar Energy Systems
9-6-1: SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA AND EARTH STATION REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definitions:
      DISH ANTENNA: An antenna shaped like a saucer, spherical section or
parabola or a similar antenna used to receive electronic signals from
satellites.
      EARTH STATION: Refers to a dish antenna together with its associated
base, mounting and aiming hardware and electronics.
      GROUND MOUNTED: Refers to an earth station installed on the ground or on
one or more pedestals, posts or legs placed on the ground.
      RECEIVER: Refers to an electronic device which receives electronic
signals from an earth station.
      ROOF MOUNTED: Refers to a dish antenna or earth station installed
directly on a roof of a primary or accessory building or on a pole or tower
rigidly attached to a primary or accessory building.
   B.   Regulations Applicable to All Dish Antennas and Earth Stations:
      1.   All earth stations shall be ground mounted or roof mounted. No earth
station shall be mounted upon an appurtenance or structure such as a chimney,
freestanding tower, tree or spire.
      2.   No earth station designed for ground mounting shall be installed
upon the roof of any structure (including, but not limited to, any garage,
residential dwelling, church, school, apartment building, hospital or any other
building or structure).
      3.   There shall be only one earth station per lot, premises or parcel of
land.
      4.   No earth station shall be linked, physically or electronically, to a
receiver which is not located on the same lot, premises or parcel of land as is
the earth station.
      5.   Wiring between an earth station and a receiver shall be placed at
least four inches (4") beneath the surface of the ground within rigid conduit.
      6.   All earth stations shall be bonded to a grounding rod.
      7.   No form of advertising or identification shall be allowed on earth
stations other than a manufacturer's small identification plate, or other
identifying marks not exceeding one square foot in size. Dish antennas must be
neutral (gray, beige, black or off-white) in color.
   C.   Regulations Applicable to Ground Mounted Earth Stations Only:
      1.   Ground mounted earth stations shall not be located in a front yard,
or in a side yard which adjoins a street or a road.
      2.   No part of any ground mounted earth station (including posts,
pedestals or legs) may be closer to any side or rear property line than the
diameter of its dish antenna.
      3.   Ground mounted dish antennas may be no greater than ten feet (10')
in diameter. The bottom of a ground mounted dish antenna may be no more than
six feet (6') from the ground level.
      4.   Ground mounted earth stations shall be designed to withstand a wind
force of seventy five (75) miles per hour without the use of supporting guy
wires.
      5.   Space required for ground mounted earth stations shall not be
considered when calculating square footage requirements for accessory
buildings.
   D.   Regulations Applicable To Roof Mounted Earth Stations Only:
      1.   The bottom of a roof mounted dish antenna shall not exceed a height
of more than two feet (2') above the roof of the building on which it is
mounted or to which its pole or tower is attached.
      2.   A roof mounted dish antenna shall not exceed six feet (6') in
diameter.
      3.   Roof mounted earth stations shall be designed to withstand a wind
force of eighty five (85) miles per hour without the use of supporting
guywires.
      4.   Any driving motor used for a roof mounted earth station shall be
limited to one hundred ten (110) volt maximum power design and be encased in
protective guards.
   E.   Trial Period And Permits:
      1.   Prior to the installation of any earth station, the owner or
installer thereof shall pay to the village clerk a permit fee specified in
chapter 7 of this title and shall submit reasonable evidence to the director of
building and zoning that the installation will comply with the provisions of
this title. If satisfied, the zoning administrator shall issue an installation
permit, but may revoke the permit during or after installation for violations
of this title.
      2.   An earth station loaned or rented on a trial basis not to exceed ten
(10) days is not subject to any of the regulations of this chapter; except,
that it must be grounded. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993; amd. 1994 Code)
9-6-2: SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definitions:
      INFLATABLE POOL: A swimming pool capable of having a water depth of
thirty six inches (36") or less, and which is erected by means of inflation.
      JUVENILE POOL: A receptacle for water or an artificial pool of water
having a depth of less than two feet (2'), intended for the purpose of
immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings.
      PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL: A swimming pool, including inflatable
pools, maintained by an individual primarily for the sole use of his or her
household and guests and not for profit.
      PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL: A swimming pool maintained by individuals for the
use of more than one household, or maintained by a club for the use of its
members, or maintained by a business for profit, or maintained by a school,
park district, municipality or other public not for profit organizations.
      SWIMMING POOL: A receptacle for water, or an artificial pool of water
having a depth at any point of more than two feet (2'), intended for the
purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and
including all appurtenant equipment constructed, installed and maintained in or
above the ground inside or outside of a building.
   B.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any swimming pool unless permits shall have been
obtained from the village.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any public swimming pool within the village unless
any required permits shall first have also been obtained from the state.
      3.   No permit is required for a juvenile pool or an inflatable pool.
   C.   Drawings, Plans And Permits:
      1.   Each application for a swimming pool permit shall be accompanied by
a permit fee specified in chapter 7 of this title and by a set of plans or
drawings which shall be drawn to scale. All distances and dimensions shall be
accurately figured and drawings shall be explicit and complete showing the lot
lines, distance from the residence(s), location of the fence and pool walk. The
pool, walk and fence construction, electrical system and all relevant
appurtenances pertaining to the pool, sufficient to show whether the swimming
pool will comply with this title.
   D.   Location Restrictions:
      1.   Private residential swimming pools shall be permitted in single-
family residential zones only. No portion of the pool shall be located less
than four feet (4') from a side or rear lot line. Pools and appurtenant
equipment shall not be permitted in any front yard.
      2.   Public swimming pools shall be permitted in residential and business
zones; except, that any public swimming pool operated for the purpose of profit
or operated in connection with a business operated for profit shall not be
operated in a single- family residential zone. No portion of a public swimming
pool or its appurtenant equipment shall be located less than fifteen feet (15')
from a side or rear lot line. Public swimming pools shall not be located in a
front yard.
   E.   Fences:
      1.   A swimming pool shall be completely enclosed by a fence:
         a.   Which is erected along the periphery of the swimming pool and any
immediately adjacent walk, deck or terrace area appurtenant to the swimming
pool; or
         b.   Which completely encloses a rear yard in which the swimming pool
is located.
The fence shall be at least thirty six inches (36") in height and shall be
designed and constructed to render the swimming pool inaccessible to children
under six (6) years of age. All fence openings shall be equipped with gates and
all gates shall be equipped with self-closing devices and shall have latches.
      2.   Swimming pools shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection
E1 of this section if they: a) are above ground level in whole or in part, and
b) have a walkway or deck area greater than thirty inches (30") in height with
integral guards or rails and a means of egress which can be removed and locked
while the swimming pool is not in use. Persons with such exempt pools ensure
that ladders and other means of ingress or egress are kept removed or locked
when the swimming pools are not in use.
   F.   Electrical Requirements:
      1.   Where electrical conductors are adjacent to a swimming pool or
juvenile pool, they shall have proper insulation and shall be ground fault
protected. No overhead electrical wires shall be permitted within fifteen feet
(15') of a swimming pool.
   G.   Safety Precautions: Swimming pools and juvenile pools shall be
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition.
   H.   Inspection Requirements: The zoning administrator may, upon completion
of construction of a pool or upon receipt of information that a pool is
nonconforming and with prior notice to the owner, inspect a swimming pool to
determine whether it is in compliance with the provisions of this title. (Ord.
06-04, 6-26-2006)
   I.   Nonconforming Structures: Swimming pools erected prior to the effective
date hereof, which do not meet the fence, electrical or safety requirements of
this title shall be made to conform to such requirements within ninety (90)
days of the effective date hereof. No swimming pool existing as of the
effective date hereof shall be rendered illegal solely because of its violation
of location or setback provisions of this title. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
9-6-3: PORCH, DECK AND SHED REGULATIONS:
   A.   Porches and decks, when attached to a principal dwelling, or when any
part thereof is within eighteen inches (18") of a principal dwelling, shall be
considered part of such principal dwelling for setback purposes and for
purposes of calculating required yards in accordance with the provisions of
this zoning title. However, except for enclosed porches and decks, the area of
a porch or deck shall not be included in the gross floor area of a structure.
   B.   Porches and decks not attached to or within eighteen inches (18") of a
principal dwelling shall be considered accessory buildings for all purposes of
this zoning title.
   C.   The construction or enclosure of a porch or deck, whether within
subsection A or B of this section, shall require a building permit. Each
application for a permit shall be accompanied by the permit fee specified in
chapter 7 of this title and with a set of plans or drawings drawn to scale. All
distances and dimensions shall be accurately figured and drawings shall be made
explicit and complete showing the relative locations of the residence, the
porch or deck and any existing accessory buildings and the lot lines.
   D.   A shed with sixty five (65) square feet or more floor area shall
require a building permit. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
9-6-4: FENCES:
   A.   Requirements In Residential Districts: No fence may be erected within
the village and within a residential zoning district which does not comply with
the following specifications:
      1.   Any fence erected in a required front yard shall be at least fifty
percent (50%) open, and no fence erected in a required front yard may exceed
four feet (4') in height measured from ground level. A clearance of three
inches (3") shall be allowed for installation purposes and shall not count in
determining the height of a fence. No privacy fence may be erected in the front
of a residence on the same zoning lot. For through lots, that yard which is
used as a rear yard, and which would normally be considered a rear yard for
lots other than through lots, shall be considered a rear yard for purposes of
erecting a fence.
      2.   Any privacy fence erected on the side street of a corner lot shall
be restricted to the same setback requirements as a building or structure.
      3.   No fence may be erected which exceeds eight feet (8') in height
above ground level.
      4.   No fence may be constructed with barbed wire, metal spikes or any
other sharp pointed materials. All chainlink fences shall be installed with the
knuckle portion of the fence up and with the barb portion of the fence at or
near the ground. No fence may be electrified.
      5.   No fence may be erected which will hinder access to any easement or
right of way for a public or village owned utility including, but not limited
to, gas, water, sewer, telephone, electric and cable television.
      6.   All fence posts, poles and other upright members and elements, if
not hidden, shall face the fence owner's side of the fence and not the adjacent
property owner's side of the fence.
   B.   Requirements In Commercial And Industrial Districts: No fence may be
erected within the village and within a commercial or industrial zoning
district, which does not comply with the following specifications:
      1.   Any fence erected in a required front yard shall be at least fifty
percent (50%) open.
      2.   Any privacy fence erected on the side street of a corner lot shall
be restricted to the same setback requirements as a building or structure.
      3.   No fence may exceed a height of eight feet (8') above ground level.
A clearance of three inches (3") shall be allowed for installation purposes and
shall not count in determining the height of a fence.
      4.   No fence may be constructed with barbed wire, metal spikes or any
other sharp pointed materials unless the sharp pointed materials are erected at
least six feet (6') above ground level, but not higher than eight feet (8')
above ground level. All chainlink fences shall be installed with the barbed
portion of a fence at or near the ground unless it is installed at least six
feet (6') above ground level. No fence may be electrified.
      5.   No fence may be erected which will hinder access to any easement or
right of way for a public or village owned utility including, but not limited
to, gas, water, sewer, telephone, electric and cable television.
      6.   All fence posts, poles, and other upright members and elements, if
not hidden, shall face the fence owner's sine of the fence and not the adjacent
property owner's side of the fence.
   C.   Permits:
      1.   No fence may be erected unless a fence permit is obtained from the
zoning administrator. The individual or agency actually constructing the fence
shall be responsible for obtaining the permit. No work shall start until the
permit has been obtained. Any individual or agency starting work prior to
applying for, and receiving said permit shall be subject to a twenty five
dollar ($25.00) fine. This fine may be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any
additional fines or penalties that are provided for in this chapter.
   D.   Recreational Purpose Fences: Fences erected for purposes of providing
fencing around sports or recreational facilities or areas as listed below,
shall not be subject to the height restrictions specified elsewhere in this
section; provided, that such facility or area is not located within twenty feet
(20') of a zoning lot corner formed by the intersection of any two (2) street
lines, the fence is at least seventy five percent (75%) open and a fence permit
is obtained. The maximum height of a fence is listed by each sports or
recreational facility or areas as follows:
 
Use                                                    Maximum Height (Feet)
Baseball diamond backstop (public or private)          16
Elementary, middle or high schools (public or private) 8
Swimming pools (public)                                8
Tennis court (public or private)                       12
 
   E.   Swimming Pool Fences: Where there is a conflict between this section
and section
9-6-2 of this chapter relating to swimming pool fences, section
9-6-2 of this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993; amd. Ord. 12-14,
7-23-2012)
9-6-5: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
A.   Definitions.
 
                                       A commercial facility, on a parcel(s) of
                                       five acres or more that converts
                                       sunlight to electricity, whether by
                                       photovoltaics, concentrating solar
COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (CSES): thermal devices, or various experimental
                                       technologies for on-site or off-site use
                                       with the primary purpose of selling
                                       wholesale or retail generated
                                       electricity.
                                       A single parcel of land greater than
COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (CSES)  five (5) acres, or two (2) or more
PROJECT AREA:                          contiguous parcels of land totaling a
                                       minimum of five (5) acres on which a
                                       CSES will be constructed and operated.
                                       Radiant energy received from the sun
SOLAR ENERGY:                          that can be collected in the form of
                                       heat or light by a solar collector.
                                       The components and subsystems required
                                       to convert solar energy into electric or
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES):             thermal energy suitable for use. The
                                       area of the system includes all the land
                                       inside the perimeter of the system,
                                       which extends to any fencing.
SOLAR PANEL:                           A device for the direct conversion of
                                       solar energy into electricity.
 
   B.   Commercial Solar Energy System (CSES).
      1.   Purpose and Intent. The purpose of these regulations is to provide a
uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the installation and use of
CSESs designed for commercial energy production. The intent of these
regulations is to protect the public health, safety, and community welfare
while allowing development of solar energy resources for commercial purposes.
      2.   Conditional Permitted Use (CPU). CSESs shall require a CPU within
the A-l or I zoning districts, and shall be subject to the procedures and
standards included in Section 9-7-8 of the Village Code, unless otherwise
stated in this Chapter.
      3.   Special Requirements. CSESs are subject to the following
requirements:
         a.   Height. Shall not exceed eighteen feet at maximum tilt of the
solar panel(s).
         b.   Setbacks. The front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be a
minimum of fifty feet from the property lines which form the outside perimeter
of a CSES. The CSES shall not be located within two hundred and fifty (250)
feet of an existing dwelling. For properties participating in the solar farm,
no additional separation from any existing dwelling or existing principal
building is required except as provided for in Section 9-2-6 (Yards, Generally)
in effect on the date the CSES building permit is submitted.
         c.   Fencing. A fence of at least six feet in height shall enclose and
secure the CSES. Hazardous fencing such as barbed wire, electrically charged
fencing or fencing with metal spikes is allowed providing such fencing is
located at a height of at least six (6) feet above grade level.
         d.   Screening. A landscaping screen shall be provided for any part of
the CSES that is visible to and located within five hundred (500) feet of an
existing dwelling. The landscaping screen shall be located between the required
fencing and the perimeter of the CSES Project Area. The screening shall include
a continuous line of native evergreen foliage and/or native shrubs and/or
native trees and/or any existing wooded area and/or plantings of tall native
grasses and other native flowering plants. The landscaping shall not be
required if the CSES is not visible to a dwelling by virtue of the existing
topography as determined by the Village Zoning Administrator.
         e.   Lighting. If lighting is provided at the project, lighting shall
be shielded and downcast such that the light does not spill onto the adjacent
parcel(s) or highway(s).
         f.   Noise. Noise levels measured at the property line shall not
exceed fifty decibels when located adjacent to an existing residence or
residential district.
         g.   Installation and Design. The CSES shall be designed and located
in order to prevent glare toward any inhabited buildings on adjacent properties
as well as adjacent highways.
         h.   All wiring between solar panels and the solar facility substation
shall be underground whenever possible.
         I.   Outdoor Storage. Only the outdoor storage of materials, vehicles,
and equipment that directly support the operation and maintenance of the solar
energy system shall be allowed.
         j.   Vegetation. The land that supports solar arrays shall be planted
in native vegetation with a priority towards low-lying, deep-rooted plants,
grasses, and flowers that have the potential to improve soil health. In
addition, these plantings should support honeybees, butterflies, hummingbirds,
and other pollinators whose populations are facing threats.
         k.   Proof an Agriculture Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA)
pertaining to the construction of a commercial solar energy facility has been
executed with the Illinois Department of Agriculture.
         l.   Annual review and reporting.
            (1)   The applicant, owner, and/or operator of a CSES project shall
submit to the Village on the first Monday of July of each year following CSES
project approval a report regarding CSES maintenance and operation. This report
shall include:
               (A)   Any physical modifications to the CSES and/or its
infrastructure;
               (B)   Complaints pertaining to setbacks, noise, appearance,
safety, lighting, and use of any public roads, received by the applicant, owner
and/or operator concerning the CSES, and the resolution of such complaints;
               (C)   Calls for emergency services, including the nature of the
emergency and how it was resolved;
               (D)   A report verifying compliance with the approved vegetation
plan. The report shall be completed by an expert with applicable training and
knowledge to evaluate the status of the vegetation. The applicant, owners, and/
or operator shall submit the name and applicable credentials of the expert to
the Zoning Administrator for approval, and shall pay all costs associated with
completing the evaluation and report;
               (E)   Status of liability insurance; and,
               (F)   Any other information that the Village might reasonably
request.
            (2)   Within thirty days of the receipt of this annual report, the
Zoning Administrator shall review the report and conduct an on-site field
review of the CSES project. The Zoning Administrator shall compile a written
report of the findings and within sixty days of the receipt of the report shall
submit the report to the Village Board.
            (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall charge a fee for this annual
review in the amount of no more than five hundred dollars per CSES project
area. This fee shall be paid to the Village by the CSES applicant, owner, and/
or operator at the time of annual report submission. Failure to provide the
annual report and required fee shall be considered a cessation of operations.
            (4)   The applicant, owner, and/or operator of an CSES project
shall provide the Zoning Administrator access to the CSES project area for the
purposes described above. Failure to provide access shall be deemed a violation
of this ordinance.
      4.   Certification. CSESs shall conform to applicable industry standards,
including those from the UL and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), as well
as all applicable Village, county, state, and national construction and
electric codes shall be followed.
      5.   Safety. All CSESs shall provide the following at all locked
entrances:
         a.   A visible “High Voltage” warning sign;
         b.   Name(s) and phone number(s) for the electric utility provider;
         c.   Name(s) and phone number(s) for the site operator;
         d.   The facility’s 911 address, GPS coordinates; and,
         e.   A knox box with keys.
      6.   Petition. The petition for a Conditional Permitted Use for a CSES
shall include:
         a.   A written summary of the project including:
            (1)   a general description of the project, including its
approximate nameplate generating capacity;
            (2)   Number of CSES panels and nameplate generating capacity of
each panel;
            (3)   Number of CSES support piers; and,
            (4)   The system height.
         b.   The name(s), address(s), and phone number(s) of the owner and/or
CSES operator.
         c.   A site plan of the CSES site showing:
            (1)   Boundaries of the site;
            (2)   Approximate location of CSES panels and piers;
            (3)   All proposed CSES structures - including, but not limited to,
the project substation, interconnect substation, battery energy storage system
(if applicable), and location and voltage of any overhead transmission lines;
            (4)   Property lines;
            (5)   Setback lines; and,
            (6)   Location of all existing structures with their uses
identified.
         d.   All other information contained in the Village Zoning Code as may
be required to file a petition.
      7.   Decommissioning Plan. Prior to applying for a building permit, the
CSES project owner/operator shall submit a decommissioning plan to the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall review the plan for completeness
and refer it to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The plan shall include:
         a.   A description of the plan to remove the CSES equipment and
restore the land to its previous use upon the end of the project’s life, as
stated in the Ordinance granting the Conditional Permitted Use;
         b.   Provisions for the removal of structures, debris, cabling, and
associated equipment on the surface and to a level of not less than five feet
below the surface, and the sequence in which removal is expected to occur;
         c.   Provisions for the restoration of the soil and vegetation;
         d.   An estimate of the decommissioning costs in future dollars at the
time of filing certified by a professional engineer who shall use professional
standards in compliance with State of Illinois law, with all costs borne by the
applicant;
         e.   A written financial plan approved to ensure that funds will be
available for decommissioning and land restoration;
         f.   A provision that the terms of the decommissioning plan shall be
binding upon the owner or operator and any of their successors, assigns, or
heirs;
         g.   Upon review of the decommissioning plan, the Zoning Board shall
recommend an amount to be held in a bond, escrow or other acceptable form of
funds approved by the Village Board to the Village Board. The plan shall state
that the project owner/operator shall provide the Village with financial
assurance to cover the estimated costs of decommissioning of the CSES and that
the Village shall have access to the project and to the funds to effect or
complete decommissioning one year after cessation of operations; and,
         h.   The applicant shall provide the Village with a new estimate of
the cost of decommissioning the CSES project every five years under the same
conditions as set forth in this Section above. Salvage value of structures,
electrical wire and other appurtenances shall be considered with in the cost
estimate calculations. Upon receipt of this new estimate, the Village may
require, and the applicant, owner, and/or operator of the CSES project shall
provide, a new financial plan for decommissioning acceptable to the Village.
Failure to provide an acceptable financial plan shall be considered a cessation
of operations.
      8.   Certificate of Compliance. Before any permit is issued, the
following shall be submitted to the appropriate Village officer for review:
         a.   Site plan with all items previously required in the petition.
Additional items to be included are:
            (1)   All CSES structures including, but not limited to, the
project solar panels, substation, interconnect substation, battery energy
storage system (if applicable), and location and voltage of any overhead
transmission lines;
            (2)   Ancillary equipment;
            (3)   Transmission lines;
            (4)   Wells;
            (5)   Septic fields;
            (6)   Field tile location;
            (7)   Fence plan;
            (8)   Vegetation plan;
            (9)   Landscaping screening plan;
            (10)   Existing easements;
            (11)   Floodplain location and elevation; and,
            (12)   Wetland location, if any.
         b.   Emergency plan. The site and emergency plan shall be submitted to
the local fire protection district(s) and/or department(s) whose jurisdiction
is included in whole or in part within the CSES project area. Any specialized
training necessary will be provided at the operator’s expense.
         c.   All required studies, reports, certifications, and approvals
demonstrating compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
         d.   After an approved final inspection of all building permits, a
certificate of compliance shall be issued.
   C.   Indemnification And Liability.
      1.   The applicant, owner, and/or operator of the CSES project shall
defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the Village of Pawnee and its officials
from and against any and all claims, demands, losses, suits, causes of action,
damages, injuries, costs, expenses, and liabilities whatsoever, including
attorney’s fees, without limitation, arising out of acts or omissions of the
applicant, owner, and/or operator associated with the construction and/or
operation of the CSES project.
      2.   The applicant, owner, and/or operator of the CSES project shall
maintain a current general liability policy covering bodily injury and property
damage with limits of at least two million dollars per occurrence and two
million dollars in the aggregate. Evidence of liability coverage must be
reported to the Village on an annual basis, and any loss of coverage must be
reported within three working days of loss. Failure to maintain coverage shall
be considered a cessation of operations.
   D.   Cessation Of Operations. If any CSES provided for in this chapter has
not been in operation and producing electricity for at least two hundred and
seventy consecutive days, it shall be removed. The Zoning Administrator shall
notify the owner to remove the system. Within thirty days, the owner shall
either submit evidence showing that the system has been operating and producing
electricity or remove it. If the owner fails to or refuses to remove the solar
energy system, the violation shall be referred to the Village Attorney for
enforcement, with attorney’s fees and costs to be borne by the owner/operator
should the Village substantially prevail in any lawsuit seeking enforcement.
   E.   Penalties.
      A failure to obtain applicable permit(s) for the construction of a CSES
or failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The Village Attorney
may bring an action to enforce compliance of the requirements of this chapter
by filing an action before the Sangamon Circuit Court for an injunction
requiring conformance with this chapter or seek such other order as the court
deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      Any person who violates this chapter shall be fined not less than two
hundred and fifty dollars or more than five hundred dollars. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues.
      Nothing herein shall prevent the Village from seeking such other legal
remedies available to prevent or remedy any violations of this chapter. (Ord.
23-07, 4-10-2023)
CHAPTER 7
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
9-7-1: Building Permits And Fees
9-7-2: Duties Of The Zoning Administrator
9-7-3: Zoning Board Of Appeals
9-7-4: Appeals
9-7-5: Variances
9-7-6: Plan Commission
9-7-7: Amendments
9-7-8: Conditional Permitted Uses
9-7-9: Fees For Variances, Appeals And Amendments
9-7-10: Violation, Penalty And Enforcement
9-7-11: Nuisances
9-7-1: BUILDING PERMITS AND FEES:
   A.   No building shall be erected or substantially altered unless a building
permit has been issued by the zoning administrator stating that the building
complies with this zoning title. For purposes of this subsection, the
construction of a garage, deck, porch, patio, fence, satellite dish or swimming
pool shall be deemed an alteration of a building. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
   B.   Initiation: An application for a variance may be made by any person,
firm or corporation requesting or intending to request application for a
building permit or by a person who has been notified by the Zoning
Administrator that his property is not in compliance with this Title. Any
applicant for a variance of the provisions of this code must submit a drawing
showing the provisions of any request for a variance, and must locate the
survey pins on the corners of the subject property. If the pins can not be
located, the applicant must obtain a new survey of the property to place the
pins.
      THE APPLICANT CERTIFIES THAT THE STRUCTURE TO WHICH THIS APPLICATION
APPLIES HAS BEEN DESIGNED AND SHALL BE BUILT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE, 2012 EDITION, AND THE CURRENT EDITION OF THE
ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE. ALL SUBCONTRACTORS AND THE OWNER HAVE BEEN OR WILL BE
NOTIFIED OF THIS CERTIFICATION.
      THE APPLICANT CERTIFIES THAT THE STRUCTURE TO WHICH THIS APPLICATION
APPLIES HAS BEEN DESIGNED AND SHALL BE BUILT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE FOR ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLINGS, 2012 EDITION
AND THE CURRENT EDITION OF THE ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE. ALL SUBCONTRACTORS AND
THE OWNER HAVE BEEN OR WILL BE NOTIFIED OF THIS CERTIFICATION.
Each application for building permit shall be accompanied by a fee, as follows:
Type Of Construction Fee
Type Of Construction                                                   Fee
Addition of a deck, porch or patio or a shed with 65 square feet or    $ 10.00
greater floor area
Alteration of a commercial, industrial or other structure other than a 50.00
residential structure
Alteration of a residential structure                                  25.00
Construction of a fence, swimming pool or satellite dish               10.00
New commercial, industrial or other structure other than a residential 100.00
structure
New residential structure                                              50.00
Other                                                                  10.00
 
(Ord. 12-13, 8-27-2012)
   C.   Upon receipt of an application for building permit, the zoning
administrator shall refer the application to the various village utility
departments and/or JULIE (joint utility locating information for excavating) to
determine whether the proposed structure would interfere with any installed
utility or any easement. No permit shall issue if such interference is present
unless consented to in writing by the affected public utility or where a
village owned utility is involved, by the village.
   D.   Within ten (10) days of receipt of an application for building permit
accompanied by an appropriate fee, the zoning administrator shall issue the
permit or deny the permit. In the event the permit is denied, the zoning
administrator shall state his reasons, in writing, and shall refer to the
appropriate provisions of this zoning title. The denial of the building permit
shall state that the applicant has ten (10) days to appeal the denial to the
zoning board of appeals in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
title.
   E.   The holder of a building permit shall begin construction of the work
described in the building permit within six (6) months of the date of issuance
of the building permit and shall finish construction of the work within one
year of issuance of the building permit. If the work is not begun and completed
within the time set forth in this subsection, the building permit shall lapse
and the holder thereof shall be required to apply for a new building permit for
the lot in question.
   F.   Building permits are nontransferable.
   G.   Building permits shall be prominently displayed at the site of
construction in an area protected from the weather or in a transparent
waterproof envelope or other suitable frame.
   H.   A record of all building permit applications and building permits shall
be kept on file by the zoning administrator and shall be a public record.
   I.   No building permit application fee shall be required where:
      1.   A building permit application is denied and the application is
amended and resubmitted within fourteen (14) calendar days; or
      2.   A building permit application is denied, the applicant seeks and
obtains a variance which obviates the grounds for denial, and the building
permit application is resubmitted within fourteen (14) calendar days of the
grant of variance. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
9-7-2: DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The zoning administrator of the village or other officials that have been or
shall be duly appointed by the village president, shall enforce this title and,
in addition thereto and in furtherance of said authority, shall:
   A.   Issue building permits and make and maintain records thereof.
   B.   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this title.
   C.   Maintain permanent and current records of this title including, but not
limited to, all maps, amendments and special uses, variations, appeals and
applications therefor.
   D.   Report periodically to the appropriate committee of the village board.
   E.   Receive, file and forward to the zoning board of appeals all
applications for appeals, variations and other matters on which the zoning
board of appeals is required to decide under this title.
   F.   Provide such clerical and technical assistance as may be required by
the zoning board of appeals in the exercise of its duties. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-
1993)
9-7-3: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
   A.   Creation: The zoning board of appeals of the village is created
pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-3. The zoning board of
appeals created as said shall consist of seven (7) members, each with a five
(5) year term commencing January 1 of each calendar year as set forth in
section 5/11-13-3 of the Illinois municipal code 1 . Members of the board of
appeals shall be appointed by the president and board of trustees. One of the
members so appointed shall be named as chairman at the time of appointment.
Terms of members shall commence on the date of their appointments. All of the
members of said board shall receive the sum of forty dollars ($40.00) for each
meeting of the board of appeals or the plan commission attended by said member,
with all such payments to be made from the general corporate fund of the
village. All members of said board shall be subject to removal by the president
and board of trustees of the village for a good cause after public hearing. The
members of the zoning board of appeals shall have powers and duties assigned to
the zoning board of appeals by statute and ordinance. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993;
amd. Ord. 02-01, 2-11-2002, eff. retroactive to 11-12-2001)
   B.   Procedure: In accordance with the applicable statutes of the state, as
follows:
      1.   All appointments to the zoning board of appeals shall be made by the
village president subject to approval of the village board. One of the members
so appointed shall be named as chairman at the time of his appointment.
Vacancies shall be filled as soon as possible for the unexpired term of any
member whose place has become vacant. In the event that the office of the
chairman is vacated for any reason, the village board shall immediately appoint
at its option either one of the remaining members on the board, or any member
who is appointed to fill such vacancy on the board as the new chairman.
      2.   All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the
call of the chairman, and at such other times as the board may determine. All
testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in this Title may be given
under oath at the option of the chairman. The chairman, or in his absence, the
acting chairman, may administer oath and compel the attendance of witnesses.
All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. The
Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member
upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating the fact, and
shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Every
rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof and every order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
immediately be filed in the office of the Village Clerk and shall be of public
record.
   C.   Jurisdiction and Authority:
      1.   The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby invested with the powers as
granted by the statutes of the State and this Title, as follows:
         a.   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by the Zoning Administrator pertaining to conformance
with requirements of this Title.
         b.   To hear and decide variances from the terms provided in this
Title in the manner and subject to the standards set forth in this Section.
         c.   To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under this Title.
   D.   Decisions:
      1.   All final decisions arrived at by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
require the concurring vote of four (4) of its members.
      2.   All final decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals on appeals from
decisions of the Zoning Administrator shall, in all instances, be final
administrative determinations subject to judicial review in accordance with
applicable statutes of the State. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS.
9-7-4: APPEALS:
   A.   Authority: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals
from an administrative order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Zoning Administrator.
   B.   Initiation: An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by
any person, firm or corporation or by any office, department, board, bureau or
commission aggrieved by an administrative order, requirement, decision or
determination under this Title by the Zoning Administrator.
   C.   Processing: An appeal shall be filed with the Village Clerk. The
Village Clerk shall forward such appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
processing in accordance with the applicable statutes of the State 1 .
   D.   Decisions: All decisions, after hearing before the Zoning Board of
Appeals on appeals from an administrative order, requirement, decision or
determination relating to this Title, of the Zoning Administrator shall, in all
instances, be final administrative determinations and shall be subject to
judicial review only in accordance with applicable statutes of the State 2 .
(Ord. 93-11, 6-14-93)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/11-13-12.
2 2. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/11-13-13.
9-7-5: VARIANCES:
   A.   Authority: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide variances of the
provisions of this Title in harmony with its general purpose and intent and
shall vary them only in the specific instances hereinafter set forth where the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall have made a finding of fact based upon the
standards hereinafter prescribed that there are practical difficulties or
particular hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
regulations of this Title.
   B.   Initiation: An application for a variance may be made by any person,
firm or corporation requesting or intending to request application for a
building permit or by a person who has been notified by the Zoning
Administrator that his property is not in compliance with this Title.
   C.   Processing:
      1.   An application for a variance shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
The Village Clerk shall forward such application to the Zoning Board of Appeals
for processing in accordance with the applicable statutes of the State 1 .
      2.   No variance shall be made by the Zoning Board of Appeals except
after a public hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals, of which there shall
be a notice of time and place of the hearing published at least once, not more
than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in one or
more newspapers with a general circulation within the Village, and a written
notice is served at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing on the owners of
the properties located adjacent to the location for which the variation is
requested.
   D.   Decisions: All decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals on variations
arrived at after the hearing shall require a concurring vote of four (4) of its
members, and such decisions shall be final, subject only to judicial review in
accordance with applicable statutes of the State.
   E.   Standards:
      1.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not vary the provisions of this
Title as authorized in this Section unless it shall have made findings based
upon the evidence presented to it that all of the following conditions apply:
         a.   That the property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations
governing the district in which it is located;
         b.   That the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and
         c.   That the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.
      2.   The Zoning Board of Appeals, in making the foregoing determination,
may take into consideration the extent to which the following facts, favorable
to the applicant, have been established by the evidence:
         a.   That the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved would bring a particular hardship
upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter
of regulation were to be carried out;
         b.   That the conditions upon which the petition for variance is based
would not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoning
classification;
         c.   That the purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money out of the property;
         d.   That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by
any person presently having an interest in the property;
         e.   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located; or
         f.   That the proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of
fire or otherwise endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or
impair property values within the neighborhood.
      3.   The Zoning Board of Appeals may require such conditions and
restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a variance as may be necessary to
comply with the standards set forth in this Section to reduce or minimize the
injurious effect of such variance upon other property in the neighborhood and
to implement the general purpose and intent of this Title.
   F.   Authorized Variances: Variation from the regulations of this Title may
be decided by the Zoning Board of Appeals only in accordance with the standards
set forth in this Section, and only in the following instances and no others:
      1.   To permit a yard less than the yard required by the applicable
regulations;
      2.   To permit the use of a lot not of record on September 8, 1975, for a
use otherwise prohibited solely because of the insufficient area of the lot,
but in no event shall the area of the lot be less than ninety percent (90%) of
the required lot area;
      3.   To permit parking lots to be illuminated between the hours of nine
thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.;
      4.   To permit the same off-street parking spaces to qualify as required
spaces for two (2) or more uses; provided, that the maximum uses of such
facility by each use does not take place during the same hours on the same days
of the week;
      5.   To increase by not more than twenty five percent (25%) the maximum
distance that required parking spaces are permitted to be located from the uses
served; and
      6.   To allow any permitted nonresidential use in a residence district to
exceed the floor area ratio imposed by the applicable regulations.
      7.   To allow a variance on the permissible scope of home occupations (as
defined in Section 9-1-4 of this Title) as follows:
a. To allow an exterior sign of reasonable dimensions; provided, however, that
this shall not be construed to allow an illuminated sign;
         b.   To allow reasonable exterior display and exterior storage of
materials and equipment used in home occupations;
         c.   To allow reasonable on-street parking in connection with home
occupations; provided, however, that:
         d.   Where variances are allowed under subsection F7a, F7b and F7c of
this Section, the Zoning Board of Appeals may restrict the hours of operation
of the home occupation or any exterior sign, display or storage or on-street
parking; the Zoning Board of Appeals may condition any such variance upon
observance by the occupant of such restrictions, and upon notice and hearing,
the Zoning Board of Appeals may revoke such variance for breach of such
restrictions.
      8.   To allow variances from requirements for swimming pools, fences and
satellite dishes. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
      9.   No variance shall be allowed which would permit a fence, swimming
pool, satellite dish, porch or other permanent or semi- permanent structure
within an easement owned by the Village or otherwise dedicated to public use,
without the consent of the Village Board. In the event the Zoning Board of
Appeals receives an application for such a variance, it shall consider the
application as in the case of any variance request. It may deny the request, in
which case no further action by the Village Board is required. But if the
Zoning Board of Appeals grants the variance, such a grant of variance shall be
conditional upon approval by the Village Board. The Village shall approve such
a variance only by motion made, seconded and duly recorded in the minutes. Any
variance which would allow encroachment upon an easement owned by the Village
or by a public utility shall be subject to the condition that should the
Village or public utility order the removal of the encroaching structure, the
structure shall be removed by the property owner. The variance shall be subject
to the further condition that should the property owner fail to remove the
encroaching structure within the time ordered by the Village Board or public
utility, or in the event of an emergency, or in the event the property owner is
not available, the Village or the public utility may remove the encroaching
structure, and the property owner shall not be entitled to any compensation
whatever for damages caused thereby. (Ord. 96-15, 8-12-1996)
   G.   Duration Of Variance:
      1.   A variance shall be extinguished if construction of the variance is
not completed within six (6) months of the date the variance is granted, unless
additional time is allowed at the time the variance is granted.
      2.   A variance is extinguished if its use lapses for a period of six (6)
months.
      3.   A variance allowing a shed or other obstruction in an easement,
right of way, required yard or swale shall be extinguished upon thirty (30)
days notice to the property owner, if the Village Board determines that the
obstruction is a hindrance to the operation, maintenance or repair of drainage,
utilities or other uses of the easement, right of way, required yard or swale.
The property owner recognizes that in the event of an emergency, any shed or
other obstruction may be moved by the Village of utility company in order to
effectuate needed repairs, and the property owner is solely responsible for any
damages to the personal property located in the easement.
(Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993; amd. Ord. 20-01, 2-24-2020)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/11-13-5.
9-7-6: PLAN COMMISSION:
   A.   Creation: The Plan Commission of the Village is created. The members of
the Plan Commission shall be the same as the members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals 1 . Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals and Plan Commission may at
any meeting constitute themselves as the Zoning Board of Appeals or as the Plan
Commission, or both, but in the event they act as both the Zoning Board of
Appeals and the Plan Commission in a single meeting, they shall be entitled to
compensation for only one meeting.
   B.   Jurisdiction And Duties: The Plan Commission is hereby vested with the
following powers and duties in the administration of this Title:
      1.   To meet at least once per calendar quarter.
      2.   To post or publish notices of public hearings and to hold such
hearings as requested by the applicable statutes of the state, pertaining to
proposed amendments to the regulations imposed and the districts created by
this title and to proposed conditional permitted uses, as established in this
title.
      3.   To make written reports and recommendations to the village board on
any such proposed amendments or proposed special uses.
      4.   To initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, studies of the
provisions of this title and to make reports of its recommendations to the
village board.
      5.   To hear and decide all matters which it is required to act upon
under this title. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
      6.   To conduct hearings on adult use permits in accordance with title 12
of this code. (Ord. 01-15, 10-22-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 9-7-3 of this Chapter.
9-7-7: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority: The regulations imposed and the districts created under the
authority of this title may be amended, from time to time, by ordinance in
accordance with the applicable statutes of the state 1 . An amendment shall be
granted or denied by the village board only after a public hearing before the
plan commission and a report of its findings and recommendations has been
submitted to the village board.
   B.   Initiation Of Amendment: Amendments may be proposed by the village
board, by the plan commission or by a resident of or owner of property in the
village.
   C.   Processing: An application for an amendment shall be filed with the
village clerk and thereafter introduced into the village board. Such
application shall be forwarded from the village board by the village clerk to
the plan commission with a request to hold a public hearing in accordance with
applicable statutes of the state, and thereafter to submit a report of its
findings and recommendations to the village board.
   D.   Decisions: The village board, after receiving the report of the plan
commission, and without further public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed
amendment in accordance with applicable statute of the state, or may refer it
back to the plan commission for further consideration. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-13-14.
9-7-8: CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Purpose: The development and execution of the zoning title is based
upon the division of the village into districts within any one of which the use
of land and buildings and the bulk and location of the buildings or structures,
as related to the land, are essentially uniform. It is recognized, however,
that there are conditional permitted uses which, because of their unique
character, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or
districts without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon
neighboring lands and upon public need for the particular use of the particular
location. Such conditional permitted uses fall into two (2) categories:
      1.   Uses operated by a public agency or publicly regulated utilities or
uses traditionally affected with a public interest.
      2.   Uses entirely private in character, but of such a nature that the
operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon
neighboring property or public facilities.
   B.   Authority:
      1.   Conditional permitted uses shall be authorized or denied by the
village board in accordance with the regulations and condition set forth in
this title for conditional permitted uses.
      2.   No application for a conditional permitted use shall be acted upon
by the village board until after:
         a.   A written report is prepared and forwarded to the village board
by the plan commission in a manner prescribed herein for amendments to this
title; and
         b.   A public hearing has been held by the plan commission after due
notice by publication as provided by the applicable statutes of the state for
amendments, and the findings and recommendations of the plan commission have
been reported to the village board.
   C.   Initiation: An application for a conditional permitted use may be made
by any person, firm or corporation or by an office, department, board, bureau
or commission requesting or intending to request a zoning certificate.
   D.   Processing: An application for a conditional permitted use, in such
form and accompanied by such information as shall be established from time to
time by the plan commission, shall be filed with the village clerk and
thereafter processed in the manner prescribed heretofore for applications for
amendments.
   E.   Decisions:
      1.   The village board, upon report of the plan commission and without
further hearing, may authorize or deny an application for a special use in
accordance with the statutes of the state applicable to amendments, or may
refer it back to the plan commission for further consideration.
      2.   No conditional permitted use shall be authorized by the village
board unless the conditional permitted use:
         a.   Is deemed necessary for the public convenience at that location;
         b.   Is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated that the
public health, safety and welfare will be protected; and
         c.   Would not cause substantial injury to the value of other property
in the neighborhood in which it is located. (Ord. 93-11, 6-14-1993)
9-7-9: FEES FOR VARIANCES, APPEALS AND AMENDMENTS:
Any application for an amendment, conditional permitted use, variance or appeal
filed by or on behalf of the owner or owners of the property affected shall be
accompanied by an application fee of two hundred eighty dollars ($280.00), plus
the cost of publication of the notice in the Pawnee Post or other newspaper of
general circulation within the village.
Any applicant for a variance, amendment, conditional permitted use or appeal of
the provisions of this code must submit a drawing showing the provisions of any
request for a variance, and must locate the survey pins on the corners of the
subject property. If the pins can not be located, the applicant must obtain a
survey of the property to place the pins. Village employees will not locate
pins for purposes of meeting this requirement.
Any application for any action, filed by an officer, board or commission of the
village of Pawnee, Illinois, not on behalf of any specific private interest,
shall not be accompanied by any fee.
(Ord. 08-10, 6-23-2008; amd. Ord. 20-03, 3-30-2020)
9-7-10: VIOLATION, PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT:
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
title shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The zoning
administrator is hereby designated and authorized to enforce this title. (Ord.
93-11, 6-14-1993)
9-7-11: NUISANCES:
Every structure and lot which is in violation of this title is hereby declared
a nuisance. The village may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for
equitable relief to restrain, enjoin or abate any such nuisance. (Ord. 93-11,
6-14-1993)
TITLE 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Jurisdiction
10-1-3: Purpose
10-1-4: Severability
10-1-5: Plat, When Required
10-1-6: Definitions
10-1-7: Subdivision Review Procedure Table
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title may be cited as the 1991 LAND SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE
OF PAWNEE, ILLINOIS. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-1991)
10-1-2: JURISDICTION:
   A.   The subdivision jurisdiction of the Village shall include all land
within the corporate limits of the Village and, by virtue of the Village's
Comprehensive Plan adopted in 1995, to all unincorporated land within one and
five-tenths (1.5) miles of the corporate limits of the Village.
   B.   Should the Village's extraterritorial subdivision jurisdiction overlay
that of another municipality, a contractual agreement between the Village and
the other municipality may be established which designates subdivision
jurisdiction boundaries in the overlap area. In the absence of such an
agreement, the jurisdiction shall extend to a median line equidistant from the
Village boundary and the boundary of the other municipality nearest to the
boundary of the Village at any given point on the line. (Ord. 17-14, 8-14-2017)
10-1-3: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this title to promote growth and development and to
regulate and control the division of land within the subdivision approval
jurisdiction of the Village in order: a) to provide for the legal and orderly
division of land by requiring proper description, monumentation and recording
of subdivided land, and b) to promote growth of the community which protects
the public health and safety and provide essential public services to existing
and future residents. The goals of this title shall be to promote:
   A.   Conformance with the Pawnee Comprehensive Plan.
   B.   Provision of adequate public services including public water and sewer,
electricity and police and fire protection to land to be developed.
   C.   Prevention of leap frog and scattered development.
   D.   Prevention of development on unsuitable land.
   E.   Provision of safe and efficient street network.
   F.   Prevention of agricultural and industrial conflicts with residential
areas.
   G.   Conservation and protection of natural resources.
   H.   Prevention of inappropriate development in or filling of the 100-year
floodplain.
   I.   Establishment of lots that are of a practical size and shape.
   J.   Enhancement and preservation of aesthetic qualities, including but not
limited to compliance by industrial operations with Illinois EPA noise
regulations. (Ord. 17-14, 8-14-2017)
10-1-4: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, provision or portion of this title is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the title
shall not be affected by that decision. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-1991)
10-1-5: PLAT, WHEN REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for a subdivider of land within the subdivision
jurisdiction of the Village to subdivide land into lots, blocks, streets,
alleys or public open space unless by plat in accordance with the laws of the
State and the provisions of this Title. It shall be unlawful to divide land
without obtaining tract survey approval, when required.
   A.   The provisions of this Title shall not apply, except as noted with
respect to tract surveys, and no plat is required in any of the following
instances (language based on Plats Act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes).
      1.   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five
(5) acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements
of access.
      2.   The division of lots nor blocks of less than one acre in any
recorded subdivision, which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access.
      3.   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land, except where the transfer results in the creation of
another buildable lot.
      4.   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for the use
as a right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other
pipe lines, which does not involve any new streets or easements of access.
      5.   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility,
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access.
      6.   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments
relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use.
      7.   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
      8.   The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the
division into no more than two (2) parts of a particular parcel or tract of
land existing on July 17, 1959, and not involving any new streets or easements
of access.
      9.   The sale of a single lot less than five (5) acres from a tract of
five (5) acres or larger when a survey is made by a registered surveyor;
provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to the sale of any
subsequent lots from the same larger tract of land, as determined by the
dimensions and configuration of the larger tract on October 1, 1973, and
provided, that this exemption does not invalidate any other local requirements
applicable to the subdivision of the land.
   B.   A tract survey shall be required for a division or subdivision of land
for which no plat is required under subsection A herein when such division or
subdivision:
      1.   Is described in metes and bounds.
   C.   Results in the remaining parcel or tract being less than five (5)
acres. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Title, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ALLEY: A public way used primarily as a service access to the rear or side of a
property which abuts on a street.
ARTERIAL ROADWAY NETWORK PLAN: The portion of the Official Village Plan
providing and planning for the present and future system of streets for the
Village.
AS-BUILT PLANS: Final plans showing any changes from the construction plans,
indicating in detail how the project was constructed. Such plans show all
public facilities as-built on the surface and underground, both on public
property and on easements and also indicate all private utility locations that
are known. Details shown include: sanitary and storm sewers, manholes, invert
grades, bench marks, location of sanitary sewer laterals, street inlets,
hydrants, general flow of surface water and grades for drainage swales on the
lot. The "as-built plans" carry the seal of a registered professional engineer
certifying that construction was completed in conformance with the plans and
specifications.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets,
parks, railroad rights of way or bodies of water.
COLLECTOR STREETS: Streets penetrating neighborhoods collecting traffic from
local streets and channeling it into the arterial street system. A minor amount
of through traffic may be expected, but collector streets primarily provide
land access service and carry local traffic movements within residential
neighborhoods and commercial and industrial areas.
CONSTRUCTION PLANS: The drawings prepared in the manner and containing the
data, documents and information required by Chapter 4 of this Title.
COVENANTS: A private agreement written into the deed in which property owners
of the development promise to do or refrain from doing certain acts.
CUL-DE-SAC: A permanent street with a single access point that ends in a
turnaround and cannot be further extended without taking property not dedicated
as a street. A cul-de-sac begins at its point of intersection with a street
with multiple access.
DEDICATE: To transfer ownership of land, either fee simple or a partial
interest, for a public use and for a public body to accept it for that public
use.
DRAINAGE COURSE: A natural watercourse, swale, depression or ditch for the
drainage of surface waters and storm waters.
EASEMENT: A liberty, privilege or advantage which a party or the general public
may have regarding the land of another. The remainder of the rights in the land
remain in the hands of the owner who retains the legal title.
EXISTING TOWNSHIP HIGHWAY: Any public road in the township which is owned and
maintained by the township.
FINAL PLAT: The drawing of a subdivision prepared in the manner and containing
the data, documents and information required by this Title showing lots of
record and which is to be recorded.
FLAG LOT: A lot located behind another lot or parcel with access to a public
street only by a narrow strip of land extending from the buildable area of the
lot to the street.
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT: A form of land subdivision which involves the
construction of a multi-family or commercial building on a lot or parcel of
land one acre or more in size or two (2) or more principal multi-family or
commercial buildings on a lot or parcel of land of any size served by an
internal street and utility distribution.
LOCAL STREETS: Streets not classified in a higher system which primarily
provide direct access to abutting land and access to higher types of roadways.
They offer the lowest level of mobility being the narrowest and shortest
streets in the street system. Service to through traffic is deliberately
discouraged.
LOCATION MAP: A preliminary drawing or map of a proposed subdivision containing
the data and information required by this Title.
LOT: The tract within a subdivision marked by the subdivider as a numbered
tract to be offered as a unit of land for sale or transfer of ownership.
MAJOR ARTERIAL STREETS AND ROADWAYS: The highest traffic volume corridors
serving major activity centers and the longest trip distances. Service to
abutting land is subordinate to the provision of travel service to major
traffic movements. They are normally spaced on a one mile grid pattern and may
include expressways.
MINOR ARTERIAL STREETS AND HIGHWAYS: Streets and roadways which interconnect
with and augment the major arterial street system and provide service trips of
moderate length at a somewhat lower level of travel mobility than major
arterials. Minor arterials place more emphasis on land access and distribute
travel to geographic areas smaller than those identified with major arterials.
OFFICIAL PLAN or COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The Pawnee, Illinois, Comprehensive Plan,
if such a plan is adopted.
OWNER: Any or all persons, entities, trusts or corporations holding legal title
to the land to be subdivided. If the owner is a trust, all beneficiaries shall
be listed as owners. If the owner is a corporation, all principals and officers
shall be listed as owners.
PAVEMENT WIDTH: The distance from the edge of the pavement to the edge of the
pavement but not including curb and gutter.
PLAN COMMISSION or COMMISSION: The Pawnee Plan Commission, established in
Section 9-7-6 of this Code.
PLAT: The action of officially subdividing land or the final plat which is
approved by the Village and recorded.
PLATS OFFICER: The Executive Director of the Springfield-Sangamon County
Regional Planning Commission or duly authorized representative.
PRELIMINARY PLAN: A plan of proposed subdivision or greater area prepared in
the manner and containing the data, documents and information required by this
Title.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: A building in which the principal use of the lot on which
it is located is conducted.
PRIVATE STREET: A purported street, way or strip of land reserved for the use
of a limited number of persons or purposes and which is not a publicly
dedicated street.
PUBLIC CROSSWALK: A ten foot (10') right of way through the interior of a block
in which a sidewalk meeting the construction standards of this Title is built.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage way,
water main, sidewalk, parkway or other facility which the Village or other
governmental unit owns, maintains and operates.
PUBLIC STREET: A street owned and maintained by a governmental body.
RECORD: To file a final plat approved by the Village with the Sangamon County
Recorder of Deeds.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land which has been dedicated in fee simple to a
public body for streets, alleys and other public improvements as determined by
the public body.
SANITARY SEWER: A constructed conduit connected with the sewer system that is
designed to carry liquids and solids other than storm water to the Village
sewer treatment plant.
SERVICE ACCESS STREET: A street parallel to and adjacent to a major arterial,
which provides access from the arterial to abutting properties.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance required between the building and the
lot line adjoining the street right of way.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" means something is mandatory; "may" means something is
discretionary.
SKETCH PLAN: A general layout of a proposed subdivision prepared in the manner
and containing the information required by this Title.
STORM SEWER: A constructed conduit for carrying storm water to a drainage
course.
STORM WATER: Water from roof downspouts, basement footing perimeter drains and
yard drains as well as surface runoff.
STUB STREET: A street which is intended to be extended but which temporarily
ends.
SUBDIVIDER: Any or all owners, agents or persons controlling land who commence
proceedings under this Title by submitting location and sketch maps to the Plan
Commission office or by making land improvements in the form of buildings,
drives and utilities, but not necessarily involving the actual division of
land.
SUBDIVISION OF LAND: The 1) division of land into two (2) or more parts, any of
which is less than five (5) acres in size (see subsection
10-1-5  A of this Chapter for exemptions); 2) dedication of streets or
easements of access; 3) creation of a planned unit development; or 4) creation
of a large scale development. In the event a subdivision is a planned unit
development or large scale development, the standards and regulations of this
Title shall govern.
SUPERINTENDENT OF HIGHWAYS: The Sangamon County Superintendent of Highways.
SURETY: A bonding agency that is financially qualified to do business in the
State of Illinois.
THROUGH LOT: Any lot which is not a corner lot and which adjoins two (2)
streets that are parallel or within forty five degrees (45o) of being parallel
to each other.
TOWNSHIP HIGHWAY COMMISSIONER: The Township Highway Commissioner for the
township in which the subdivision is located.
TRACT SURVEY: A land survey, made by an Illinois registered land surveyor,
complying with the requirements of section 1 of An Act to revise the law in
relation to plats 1 , as now or hereafter amended, and section 35 of the
Revenue Act of 1939 2 , as now or hereafter amended.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE: Any sign, signal marking or device placed on or
adjacent to a street or highway by authority of the Village of Pawnee, the
State of Illinois Department of Transportation or the Sangamon County
Superintendent of Highways.
VILLAGE: The Village of Pawnee, Illinois.
VILLAGE CLERK: The Village Clerk of the Village of Pawnee, Illinois.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The professional engineer appointed or designated by the
Village Board of Trustees.
WATER DEPARTMENT: The Water Department of the Village of Pawnee.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR 1 : The Director of Building and Zoning of the Village of
Pawnee, as established by Ordinance 75-22. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91; amd. Ord. 19-
08, 5-13-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 765 ILCS 205/1.
2 2. S.H.A. 35 ILCS 205/35.
1 1. See Section 9-7-2 of this Code.
10-1-7: SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCEDURE TABLE:
SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCEDURE
PPC - Pawnee Planning Commission
 Number Of Prints Reviewed By Payment Approval Valid For
              Number Of Reviewed By      Payment          Approval Valid
              Prints                                      For
Location map
minor         12        PPC              None             1 year
subdivision
Location and  12        PPC              None             1 year
sketch maps             Village Board
Preliminary   10        PPC              $100.00          3 years
plan
Construction                                              As long as
plans         4         Village Engineer None             preliminary
                                                          current
Final plat    10        PPC              $100.00 plus     2 years
                        Village Board    $5.00/lot
Preliminary                                               3 years
plan          10        PPC              None             renewable 1 time
reaffirmation
Minor         12        PPC              $100.00          2 years
subdivision             Village Board
                                         Residential
                                         large scale
                                         development:
                                         $100.00 plus
                                         $3.00/unit or
                                         1,000 sq. ft. of
                                         non-residential
                                         use
Large scale                              Commercial or
development   10        PPC              industrial large  
                                         scale
                                         development:
                                         $500.00 plus
                                         actual cost to
                                         Village of plan
                                         review by
                                         engineers or
                                         other technical
                                         consultants
 
All plans shall be filed 2 weeks before the scheduled monthly Pawnee Plan
Commission meeting with the Pawnee Village Clerk.
Exception: Construction plans - See subsection
10-4-3B of this title.
Note: Pawnee Plan Commission review must be completed in 2 consecutive,
regularly scheduled meetings.
(Ord. 91-14, 9-23-1991; amd. Ord. 17-14, 8-14-2017)
CHAPTER 2
LOCATION AND SKETCH MAPS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Purpose
10-2-2: Submission Requirements
10-2-3: Subdivision (Including Large Scale Plan) Site Suitability
10-2-4: Location And Sketch Maps Review Process
10-2-5: Validity Of Location And Sketch Maps Approval
10-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the location and sketch maps is to determine the suitability of
the site for subdividing and subsequent development. Suitability shall be
measured by the conformance with the Comprehensive Plan, effect on natural
resources and natural systems, ability to provide adequate essential services
to the site and conformance with the goals of this title set forth in section
10-1-3 of this title. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-1991)
10-2-2: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
Information filed with the Plan Commission shall be of sufficient detail so
that the commission can determine whether and how essential services will be
provided and if the site is suitable.
   A.   Location Map: The location map shall consist of data added to an
existing base map of a suitable scale, covering an area of at least one mile
radius from the tract proposed for development. The location map shall show the
following information:
      1.   North point, scale and date.
      2.   Outline of the entire area owned or controlled by the subdivider
with approximate boundary dimensions and total acreage.
      3.   Existing streets and roads expected to serve the area to be
subdivided.
      4.   Existing utility lines expected to serve the area to be subdivided.
   B.   Sketch Map: The sketch map shall show the general layout and character
of the proposed development. The scale shall be no more than one hundred feet
to the inch (1" = 100'). Exact dimensions or engineering plans are not
required. The sketch map shall show the following information:
      1.   North point, scale and date.
      2.   Area to be subdivided with general dimensions.
      3.   Proposed street network and alignments with existing streets.
      4.   General lot layout.
      5.   Potential open space, public parks, existing waterways, drainage or
retention areas, etc.
      6.   Outstanding or unusual natural features and vegetation.
   C.   Additional Information: In addition to the information required below,
any other information necessary for the Plan Commission to determine site
suitability or adequacy of mitigating factors as outlined in section
10-2-3 of this chapter shall be submitted:
      1.   Title of the proposed subdivision.
      2.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner, subdivider,
engineer and land surveyor. A contact person should be designated.
      3.   Proposed use and approximate number of housing units.
      4.   Existing and proposed zoning.
      5.   Method of sewage disposal.
      6.   Method of water supply.
      7.   Electric service provider.
      8.   Fire protection district.
      9.   School district. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-1991)
10-2-3: SUBDIVISION (INCLUDING LARGE SCALE PLAN) SITE SUITABILITY:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section:
      LAND PROPOSED TO BE SUBDIVIDED: Includes land proposed to be developed
pursuant to a Large Scale Plan.
      SUBDIVISION AND SUBDIVIDE: Include not only the division of a tract into
lots, but also development of a single tract pursuant to a Large Scale Plan.
      SUITABLE FOR SUBDIVIDING: Includes suitability for development pursuant
to a Large Scale Plan.
   B.   Essential Utilities And Public Services: Land proposed to be
subdivided, shall have essential utilities and public services available within
a reasonable distance and time period. Land to which these essential utilities
and services will not be so provided shall be deemed unsuitable for
subdividing. Essential utilities and services and criteria for determining if
they can adequately be provided shall include the following:
      1.   Sewage Disposal:
         a.   Sanitary sewer service provided by the Village shall be the
preferred method of sewage disposal. If sanitary sewer service is currently
available to the land proposed to be subdivided, it shall be the sewage
disposal method used.
         b.   If sanitary sewer service is not currently available, the land
may be deemed suitable for subdividing if:
            (1)   Sanitary sewers shall be installed by the subdivider for
future service to each building site;
            (2)   On-site sewage disposal facilities can and will be provided;
and
            (3)   The subdivider pays the cost to the Village for extension of
Village sewer mains to the subdivision.
         c.   The Village may, but is not required to, share with the developer
the cost of extending sewer lines.
         d.   For industrial developments, the Large Scale Plan submission will
contain an assessment of probable effluent quantity and quality, and whether
pretreatment will be required.
      2.   Water Supply:
         a.   The Village water supply shall be the preferred public water
supply. For developments outside the Village corporate limits and within the
Village's 1.5 mile planning jurisdiction, the Otter Lake Water Commission,
ADGPTV is the preferred public water supply. No subdivision will be approved
utilizing any public water supply other than the Village or the Otter Lake
Water Commission, ADGPTV, unless the developer can prove that the preferred
public water supply is unavailable or inadequate, or the Village by ordinance
or resolution waives this requirement due to: 1) the infeasibility of the
Village or Otter Lake Water Commission providing water to the development, or
2) an intergovernmental agreement between the Village and another public water
supply regarding supply of water to the development.
         b.   Private wells may be permitted for developments outside the
Village if the developer can demonstrate that it is not feasible to extend
water mains to the land proposed to be subdivided. As a minimum guideline, the
extension of one hundred twenty feet (120') of water main per lot of the
preliminary plan, or per acre of an industrial large scale development, shall
be deemed feasible. This distance shall be measured between the nearest
suitable public water main and the proposed development. Mains within the
development shall not count toward this extension footage.
      3.   Fire Protection: Land proposed to be subdivided shall meet the
following conditions in order to be deemed suitable for subdividing:
         a.   Land shall be within a fire protection district or a petition to
annex to a district shall have been filed;
         b.   There shall be a public road providing adequate access for
emergency vehicles to the site. Roadways shall have an all- weather driving
surface (minimum oil and chip) with twenty feet (20') of unobstructed width.
Where a bridge is required to be used as a part of the most direct fire truck
access route, it shall have a minimum vertical clearance of thirteen feet six
inches (13'6") and be constructed and maintained to carry the live loads
imposed by fire trucks;
         c.   There shall be a system of water mains or other source of water
adequate for firefighting purposes. Specific fire flows shall be determined by
the Pawnee Fire Protection District using a standard published by the Insurance
Service Office entitled Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow; and
         d.   A full sprinkler system installed with adequate water available
as determined by the National Fire Protection Association Standards 13 or 13D
depending on the occupancy of the building shall also satisfy this requirement.
      4.   Streets: The suitability of existing streets for access to the
proposed subdivision and/or for incorporation into the proposed subdivision's
street system shall also be considered. For residential developments, a street
shall be considered suitable if:
         a.   The street is constructed of all-weather material (concrete,
asphalt, oil mat);
         b.   The paved area is at least twenty feet (20') wide with a road bed
twenty four feet (24') wide; and
         c.   The street has good drainage.
For commercial and industrial projects, the developer shall provide a
certificate from a registered professional engineer that streets providing
access to the development both during construction and afterward, and the
streets within the development, are suitable.
If only a portion of the criteria set forth in this subsection B4 is met, the
Village Engineer, a representative of the Pawnee Fire Protection District and a
representative of the Plan Commission shall make the recommendation as to
whether the street is suitable for the proposed development or what
improvements must be undertaken to make it suitable.
      5.   Police Protection: In determining the suitability of land for
subdivision purposes, the distance that police would have to travel to respond
to a call for service shall be considered.
   C.   Other Requirements: Land proposed to be subdivided shall meet the
following requirements:
      1.   Site must be in conformance with the Pawnee Comprehensive Plan, if
such a plan is adopted.
      2.   Development must not be located in a 100-year floodplain or flood
prone area, and shall comply in all respects with the Village floodplain
ordinance 1  or successor ordinance.
      3.   Development must not be located in an environmentally sensitive area
and its tributaries unless the subdivider can show that environmental concerns
can be mitigated.
      4.   Site must be of a shape, size and terrain so that usable lots and
streets in conformance with this title can and will be created.
      5.   Development must not have a major conflict with existing use of
adjacent property (wastewater treatment plants, power plants, major industrial
plants, landfills, certain agricultural uses, etc.) unless it is shown that
factors which cause the conflict can and will be mitigated.
      6.   Development must not cause major off-site impacts and problems
relating to, but not limited to, streets, drainage water system, parks. If it
is determined by the Plan Commission that major off-site impacts will result,
the subdivider must agree to mitigate the portion of the impact caused by the
subdivision.
      7.   When soils in the area to be developed have severe limitations for
building site development or sanitary facilities as determined by the USDA Soil
Conservation Service, the subdivider shall submit information indicating how
these limitations will be addressed.
      8.   For industrial projects, developer must submit a noise study and a
certification by a registered professional engineer with demonstrated
competence in acoustical engineering, that the project as designed will meet
all Illinois EPA noise regulations, including but not limited to the Sound
Emission Standards established in title 35, part 901 of the Illinois
Administrative Code. (Ord. 17-14, 8-14-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 11, chapter 1 of this Code.
10-2-4: LOCATION AND SKETCH MAPS REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   The subdivider shall submit an appropriate number (10 to 12) of prints
of the location and sketch maps and support data to the Village Clerk. The
subdivision will be reviewed according to the filing deadline and review
schedule established by the Plan Commission.
   B.   The Village Clerk shall retain one print on file and distribute the
location and sketch maps and support data as follows:
         Two (2) prints to the Plan Commission;
         One print to the Water and Gas Department;
         One print to the Village Engineer;
         One print to the Zoning Administrator;
         One print to the Pawnee Fire Protection District;
         One print to the Sangamon County Superintendent of Highways, if
applicable;
         One print to the appropriate Township Highway Commissioner, if
applicable;
         One print to the Pawnee School District;
         One print to Cass Cable or successor cable franchisee; and
         One print to the electric service franchisee (CIPS or RECC) serving
the area.
   C.   The entities listed in subsection B of this section shall transmit any
comments on suitability of the site, in writing, to the Plan Commission within
one week of receipt.
   D.   The Plan Commission shall make a recommendation to the Village Board
with respect to the suitability of the site and the proposed layout no later
than its second regularly scheduled meeting after the plan was filed with the
Village Clerk. Lack of action within the allotted time period shall constitute
a negative recommendation to the Village Board.
   E.   After receiving the Plan Commission's recommendation, the Village Board
shall, at its next regularly scheduled Board meeting, approve or disapprove the
location and sketch maps based on the suitability criteria outlined in section
10-2-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-1991)
10-2-5: VALIDITY OF LOCATION AND SKETCH MAPS APPROVAL:
The location and sketch maps shall be valid for a period of one year after
Village Board approval. If a preliminary plan has not been submitted within the
one year period, approval of the location and sketch maps shall expire. If
interest is renewed in subdividing the site at a later time, the entire
location and sketch maps review process and submission requirements shall be
repeated. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-1991)
CHAPTER 3
PRELIMINARY PLAN
SECTION:
10-3-1: Purpose
10-3-2: Submission Requirements
10-3-3: Preliminary Plan Review Process
10-3-4: Commission Action
10-3-5: Validity of Preliminary Plan; Reaffirmation of Preliminary Plan
10-3-1: PURPOSE:
The preliminary plan is intended to provide a detailed layout of the proposed
subdivision showing the location of public improvements, lots, drainage and
open space areas. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-3-2: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The preliminary plan shall show the information required by subsection
B of this Section on plan sheets no larger than twenty four inches by thirty
six inches (24" x 36") with matching lines if two (2) or more sheets are
necessary. The scale shall be not more than one hundred feet to the inch ( 1"-
100'). All dimensions shall be to the nearest foot. The preliminary plan shall
be consistent with the current zoning district classification of the property.
   B.   Information to be shown on the plan sheets shall include:
      1.   The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded;
the names and addresses of the engineer, registered land surveyor, subdivider
and owner of the tract with the name and address of the contact person to whom
any notice is to be sent.
      2.   North point, scale and date of preparation and any revisions.
      3.   A notation stating "Preliminary Plan - Not to be recorded by
Recorder of Deeds".
      4.   Total acreage.
      5.   Location of all present property lines and section lines.
      6.   The location of all streets, watercourses and other existing
features within the area to be subdivided and within two hundred feet (200') of
the site.
      7.   Location and dimensions of existing buildings and their proposed
disposition.
      8.   The existing utilities, drainage courses and culverts including the
location and size of water mains and sewer outlets within the area to be
subdivided and on the adjacent land.
      9.   Contours referring to the United States Geological Survey datum with
intervals of two feet (2') or less unless a greater interval is required
because of terrain.
      10.   The elevation of the 100-year flood plain if any portion of the
land to be subdivided would be submerged by the flood. Adequate buildable area
must be provided above the elevation of the 100-year flood plain.
      11.   Lot numbers.
      12.   Proposed location of sewer mains (may be shown on a supplemental
sheet).
      13.   The proposed storm drainage system including preliminary drainage
computations when detention or retention is likely to be needed (may be shown
on a supplemental sheet). An assessment of long term erosion, sedimentation and
runoff changes caused by the subdivision should be concluded.
      14.   Proposed location of water mains and fire hydrants.
      15.   Location and width to the nearest foot of all proposed streets,
alleys and their associated rights of way.
      16.   Location and width to the nearest foot of lots.
      17.   Location and width to the nearest foot of all utility easements.
The subdivider shall determine the correct location of all easements to be
shown on the preliminary plan from the utility companies.
      18.   The location of areas to be reserved for public use.
      19.   The minimum setback requirements for the appropriate zoning
district.
      20.   Proposed staging of final plats if more than one final plat will be
submitted based on traffic, utilities and other factors which would determine
the sequence of development with the lease impact on existing residents of the
Village.
      21.   Draft of subdivision covenants.
      22.   If subdivision road access is to a State, County or Township road,
written approval of the access by the Illinois Department of Transportation,
County Highway Department or Township Road Commissioner. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-3-3: PRELIMINARY PLAN REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   The subdivider shall file ten (10) to twelve (12) prints of the
preliminary plan of the proposed subdivision in the office of the Village Clerk
with a filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to be deposited in the
appropriate Village account. The subdivision will be reviewed according to the
filing deadline and review schedule established by the Plan Commission.
   B.   The Village Clerk shall retain one print on file and distribute the
prints as follows:
      Two (2) prints to the Plan Commission;
      One print to the Water and Gas Department;
      One print to the Village Engineer;
      One print to the Sangamon County Superintendent of Highways, if
applicable;
      One print to the appropriate Township Highway Commissioner, if
applicable;
      One print to the Zoning Administrator;
      One print to the Pawnee Fire Protection District;
      One print to Cass Cable or successor cable franchisee; and
      One print to the electric service franchisee (CIPS or RECC) serving the
area.
   The reviewing entities shall transmit any comments or requirements, in
writing, to the Plan Commission within one week of receipt.
   C.   The Plan Commission shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plan no
later than forty five (45) days after the plan was filed with the Village
Clerk. However, no review will take place and no recommendation will be made by
the Plan Commission until the Village Board has approved the location and
sketch maps. Failure to act by the end of forty five (45) days shall constitute
a disapproval of the plan and may be appealed as described in Section 10-11-
3 of this Title.
10-3-4: COMMISSION ACTION:
   A.   Approval: If the Plan Commission finds that the preliminary plan meets
the requirements of this Title, the subdivider shall submit the original and
three (3) prints to the Plan Commission. The chairman shall indicate approval
on the plan in substantially the following language:
This preliminary plan of subdivision is approved. This is not an approval of
the final plat and is not to be recorded.
   By:_______________________________
   Chairman
   Date:____________________________           
One print so endorsed shall be retained on file in the Village office, one
endorsed print shall be sent to the Village Engineer and the third endorsed
print and the endorsed original shall be returned to the subdivider or his
representative.
   B.   Disapproval:
      1.   If the Plan Commission finds that the preliminary plan does not
comply with the requirements of this Title, it shall inform the subdivider of
its disapproval, in writing, and state the noncompliance found.
      2.   One print of the proposed preliminary plan with the written findings
of the Plan Commission disapproving the plan shall be retained by the Plan
Commission.
      3.   If the subdivider desires to amend the disapproved preliminary plan,
the subdivider shall submit ten to twelve (10-12) prints of the amended plan to
the Village Clerk, which shall be reviewed according to the filing deadline and
review schedule established by the Plan Commission. No filing fee shall be
necessary if the amended preliminary plan is filed within two (2) months of
disapproval. The Village Clerk shall transmit copies of the amended plan as
described in Section 10-3-3 of this Chapter and review will proceed as
indicated in said Section.
10-3-5: VALIDITY OF PRELIMINARY PLAN; REAFFIRMATION OF PRELIMINARY PLAN:
   A.   The preliminary plan shall be valid for a period of three (3) years
after Plan Commission approval. If a final plat has not been submitted to the
Plan Commission within said three (3) year period, or if submitted, no final
plat is approved, the preliminary plan shall expire.
   B.   If the subdivider has not submitted a final plat within three (3) years
after preliminary plan approval, but wishes to avoid expiration of the plan,
the subdivider shall seek reaffirmation of the plan by submitting twelve (12)
prints to the Village Clerk for review according to the review schedule
established by the Plan Commission no later than thirty five (35) months after
Plan Commission approval. If the subdivider has submitted a final plat within
said three (3) year period but it is not approved during or after the thirty
fifth month, the submission required shall be made within one month of such
disapproval. In such event, the review process in Section 10-3-3 of this
Chapter shall be followed.
   C.   Where reaffirmation of the preliminary plan is sought, the Plan
Commission shall require any changes in the plan it deems necessary to meet the
requirements of this Title. If the subdivider has not resubmitted the
preliminary plan with the required changes to the Commission within thirty (30)
days after the Commission meeting requiring changes, or if the resubmitted plan
is disapproved, the plan shall expire at that time or at the end of any appeal
process provided for in this Title, whichever is later.
   D.   A preliminary plan may be reaffirmed one time. If a final plat has not
been submitted to the Plan Commission within three (3) years from the date of
the reaffirmation, or if submitted, is not approved, the plan shall expire.
   E.   Final plat approval shall extend the validity of the preliminary plan
for three (3) years from the date of final plat approval; provided, that the
Plan Commission may require any changes necessary to meet the requirements of
this Title, and in such an event, the provisions of subsection C hereof with
respect to resubmission shall apply. The preliminary plan may be reaffirmed one
time after each final plat approval. If another final plat has not been
submitted within three (3) years from the date of the reaffirmation, the
preliminary plan shall expire. In the event a preliminary plan expires, a
subdivider wishing to proceed with subdivision of the land involved must
resubmit a location and sketch map for review and proceed as in the case of an
original submittal. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
CHAPTER 4
CONSTRUCTION PLANS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Purpose
10-4-2: Submission Requirements
10-4-3: Construction Plan Review Process
10-4-1: PURPOSE:
Construction plans are intended to show the design of public improvements for
the subdivision so that a determination can be made as to whether Village
standards are met and whether the improvements are compatible with existing
public improvements. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-4-2: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
Construction plans shall be submitted on sheets not larger than twenty four
inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") and to a scale of not more than one
hundred feet to the inch (1"=100'). Construction plans shall include the
following information:
   A.   Cover sheet showing the location of the development; scales and symbols
that are used; index to sheets; summary of quantities; appropriate place for
approval of the Village Engineer and the signature and seal of a registered
professional engineer.
   B.   North arrow and bench marks with their elevations noted. Bench marks
shall be referenced to mean sea level datum as determined by the United States
Geological Survey.
   C.   Plan sheets showing the locations of all existing streets, right-of-way
lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, sidewalks, drainage ditches, easements,
rear lot drainage, direction of storm drainage flow, survey monuments, water
mains, fire hydrants and any other appurtenance or structure that might
influence design considerations.
   D.   Profile sheets indicating the existing ground line and proposed grades
and elevations for all proposed streets, sanitary sewers, drainage structures,
drainage ditches and rear lot drainage. Elevations shall be referenced to the
United States Geological Survey datum.
   E.   Typical sections showing the right-of-way lines, proposed pavement
widths, pavement thickness, base thickness, sub-base thickness, subgrade,
crown, curbs and gutters, sidewalks and design data, when required.
   F.   Detail sheets showing the details of manholes, inlets, catch basins,
curbs and gutters, drainage structures and any other structure or appurtenance
to be constructed or reference made to the "Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction in Illinois" or "Highway Standards published by the
Illinois Department of Transportation".
   G.   Design computations for storm sewer design, for special structures and
pavement designs when required and for anticipated fire flow.
   H.   Detailed description of erosion control measures to be taken during
construction.
   I.   Proof of application for an access permit from the County Highway
Department when access to a County highway is involved.
   J.   Proof of application for a 404 permit if any dredging, riprapping, fill
work or similar activities will be conducted in or around streams.
   K.   Other specific additional information may be requested by the Village
Engineer. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-4-3: CONSTRUCTION PLAN REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   After receiving approval of the preliminary plan, the subdivider shall
submit three (3) sets of construction plans to the Village Clerk who shall
retain one set on file and distribute the remaining as follows:
      1.   One set to the Village Engineer; and
      2.   One set to the County Superintendent of Highways or Township
Commissioner of Roads, if applicable, when the subdivision is located outside
the corporate limits of Pawnee.
   B.   Construction plans shall be submitted a minimum of thirty (30) days
before the final plat is to be submitted for review.
   C.   The Village Engineer shall complete his review within thirty (30) days
after all items of information required by Section
10-4-2 of this Chapter have been submitted, in writing.
   D.   Within thirty (30) days after complete submission, the Village Engineer
shall notify the subdivider's engineer of approval of the plans or of any
required changes unless the review time is extended for no more than fourteen
(14) days by the Village Engineer in a letter to the subdivider's engineer
listing reasons for the extension. If plans must be resubmitted, the Village
Engineer shall also inform the engineer of the number of sets of plans to be
submitted.
   E.   When construction plans are resubmitted with the required changes, they
shall be re-reviewed within fourteen (14) days unless the review time is again
extended by the Village Engineer in the manner set forth in subsection D above.
   F.   The Village Engineer shall notify the subdivider's engineer and the
Village Clerk of the approval of the construction plans. Construction plans
shall not be approved until proof of acquisition of a County access permit or
404 permit, if applicable, is submitted. The Village Clerk shall also send a
notice of the approval to the:
      Plan Commission
      Water and Gas Department
      County Superintendent of Highways or Township Road Commissioner
      Other Utility Companies
(Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
CHAPTER 5
CONSTRUCTION AND BONDING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Right to Begin Construction
10-5-2: Notification of Construction
10-5-3: Inspection of Construction
10-5-4: Security for Public Improvements
10-5-5: Length Security in Effect; Forfeiture
10-5-6: Approval of Public Improvements
10-5-1: RIGHT TO BEGIN CONSTRUCTION:
Approval of the construction plans shall give the subdivider the right to begin
construction of the subdivision improvements. Construction must be started
within one year of approval of the construction plans. If construction is not
started within the year, reapproval by the Village Engineer shall be required
before construction is started. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-5-2: NOTIFICATION OF CONSTRUCTION:
The Village Engineer shall be notified at least twenty four (24) hours before
construction begins. Construction shall begin only after approval of
construction plans. Whenever construction stops for twenty four (24) hours or
longer, the Village Engineer shall be notified twenty four (24) hours before
construction begins again. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-5-3: INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Presence of Subdivider's Observer: The subdivider's engineer shall have
a full-time, qualified resident observer present on the construction site for
the following:
      1.   Approval of the subgrade prior to paving; and
      2.   Continuous observation of all phases of the paving operation,
construction of sanitary sewer mains and appurtenances and construction of
storm sewer and appurtenances and construction of water mains.
   B.   Presence of Subdivider's Contractor Superintendent: The subdivider's
contractor shall have a superintendent on the job site at all times while
construction is in progress. The superintendent shall be responsible for the
entire construction procedure. In his absence, the superintendent shall
indicate to the subdivider's observer, the person temporarily responsible for
the conduct of the work.
   C.   Inspection by Village Engineer: All required improvements to be
installed under the provisions of this Title shall be checked during the course
of construction by the Village Engineer. The cost of any reinspection of any
required improvement found to be faulty or not in accordance with the approved
plans and specification shall be paid by the subdivider to the Village. The
testing of any concrete, asphalt, soil, other materials or workmanship shall be
done at the direction of the Village and at the expense of the subdivider.
(Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-5-4: SECURITY FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   If construction has not been completed and approved by the Village
Engineer before the final plat is submitted to the Village Board, a security in
the amount equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated
construction costs of the public improvements must be filed with the Village
Clerk in order to insure completion of the public improvements as required by
this Title within a reasonable length of time without cost to the Village.
   B.   The form and sufficiency of security shall be subject to the approval
of the Village Attorney and the Village Engineer. The subdividers shall file
their recommendation that the security be accepted at the time the security is
filed with the Village Clerk. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-5-5: LENGTH SECURITY IN EFFECT; FORFEITURE:
The security shall remain in effect until it is released by the Village Board
upon acceptance of the public improvements 1 . All public improvements must be
completed within two (2) years from the date when the security was approved. If
public improvements have not been completed within said two (2) years, the
subdivider shall forfeit the security in the amount necessary for the Village
to carry out the construction or repairs so that the public improvements meet
the standards of this Title, plus administrative costs involved. (Ord. 91-14,
9-23-91)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 10-6-7 of this Title.
10-5-6: APPROVAL OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
After the Village Engineer informs the Village that the following conditions
have been met, the public improvements shall be accepted by the Village:
   A.   The Village Engineer has inspected the construction and all necessary
repairs and corrections and certifies that the public improvements required by
this Title have been constructed.
   B.   As-built plans have been prepared by the subdivider's engineer and
delivered to the Village Engineer.
   C.   The Village Engineer has received a signed statement of a registered
professional engineer stating that the public improvements have been observed
during construction and installed to the specifications shown on the
construction plans. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
CHAPTER 6
FINAL PLAT
SECTION:
10-6-1: Purpose
10-6-2: Submission Requirements
10-6-3: Final Plat Review Process
10-6-4: Submission of Final Plat to Village Board
10-6-5: Village Board Approval
10-6-6: Recording the Final Plat
10-6-7: Acceptance of Public Improvements
10-6-1: PURPOSE:
The final plat is intended to provide the accurate location of lots, monuments
and property dedicated to public use. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-6-2: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
The final plat need not cover the entire preliminary plan area. It may cover
only the portion which the subdivider presently wishes to record and develop in
accordance with the staging approved with the preliminary plan. The final plat
submission shall include the following information on the plat and accompanying
documents:
   A.   Final Plat: The final plat shall be drawn in black india ink on a
reproducible material to a scale of not more than one hundred feet to the inch
(1"=100'). Maximum size of the plan sheets shall be twenty four inches by
thirty six inches (24" x 36"). If more than two (2) sheets are used, an index
sheet with component areas on the remaining sheets shall be included. The final
plat shall show:
      1.   The name of the owner and subdivider.
      2.   North point, scale and date of preparation and latest revisions.
      3.   Boundary lines with accurate distances and angles.
      4.   General land legal description of the plat with total acreage.
      5.   All lots designated by numbers and other grounds designated by names
and numbers.
      6.   Location of all survey monuments and their descriptions.
      7.   Location of all easements provided for public use, services or
utilities. Easements shall include anchor space for pole lines.
      8.   An accurate outline of any portions of the property intended to be
dedicated for public use.
      9.   Lines of all proposed streets with their widths and names.
      10.   The line of departure of one street from another.
      11.   The names and widths of adjoining streets.
      12.   All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating the
boundaries of the subdivision, lots, streets, easements and other areas for
public or private use. Linear dimensions shall be given to the nearest one one-
hundredth of a foot (1/100').
      13.   Radii, arcs, chords, points of tangency and central angles for all
curvilinear streets and radii for rounded corners.
      14.   If applicable, a note on the final plat stating:
         Approval of this final plat by the Village of Pawnee does not
constitute a guarantee that well water is of adequate quantity or quality for
residential needs or that a suitable sewage disposal system can be constructed
on each lot.
   Any guarantees are the subdivider's responsibility.
      15.   A statement indicating whether or not any part of the plat is
located in a special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
      16.   A notation stating any setbacks required through covenants if the
setbacks are different from those of the appropriate zoning district.
   B.   Accompanying Documents:
      1.   Letter from the Village Engineer approving the construction plans.
      2.   Proof of acquisition of an access permit from either the State or
the County Highway Department, whichever applies.
      3.   The certificate of a registered Illinois land surveyor attesting to
the accuracy of the survey and the location of all monuments shown. The
certificate may be filed as a supplement to the final plat.
      4.   Notarized acknowledgement of the plat by the owner or a duly
authorized attorney. This item may be a separate document or on the plat
itself.
      5.   Certification of perpetual maintenance of drainage areas and common
areas.
      6.   Exhibit showing the location of wells and seepage field areas (must
be large enough to accommodate 2 seepage fields) on each lot.
      7.   Any covenants or restrictions relating to the requirements of this
Title.
      8.   A signed statement of a registered professional engineer and the
owner of the land or his duly authorized attorney as required by the State
statutes concerning drainage. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-6-3: FINAL PLAT REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   The subdivider shall submit an appropriate number (10 to 12) of prints
of the final plat of the proposed subdivision to the Village Clerk with a
filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus five dollars ($5.00) per lot
to be deposited in the appropriate Village account. The subdivision will be
reviewed according to the filing deadline and review schedule established by
the Plan Commission. A final plat shall be reviewed only after approval of the
preliminary plan by the Plan Commission and approval of the construction plans
by the Village Engineer. Preliminary plans and final plats will not be reviewed
at the same meeting. However, if the preliminary plan is being reaffirmed, the
preliminary being reaffirmed and its final plat may be reviewed and approved at
the same meeting if there are no major changes required to reaffirm the
preliminary.
   B.   The Village Clerk shall retain one print and shall distribute the final
plats as follows:
         Two (2) prints to the Plan Commission;
         One print to the Water and Gas Department;
         One print to the Village Engineer;
         One print to the Zoning Administrator;
         One print to the Sangamon County Superintendent of Highways, if
applicable;
         One print to the Pawnee Fire Protection District;
         One print to the appropriate Township Highway Commissioner, if
applicable;
         One print to Cass Cable or successor cable franchisee; and
         One print to electric service company (CIPS or RECC) having
jurisdiction over the territory.
         The reviewing entities shall transmit any comments or requirements in
writing to the Plan Commission within one week of receipt.
   C.   The Plan Commission shall review the final plat to determine if it
meets the requirements of this Title and conforms to the preliminary plan
previously submitted. The Plan Commission shall recommend approval or
disapproval of the final plat no later than its second regularly scheduled
meeting after the plat was filed. Failure to act by the end of said second
regularly scheduled meeting shall constitute a recommendation of disapproval.
      1.   Disapproval: If the Plan Commission finds that the final plat does
not meet the requirements of this Title, the subdivider shall be notified, in
writing, of the Plan Commission's disapproval and of the noncompliance found.
      2.   Approval: If the Plan Commission finds that the final plat meets the
requirements of this Title, the subdivider shall submit the original and three
(3) prints to the Plan Commission. The following shall be printed or stamped on
the original plat and prints and signed by the chairman of the Plan Commission:
         The Final Plat of this subdivision is recommended to the Village Board
for approval by the Pawnee Plan Commission subject to the certifications set
forth in Section 10-6-4 of the Municipal Code.
   By:_______________________________
   Chairman
   Dated:____________________________
   Pawnee Plan Commission
   D.   The Plan Commission shall transmit the endorsed original plat and two
(2) prints to the Village Clerk for immediate reference to the Village Board.
One print of the endorsed final plat shall remain on file with the Plan
Commission. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-6-4: SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAT TO VILLAGE BOARD:
   A.   Upon receipt of the endorsed original final plat and two (2) prints,
the Village Clerk shall retain one print on file and shall deliver one print to
the Village Engineer.
   B.   The Village Clerk shall deliver the original final plat to the Village
Board at its next regular session after receiving the documents from the Plan
Commission.
   C.   The final plat shall remain pending on the agenda of the Village Board
and shall not be approved by the Village Board until the following have been
received:
      1.   Written certification from the Village Engineer that the public
improvements required by this Title have been approved as described in Section
10-5-6 of this Title or, in lieu of construction, a security has been provided
as described in Section 10-5-4 of this Title.
      2.   A certificate provided by the subdivider from the Sangamon County
Clerk indicating that payment of taxes is not delinquent.
   D.   If the requirements of this Section have not been met within two (2)
years from the final plat approval by the Plan Commission, the existing final
plat shall expire and must be resubmitted and reviewed as a new final plat.
(Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-6-5: VILLAGE BOARD APPROVAL:
When the requirements of Section 10-6-4 of this Chapter have been met, the
Village Board may by resolution approve the final plat, accept the security, if
any, and authorize the Mayor to sign the plat for and in the name of the
Village with the Village Clerk attesting to it. The Village Clerk shall retain
one print on file. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-6-6: RECORDING THE FINAL PLAT:
When the final plat has been approved by the Village Board and signed by the
Mayor and the Village Clerk, the original tracing shall be recorded by the
subdivider at the subdivider's expense in the office of the Recorder of Deeds
of Sangamon County, Illinois. If the final plat is not recorded within six (6)
months after approval by the Village Board, the plat must be resubmitted to the
Plan Commission to determine if any changes in the final plat are needed to
meet the requirements of this Title. No title to any lots shall be conveyed
until the original tracing is recorded. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-6-7: ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   After the Village Engineer has approved the public improvements as
described in Section 10-5-6 of this Title and has received a signed statement
from the subdivider stating that all contractors and subcontractors have been
paid and that there are no liens against the property, the Village Engineer
shall issue a letter to the subdivider and the Village Board stating that the
public improvements meet the Village standards. Within one month after
receiving the Village Engineer's approval, the Village Board shall release the
security, if any, and accept the public improvements.
   B.   In areas within the Village subdivision jurisdiction but outside the
Village corporate limits, the Village Engineer and County Superintendent of
Highways shall jointly determine whether the standards of this Title have been
met. If met, the Village Engineer shall so indicate in a letter to the
subdivider and the Village Board and the Village Board shall release the bond,
if any. The County Superintendent of Highways, as a representative of the
appropriate Township Highway Commissioner, shall indicate in a letter to the
Village Engineer approval of the streets to Sangamon County standards which
shall constitute acceptance of the streets by the appropriate Township Highway
Commissioner. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
CHAPTER 7
DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
10-7-1: State Specifications
10-7-2: Right of Way of Streets
10-7-3: Street Design
10-7-4: Lot and Block Design
10-7-5: Erosion and Sediment Control
10-7-6: Utility Easements; Location of Utilities
10-7-7: Surface Water Drainage
10-7-8: Sidewalks
10-7-9: Sewage Disposal
10-7-10: Water Supply
10-7-11: Electric Distribution
10-7-12: Street Lighting
10-7-13: Public Areas and Open Space
10-7-1: STATE SPECIFICATIONS:
Unless stated otherwise in this Title, all construction of public improvements
shall be performed in accordance with the latest revised edition of the "State
of Illinois Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction" adopted
by the Illinois Department of Transportation and the "Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois". If an engineering design or
construction situation arises not covered by the above cited standard
specifications or in the following sections, the decision of the Village
Engineer shall be followed. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-7-2: RIGHT OF WAY OF STREETS:
   A.   The location and width of all streets shall conform to the Arterial
Roadway Network Plan. The minimum width of a street right of way (R-O-W) shall
be as shown on the Arterial Roadway Network Plan, or if not shown on the plan,
shall not be less than the following:
 
1. Major arterial            110-210 foot R-O-W
2. Minor arterial            80-100 foot R-O-W
3. Collector street          60 foot R-O-W
4. Local street              50 foot R-O-W
5. Alley                     20 foot R-O-W
6. Existing township highway 80 foot R-O-W
 
   B.   Additional right of way may be required for drainage, slope,
maintenance or other reasons not directly related to street classification.
   C.   For subdivisions that adjoin existing streets, additional right of way
shall be dedicated, as needed, to meet the above requirements. This shall be
done as follows:
      1.   The entire additional right of way shall be provided when the
subdivision is located on both sides of the existing street.
      2.   One-half (1/2) of the required right of way shall be provided when
the subdivision is located on only one side of the existing street. However, in
no case shall the resulting right of way width be less than fifty feet (50').
(Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-7-3: STREET DESIGN:
The following requirements shall be incorporated into the design of all
streets:
   A.   Vertical Alignment:
      1.   Grades: The maximum grade on a major or minor arterial shall be five
percent (5%). The maximum grade on all other streets shall be eight percent
(8%). The minimum grade on all streets shall be four tenths of one percent
(0.40%). All street grades shall be subject to the approval of the Village
Engineer.
   B.   Horizontal Alignment:
      1.   Horizontal Curves: When a center line deflection angle is greater
than one degree (1°), the following curves will be required in the street:
major and minor arterials and collector streets shall have a minimum center
line radius of three hundred feet (300') and a minimum length of curve of one
hundred feet (100'); arterials and collectors having a design speed and/or
expected posted speed greater than thirty (30) miles per hour shall be
consistent with the latest revision of the horizontal curvature requirements of
ASSHTO; a Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, for the
appropriate roadway classification; all other types of streets shall have a
minimum center line radius of one hundred feet (100'). The pavement in all
cases shall be wide enough to allow the movement of a WB-50 Design vehicle, as
described in the State of Illinois, "Department of Transportation Design
Manual".
      2.   Intersections: Intersections of major and minor arterials and
collectors with roadways of the same classes shall not be closer than one-
quarter (1/4) of a mile from any other such functionally classed roadways'
intersections. These intersections shall be located at the one-quarter (1/4)
mile grid points.
      3.   Street Offsets: Street center line offsets shall not be less than
one hundred twenty five feet (125'), unless otherwise warranted to the
satisfaction of the Village Engineer.
      4.   Curb Corners: All curb corners shall have a minimum radius of twenty
five feet (25').
   C.   Pavement Construction: Except as may be approved by the Village Board
for a specific project, pavements shall be installed in accordance with the
following standards:
      All streets shall be constructed as follows:
      Aggregate Base course: 8" of CA-6 gradation per the Illinois Department
of Transportation’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,
latest revision.
      Surface course: Class A-3 per the Illinois Department of Transportation’s
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, latest revision.
   D.   Pavement Width:
      1.   All streets shall be improved with pavements to an overall width in
accordance with the following general guidelines:
 
Type of Street   Pavement Width
                 (edge of pavement to edge of pavement)
Major arterial   40 feet minimum
Minor arterial   32 feet
Collector street 27 feet
Local street     27 feet
 
      2.   The minimum pavement width shall be twenty seven feet (27') from the
edge of pavement to edge of pavement, not including the curb and gutter.
Different widths may be used depending on the anticipated traffic volumes and
parking demand. These widths of pavement shall be determined by the Plan
Commission and the Village Engineer in consultation with the engineer for the
subdivider. If a pavement width narrower than the above stated minimum results
from this consultation, the subdivider shall install "No Parking" signs at his
expense.
   E.   Curb and Gutter: The standard curb and gutter required adjacent to
flexible pavement shall be a mountable type constructed of Portland cement
concrete with the following dimensions: twenty four inches (24") wide, eight
inches (8") thick on the front face (pavement side), ten inches (10") thick on
the back face, seven inches (7") thick at center line (flow line), and a ten
inches (10") radius in the flow line. The curb and gutter adjacent to concrete
pavement, if poured monolithically, may be limited to the thickness of the
pavement.
   F.   Pavement Crown: The minimum crown used on all pavements shall be one-
quarter inch (1/4") per foot measured from the edge of the pavement to the
center line of the street.
   G.   Cul-de-Sac Streets: Local streets that are also cul-de-sac streets
shall be no more than six hundred feet (600') long unless necessitated by
topography in which case they shall be no longer than one thousand feet
(1,000'), unless provision is made for an interim turnaround with a radius
sufficient to accommodate emergency vehicles and/or a median entrance (see
subsection I of this Section). A turnaround shall be provided at the closed end
having an outside roadway diameter of at least eighty six feet (86') edge to
edge of pavement and a street right-of-way diameter of one hundred ten feet
(110'). No obstructions shall be permitted in the cul-de-sac turnaround.
   H.   Stub Streets: Access shall be provided to adjoining property not yet
subdivided. Proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of
such unsubdivided property. At the end of all temporary stub streets, a
barricade meeting the provisions of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices shall be installed by the subdivider. Stub streets in excess of
two hundred fifty feet (250') shall be provided with a temporary cul-de-sac
with an outside roadway diameter of at least ninety feet (90'). The type of
constructions shall be determined by the appropriate street authority in the
amount needed in excess of the normally required right of way for the temporary
turnaround. When the street is extended in the future, the extra turnaround
pavement shall be removed and curb and gutters and sidewalks constructed by the
subdivider who constructed the temporary pavement or by the subsequent lot
owner.
   I.   Multiple Access: Any area of development containing seventy (70) or
more single-family lots (or equivalent population) shall be served by two (2)
functioning points of access. Where higher densities of development are
proposed, a divided type entrance roadway may suffice with a median of adequate
width to ensure continued emergency access lanes on one side. Depending on
location and height of nearby poles or trees, the required median width shall
range between twelve feet (12') and thirty feet (30'). This type of roadway
construction is intended to accommodate higher density developments and not to
lengthen the overall length of a cul-de-sac.
   J.   Restriction of Access: When a subdivision or a portion of it adjoins a
major or minor arterial, no lot shall have direct access to the arterial. The
lot shall have adequate depth for screen planting on the portion of the lot
contiguous to the major or minor arterial.
   K.   Street Names and Street Signs:
      1.   A proposed street that is in alignment with and/or joins an existing
named street shall bear the name of the existing street. In no case shall the
proposed name of a street duplicate the name of an existing street within the
plat jurisdiction of this Title. The use of the suffix "street", "avenue",
"boulevard", "driveway", "place", "court" or similar description shall not be a
distinction sufficient to constitute compliance with this requirement.
      2.   Street name signs shall be erected at all intersections within the
Village jurisdiction at the expense of the subdivider and shall be subject to
the specifications of the "Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
   L.   Private Streets: There shall be no private streets platted in any
subdivision. Every subdivision lot shall be served from a publicly-dedicated
street.
   M.   Alleys: Alleys are not recommended in residential subdivisions unless
deemed necessary by the Plan Commission.
   N.   Ramps: Where sidewalks cross a barrier type curb and gutter as
described in subsection E2 hereof, ramps shall be constructed to accommodate
the handicapped. These ramps shall be constructed to the lines and grades shown
on the standard sidewalk ramp example. Inlets for storm drainage shall not be
located so that a pedestrian way will be interrupted by the inlet grates. Other
locations where these ramps are required shall be determined by the Village
Engineer.
   O.   Typical Street Section:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/93ca910a25e602c3faf81fd60b5f2e2e3bb970f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1267.gif]
   P.   Medians and Islands:
      1.   Where medians or islands are proposed, they shall be constructed
with barrier curbing. All medians and islands shall be the responsibility of
the subdivider and/or a subdivision association to maintain. No sign may be
installed in the median which blocks the sight distance at the intersection. If
such a sign is to be installed, detailed plans for the sign shall be submitted
with the construction plans for approval. In no case shall an island or median
contain any other sign or structure, except as may be placed for traffic
control under the direction of the Village Engineer.
      2.   The subdivider or subdivision association may landscape medians or
islands. Ground cover may not exceed a maximum height of twelve inches (12").
Any additional living plant material must be maintained to allow visibility
across, over or through medians and islands at a height of three to ten feet
(3' - 10') above the adjacent roadway pavements.
(Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91; amd. Ord. 20-11, 5-11-2020; Ord. 20-17, 8-10-2020)
10-7-4: LOT AND BLOCK DESIGN:
   A.   Size of Lots: Minimum lot sizes shall be the minimum for the applicable
zoning district of Pawnee, except when outside the corporate limits where a
private sewage disposal system is necessary. When a private sewage disposal
system will be used for greater than one year, lots shall be a minimum of
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
   B.   Lot Arrangement:
      1.   Side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or
substantially radial to curved street lines. However, for purposes of solar
orientation, side lot lines need not be at right angles to straight street
lines or radial to curved street lines; provided, that side lot lines run
within twenty degrees (20°) east or west from due north to due south. If side
lot lines are being varied for solar orientation, layout and building setbacks
shall also be oriented with their long axis running from east to west, with a
possible variation of twenty degrees (20°) to the southwest or twenty degrees
(20°) to the southeast.
      2.   Each lot shall front upon a public street.
      3.   Flag lots shall be permitted only if the Plan Commission determines
that no public health and safety problems or additional costs or difficulties
providing Municipal services will result.
      4.   Through lots shall be permitted only when access is prohibited to
one street as described in subsection
10-7-3J of this Chapter.
      5.   All lots must contain sufficient buildable area.
   C.   Sizes of Blocks: Blocks shall not be less than four hundred feet (400')
nor more than one thousand two hundred feet (1,200'), in length measured along
the greatest dimension of the enclosed block area. In blocks over eight hundred
feet (800') in length, the Plan Commission may require one or more public
crosswalks with a right of way of not less than ten feet (10') in width to
extend entirely across the block at locations deemed necessary at intervals not
closer than four hundred feet (400').
   D.   Survey Monuments: All survey monuments shall be located and be made of
the appropriate material as required by State law 1 .
   E.   Lot Grading:
      1.   Trees that cannot be saved, stumps, boulders and similar items shall
be removed.
      2.   All grading in the subdivision shall be related to the topography of
the surrounding area. All street embankments shall be raised at least one and
one-half feet (11/2') above the high water elevation.
      3.   All building lots shall be graded or have natural slopes that will
properly allow surface drainage to flow away from the principal structures to
be located on the lot.
      4.   Grading in the subdivision shall provide alternate drainage ways for
the purpose of carrying water away from homes and preventing damage during
periods of heavy rainfall. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 765 ILCS 205/1.
10-7-5: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:
   A.   During construction of public improvement, measures shall be taken to
control erosion and sedimentation to insure that sediment will not be
transported from the site by a storm event of 2-year frequency or less. The
erosion and sediment control plan shall include measures to stabilize and
protect disturbed areas, keep runoff velocities low, retain sediment on site
and protect disturbed areas from runoff. The location, type and configuration
of controls such as swales, berms, dams, sediment basins and release mechanisms
shall be included with the construction plans.
   B.   Temporary or permanent soil stabilization measures, whichever is
applicable, shall be applied within fifteen (15) days after final grading to
all areas where the soil has been disturbed or the vegetative cover removed.
Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seed bed preparation,
expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application and
kind and quantity of mulch for temporary or permanent vegetative control
measures shall be included with the construction plans. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-1991)
10-7-6: UTILITY EASEMENTS; LOCATION OF UTILITIES:
   A.   Utility Easements:
      1.   Utility easements shall be provided along front lot lines for the
purpose of erecting and maintaining one or more of the following facilities:
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, surface drainage, gas mains, underground
electric lines, telephone lines, cable TV and such other utilities reasonably
required for an urban structure.
      2.   Easements shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') in width. A utility
may be located in the street right of way if the respective company so desires
and appropriate permits have been obtained.
      3.   Alternate locations for various utilities shall be decided upon by
the appropriate utility companies, subject to the approval of the village
engineer. In no case shall streets, permanent buildings or other manmade
improvements that obstruct surface drainage be placed on rear or side lot
easements.
      4.   It is the responsibility of the subdivider to notify all utility
companies, in writing, when the land to be developed has been graded in
accordance with the construction plans and is ready for installation of a given
utility. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-1991)
   B.   Location Of Utilities:
      1.   Utilities (sewers, electric, water and gas), whenever possible,
shall be located in the public right of way or front lot easement in the
following manner: water and electric lines shall be located on the south and
east sides; sanitary sewer and gas lines shall be located on the north and west
sides. In some cases, however, electric lines may also be located on the north
and west sides. Storm sewers shall be located under the pavement near, but not
in, the center. Where a customer is to be located on the opposite side of the
street from the main, the village shall require, as part of the approved
construction plans, that the subdivider make a service connection at the main,
and that the subdivider run the service line or lateral under the street and
cap or stub the service line in an appropriate manner. (Ord. 02-05, 5-13-2002)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/93ca910a25e602c3faf81fd60b5f2e2e3bb970f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1269.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/93ca910a25e602c3faf81fd60b5f2e2e3bb970f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1271.gif]
      2.   The placement of storm sewers or electric lines in the rear of a lot
is strongly disfavored. Such a practice shall be allowed only upon the
developer's demonstration to the satisfaction of the village engineer that
circumstances absolutely require their placement in the rear, in which case the
following easement diagrams indicate placement:
         a.   Ten Foot Easements: When an easement will not include sanitary
sewer or surface drainage systems, a ten foot (10') easement width shall be
sufficient and the utilities shall be located as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/93ca910a25e602c3faf81fd60b5f2e2e3bb970f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1273.gif]
         b.   Fifteen Foot Easements: When an easement will include either a
sanitary sewer system or a surface drainage system, but not both systems, a
fifteen foot (15') easement shall be required and the utilities shall be
located as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/93ca910a25e602c3faf81fd60b5f2e2e3bb970f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1275.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/93ca910a25e602c3faf81fd60b5f2e2e3bb970f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1277.gif]
         c.   Twenty Foot Easements: When a utility easement will include both
a sanitary sewer system and a surface drainage system, a twenty foot (20')
easement shall be required and the utilities shall be located as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/93ca910a25e602c3faf81fd60b5f2e2e3bb970f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1279.gif]
         d.   Ten-Foot Access Easement: When sanitary or storm sewers are
located in the rear of a lot, a ten foot (10') easement in the side yard shall
be required from the street right of way to each manhole or inlet. (Ord. 91-14,
9-23-91)
10-7-7: SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE:
   A.   All subdivisions shall be developed with adequate surface drainage.
Surface water drainage improvements shall consist of storm sewers and/or open
channels, inlets, catch basins and manholes designed and constructed to conform
with the standards established by the Village Engineer and shall adequately
drain the area being developed, including drainage from other areas which
naturally drain through the area being developed.
   B.   If, as a result of the subdivision development, surface water is
deposited in existing roadside ditches in quantities exceeding their capacity,
the developer shall improve the ditches and replace culverts as needed to
handle the flow.
   C.   Unless engineering evidence is presented to the Village Engineer
warranting exceptions, storm sewers which will drain twenty (20) acres or less
for residential development shall be designed and constructed to meet the
following criteria:
      Major and minor arterials - 10 year storm frequency
      All other areas - 5 year storm frequency
   D.   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to provide grade
control for rear lot drainage to each lot owner. It shall be the lot owner's
responsibility to maintain the drainage course and to keep it free from
features that restrict natural drainage.
   E.   The controlled release and storage of excess storm water runoff shall
be required in combination for all of the areas indicated on the preliminary
plan.
      1.   The controlled release of storm water runoff shall not exceed the
release or discharge rate which existed at the site prior to development. This
rate shall be known as the pre-developed discharge rate. In the case of
multiple discharge locations, no location shall discharge at a rate higher than
the pre-developed discharge rate for that location under any set of conditions.
The controlled release rate in any case shall not exceed the rated capacity of
the existing natural downstream outlet channel or storm sewer system as
determined by the Village Engineer. The rate at which storm water runoff is
transported to a designated storage area may be as determined by the design
engineer and is unrestricted.
      2.   A natural or surface channel system shall be designed with adequate
capacity to convey the storm water runoff from all tributary upstream areas
through the development. This by-pass channel shall be designed to carry the
peak rate of runoff from a 50-year storm assuming all storm sewers are blocked
and that the upstream areas are fully developed and have been saturated with
antecedent rainfall. No habitable structures shall be constructed within this
channel; however, streets and parking or playground areas and utility easements
shall be considered compatible primary uses.
      3.   Storm water runoff capacity of detention facilities and discharge
rates from such facilities shall be calculated by analyzing volume and rate of
runoff during pre- and post- development conditions for the 10-year and the
100-year recurrence intervals.
         a.   Storage capacity and discharge rates shall be based on the
maximum calculated volume and peak flow of storm waters, respectively.
         b.   Storage facilities shall be designed using the Soil Conservation
Service (SS) method of calculating runoff discharge rate and total volume of
storage. The rational method of calculating runoff may be used for subdivisions
less than twenty (20) acres.
         c.   The storage volume shall be provided for the fully developed
watershed that is tributary to the area designated for detention purposes. The
control structure for discharge shall maintain the release rate at or below the
rate established in subsection E1 hereof for all rainfall events of 100-year or
less frequency.
      4.   a. Detention reservoirs or bottom storm water storage areas shall be
designed to serve a secondary purpose for recreation, open space or other types
of uses that will not be adversely affected by occasional or intermittent
flooding. A method of carrying the low flow through these areas shall be
provided in addition to a system of drains, and both shall be provided with a
positive gravity outlet to a natural channel or other storm sewer facility with
adequate capacity. The combination of storage of the water from a 100-year
storm and the design release rate shall not result in a storage duration in
excess of seventy two (72) hours. Maximum depths of planned storm water storage
shall not exceed four feet (4') unless the existing natural ground contours and
other conditions lend themselves to greater storage depth, which shall be
approved by the Village Engineer. Minimum grades for turf areas shall be four-
tenths of one percent (0.4%) and maximum slopes shall be ten percent (10%).
Storage area side slopes shall be kept as close to the natural land contours as
practical and a ten percent (10%) slope or less shall be used whenever
possible. If slopes greater than ten percent (10%) are necessary to meet
storage requirements or area restrictions, approval shall be obtained from the
Village Engineer, and suitable erosion control shall be provided in addition to
the protection required to insure public health and safety.
         b.   Outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as possible
and shall require little or no maintenance and/or attention for proper
operation. Each storm water storage area shall be provided with a method of
emergency overflow in the event that a storm in excess of the 100-year return
frequency storm occurs. The emergency overflow facility shall be designed to
function without maintenance and/or attention and shall become part of the
natural or surface channel system described in a preceding paragraph. Hydraulic
calculations shall protect the public health and safety. Storm water runoff
velocities shall be kept to a minimum and turbulent conditions at an outfall
control structure will not be permitted without complete protection for the
public safety. The use of restrictive fences shall be kept to a minimum and
shall be used only as a last resort when no other method is feasible.
      5.   Retention reservoir or wet bottom storm water storage areas shall be
designed with all of the items required for detention reservoir storage areas;
except, that a low flow conduit and a system of drains with a positive gravity
outlet shall not be required. However, the following additional conditions
shall be complied with:
         a.   Water surface area shall not exceed one-tenth (1/10) of the
tributary drainage area.
         b.   Shoreline protection shall be provided to prevent erosion from
wave action.
         c.   Minimum normal water depth shall be four feet (4'). If fish are
to be used to keep the pond clean, a minimum of one-fourth (1/4) of the pond
area shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') deep.
         d.   Facilities shall be available, if possible, to allow the pond
level to be lowered by gravity flow for cleaning purposes and shoreline
maintenance.
         e.   Control structures for storm water release shall be designed to
operate at full capacity with only a minor increase in the water surface water
level. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all design
features.
         f.   Aeration facilities to prevent pond stagnation shall be provided,
if necessary. Design calculations to substantiate the effectiveness of these
aeration facilities shall be submitted with construction plans. Agreement for
the perpetual operation and maintenance of aeration facilities shall be
prepared to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer and Plan Commission.
      6.   Where developments form only a portion of the watershed or contain
portions of several watersheds, the requirements for providing storage shall be
based upon that proportion of the area being developed as compared to the total
watershed tributary to the storage area. Compensating storage will be
acceptable whenever it is justified and feasible. As a watershed is developed
with a series of storm water storage facilities, due consideration will be
given for calculations of the allowable release rate and capacity of the
natural or surface channel system as described in subsection E2 hereof.
      7.   Where development of a property presents the threat of flooding or
damage by flash flood runoff to downstream residents, the facilities for
stormwater runoff control shall be constructed prior to any earthmoving or
drainage construction on the project site.
      8.   The construction of the stormwater control systems shall be
accomplished as part of the cost of land development. If the amount of storage
capacity can be increased to provide certain benefits to the surrounding
properties, negotiations for public participation in the cost of such
development may be feasible.
      9.   The ability to retain and maximize the ground water recharge
capacity of the area being developed is encouraged. Design of the stormwater
runoff control system as provided in subsection E4 of this section shall give
due consideration to providing ground water recharge to compensate for the
reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground surface is paved and/
or roofed over. The use of natural gravel deposits for the lower portions of
storm runoff storage areas, the flattening of drainage slopes and the retention
of existing topography are samples of possible recharge methods.
      10.   During the construction phase of land development, facilities shall
be provided by appropriate stock-pile design, to prevent the erosion and
washing away of the earth. Silting of downstream areas shall be prevented
through the strategic use of silting basins, sodding of runoff channels, and by
limiting the period of time during which the earth is stripped of vegetation.
      11.   Final engineering plans shall show complete details for all items
covered in this section. Plans, specifications and all calculations for
stormwater runoff control shall be submitted for review and approval as part of
the construction plan submittal or as part of the site plan submittal for large
scale developments.
      12.   Stormwater control systems, other than underground storm sewers are
not public improvements and will not be dedicated to the Village. The
subdivider shall, through the subdivision covenants, make provision for control
over and maintenance of stormwater control systems by a homeowner's association
or other means acceptable to the Plan Commission and Village Attorney. (Ord.
91-14, 9-23-1991)
10-7-8: SIDEWALKS:
Concrete sidewalks at least four feet (4') wide and four inches (4") thick
shall be constructed on both sides of each street at least four and one-half
feet (4.5') from and at least four inches (4") above the backs of the curbs.
Sidewalks shall be located one foot (1') inside the street right-of-way.
Sidewalks shall be constructed along all streets bordering the subdivision.
(Ord. 91-14, 9-23-1991)
10-7-9: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Sanitary Sewers: When a subdivision is located within the service area
of a public sanitary sewerage system, sanitary sewers shall be constructed
throughout the entire subdivision in such a manner as to serve adequately each
building lot.
      1.   Public sanitary sewers shall be located in the north or west
boulevard (between curb and sidewalk) within the street right-of- way or in a
fifteen foot (15') easement behind the sidewalk within the house setback area.
Parallel sewer lines along the street may be used. Sanitary sewers shall not be
located in the rear yard.
      2.   Under no circumstances shall the entrance of stormwater or ground
water to the sanitary sewers be permitted.
      3.   All sanitary sewer collections and disposal systems shall comply
with the ordinances of the Village, including title 7, chapter 3 of this Code,
and the requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   B.   Private Sewage Disposal Systems: Where no public sanitary sewerage
system is available, individual sanitary disposal systems shall be installed to
service individual dwelling units according to conditions set forth in section
10-2-3 of this title. These sanitary disposal systems shall be installed in
accordance with the latest revised edition of the Illinois Private Sewage
Disposal Licensing Act and Private Sewage Disposal Code promulgated by the
Illinois Department of Public Health and the applicable ordinance of the
Village. Sufficient area shall be provided to accommodate two (2) seepage
fields. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-1991)
10-7-10: WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Public Water Supply:
      1.   Water mains not less than six inches (6") in diameter shall be
constructed throughout the entire subdivision. Larger diameter pipes may be
required by the Village to provide for future transmission needs, in which
case, the Village shall pay any additional costs.
      2.   Every water supply system shall be designed in such a manner as to
provide an area fire flow meeting the requirements established by the Pawnee
Fire Protection District. Water mains larger than six inches (6") in diameter
shall be installed at the subdivider's expense if needed to provide the area
fire flow required by the Insurance Services Office Guild for determination of
required fire flow. A minimum of one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute with a
residual pressure of twenty (20) pounds per square inch shall be required. Fire
hydrants with shut-off valves at each hydrant shall be installed throughout the
entire system at maximum intervals of six hundred feet (600') or less if
required by the Fire Protection District. All fire hydrants shall be three (3)
nozzle hydrants with threads as specified by the Pawnee Fire Protection
District and shall have flow characteristics similar to those of a five and
one-quarter inch (51/4") hydrant valve.
   B.   Private Water Supply: When a public water supply is not feasible and
the subdivision is outside the corporate limits of Pawnee, a private well may
be used. Wells shall be constructed according to the Illinois Water Well Pump
Installation Code. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-7-11: ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION:
The underground electric distribution system shall be installed on utility
easements along front lot lines. Transformers shall normally be placed on every
other lot line with secondary conductors and distribution pedestals installed
on the opposite sides of the street. In some instances, transformers may be
installed on both sides of the street. All primary and secondary cables shall
be in conduit. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-7-12: STREET LIGHTING:
Street lights shall be installed along public streets in the Village by the
subdivider at intervals of no greater than every six hundred feet (600'). (Ord.
91-14, 9-23-91)
10-7-13: PUBLIC AREAS AND OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Due consideration shall be given to the allocation of areas suitably
located and of adequate size for playgrounds and parks for local or
neighborhood use as well as public service areas.
   B.   When a proposed school, neighborhood park, electric substation, water
storage tank, recreation area or public access to water frontage shown in the
Official Plan, if such a plan is adopted, is located in whole or part in a
proposed subdivision, the Village Board may require, as a condition of final
plat approval, that such space within the subdivision be reserved and not
developed for a period not to exceed one year from the date of such final plat
approval. Within the one year period, the appropriate public agency may acquire
the reserved property in the manner provided by law 1 . If the reserved site is
not acquired and no legal action is filed within the one year period, the
reservation shall become void and the site previously reserved may then be used
for other purposes. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 765 ILCS 205/1.01.
CHAPTER 8
MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
10-8-1: Purpose
10-8-2: Location Map
10-8-3: Final Plat Submission Requirements
10-8-4: Review Process
10-8-5: Submission of Minor Subdivision Plat to Village Board
10-8-6: Village Board Approval
10-8-7: Recording Minor Subdivision Plat
10-8-8: Limitations on Minor Subdivisions
10-8-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   A minor subdivision is the creation of a total of up to four (4) lots
(counting the original tract from which the lots are created) which front along
a public road.
   B.   The minor subdivision is designed to allow the sale of said lots
without the delay and expense of the conventional subdivision process. (Ord.
91-14, 9-23-91)
10-8-2: LOCATION MAP:
   A.   Location Map Submission Requirements: The location map shall consist of
data added to an existing base map of a suitable scale covering an area of at
least one mile radius from the tract proposed for development. The location map
shall show the following information:
      1.   Title of proposed subdivision.
      2.   North point, scale and date.
      3.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner, subdivider,
engineer and registered land surveyor with the name and address of the contact
person to whom any notice is to be sent.
      4.   Outline of the entire area owned or controlled by the subdivider
with approximate boundary dimensions and total acreage.
      5.   Existing streets and roads expected to serve the area to be
subdivided.
      6.   Existing utility lines expected to serve the area to be subdivided.
      7.   Existing and proposed zoning.
      8.   Method of sewage disposal.
      9.   Method of water supply.
      10.   Electric service provider.
      11.   Fire protection district.
      12.   School district.
   B.   Location Map Review Process:
      1.   The subdivider shall submit an appropriate number (10 to 12) of
prints of the location map to the Village Clerk according to the filing
deadline and review schedule established by the Plan Commission.
      2.   The Village Clerk shall retain one print and distribute the
remainder as follows:
            Two (2) prints to the Plan Commission;
            One print to the Water and Gas Department;
            One print to the Village Engineer;
            One print to the Zoning Administrator;
            One print to the Pawnee Fire Protection District;
            One print to the Sangamon County Superintendent of Highways or
Township Road Commission, as applicable;
            One print to the appropriate school district;
            One print to Cass Cable or successor cable franchisee; and
            One print to the electric service company (CIPS or RECC) having the
franchise over the subdivided area.
      3.   The entities listed in subsection B2 hereof shall transmit their
comments on suitability of the site, in writing, to the Plan Commission within
one week of receipt.
      4.   The Plan Commission shall review the suitability of the site based
on comments received and the suitability criteria outlined in Section 10-2-3 of
this Title. The Plan Commission shall either approve or disapprove the location
map based on the suitability of the site at its next regularly scheduled
meeting after the plan was filed. If the location map is disapproved, the
owners shall be informed, in writing, of the noncompliance found. The
Commission's decision may be appealed to the Village Board as described in
Section 10-11-3 of this Title.
10-8-3: FINAL PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Final Plat Submission Requirements: The final plat shall be consistent
with the current zoning district classification of the property. The following
shall be submitted on a plan drawn to a scale of no more than one hundred feet
to the inch (1"=100') or in accompanying documents:
      1.   North point, scale and date of preparation and any revisions.
      2.   Names and addresses of the owner, engineer and registered land
surveyor.
      3.   Total acreage.
      4.   Lot numbers.
      5.   Existing utilities and drainage courses within and adjacent to the
site.
      6.   Location of all present property lines, section lines, streets,
buildings and watercourses within the area and within one hundred feet (100')
of the area.
      7.   Location of proposed lots, setback lines and utility easements.
      8.   Contours referring to the United States Geological Survey datum with
intervals of two feet (2') or less unless a greater interval is required
because of terrain.
      9.   If applicable, a note on the final plat stating:
            Approval of this final plat by the Village of Pawnee does not
constitute a guarantee that well water is of adequate quantity or quality for
residential needs or that a suitable sewage disposal system can be constructed
on each lot.
   Any guarantees are the subdivider's responsibility.
      10.   A statement indicating whether or not any part of the plat is
located in a special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
      11.   A notation stating any setback required through covenants if the
setbacks are different from those of the appropriate zoning district.
   B.   Accompanying Documents: The following documents shall accompany the
final plat:
      1.   A signed statement of a registered professional engineer and the
owner of the land or his duly authorized attorney, as required by State
statutes concerning drainage.
      2.   Notarized acknowledgement of the plat by the owner or a duly
authorized attorney. This item may be a separate document or on the plat
itself.
      3.   The certificate of a registered Illinois land surveyor attesting to
the accuracy of the survey and the location of all monuments shown. The
certificate may be filed as a supplement to the final plat.
      4.   Exhibit showing the location of wells and seepage field areas (must
be large enough to accommodate 2 seepage fields) on each lot.
      5.   Any proposed subdivision covenants or restrictions. (Ord. 91-14, 9-
23-91)
10-8-4: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   The subdivider shall file an appropriate number (10 to 12) of prints of
the minor subdivision in the office of the Village Clerk with a filing fee of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) to be deposited to the appropriate Village
account. The subdivision will be reviewed according to the filing deadline and
review schedule established by the Plan Commission.
   B.   The Village Clerk shall retain one print on file and shall distribute
the prints as follows:
         Two (2) prints to the Plan Commission;
         One print to the Water and Gas Department;
         One print to the Village Engineer;
         One print to the Sangamon County Superintendent of Highways, if
applicable;
         One print to the appropriate Township Highway Commissioner, if
applicable;
         One print to the Zoning Department;
         One print to the Pawnee Fire Protection District;
         One print to Cass Cable or successor cable franchisee; and
         One print to the electric service company (CIPS or RECC) having the
franchise over the subdivided area.
      The reviewing entities shall transmit any comments or requirements to the
Plan Commission within one week of receipt.
   C.   The Plan Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval not later
than its second regularly scheduled meeting after the plan was filed with
Village Clerk. Failure to act by the end of said second regularly scheduled
meeting shall constitute a recommendation of disapproval.
      1.   Disapproval: If the Plan Commission finds that the minor subdivision
plat does not meet the requirements of this Title, it shall specify its
disapproval, in writing, and state the noncompliance found.
      2.   Approval: If the Plan Commission finds that the minor subdivision
plat meets the requirements of this Title, the subdivider shall submit the
original and three (3) plats to the Plan Commission. The following shall be
printed or stamped on the original plat and prints and signed by the chairman
of the Plan Commission:
The Plat of this subdivision is recommended to the Village Board for approval
by the Pawnee Plan Commission subject to the certifications set forth in Pawnee
Village Code Section ________________
   By:_____________________________
   Chairman
   Dated:__________________________
   Pawnee Plan Commission
   D.   The Plan Commission shall transmit the endorsed original plat and two
(2) prints to the Village Clerk for immediate reference to the Village Board.
One print of the endorsed minor subdivision plat shall remain on file in the
Plan Commission office. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-8-5: SUBMISSION OF MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT TO VILLAGE BOARD:
   A.   Upon receipt of the endorsed original minor subdivision plat and two
(2) prints, the Village Clerk shall retain one print on file and shall deliver
one print to the Village Engineer.
   B.   The Village Clerk shall deliver the original minor subdivision plat to
the Village Board at its next regular session after receiving the documents
from the Plan Commission.
   C.   The minor subdivision plat shall remain pending on the agenda of the
Village Board and shall not be approved by the Village Board until the
following have been received:
      1.   Written certification from the Village Engineer that the plat has
been reviewed and any required public improvements have been approved as
described in Section 10-5-6 of this Title or, in lieu of construction, a
security has been provided as described in Section 10-5-4 of this Title.
      2.   A certificate provided by the subdivider from the Sangamon County
Clerk indicating that payment of taxes is not delinquent.
   D.   If the requirements of this Section have not been met within two (2)
years from Plan Commission approval, the existing approvals and recommendations
shall expire and the plat must be resubmitted and reviewed as a new minor
subdivision. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-8-6: VILLAGE BOARD APPROVAL:
When the requirements of Section
10-8-4 of this Chapter have been met, the Village Board may by resolution
approve the minor subdivision plat and authorize the Mayor to sign the plat for
and in the name of the Village with the Village Clerk attesting to it. The
Village Clerk shall retain one print on file. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-8-7: RECORDING MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT:
   A.   When the minor subdivision plat has been approved by the Village Board
and signed by the Mayor and Village Clerk, the original tracing shall be
recorded by the subdivider at the subdivider's expense in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Sangamon County, Illinois.
   B.   If the minor subdivision plat is not recorded within six (6) months
after approval by the Village Board, the plat must be resubmitted to the Plan
Commission to determine if any changes in the plat are needed to meet the
requirements of this Title. No title to any lots shall be conveyed until the
original tracing is recorded. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-8-8: LIMITATIONS ON MINOR SUBDIVISIONS:
Only one minor subdivision shall be allowed for any parcel of record existing
July 1, 1989. If three (3) lots have been created from a parcel of record after
said date, all additional divisions at a later time shall follow conventional
subdividing procedures. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
CHAPTER 9
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
10-9-1: Purpose
10-9-2: Submission Requirements
10-9-3: Standards And Requirements
10-9-4: Review Process
10-9-5: Commission Action
10-9-6: Appeal Of The Plan Commission Decision
10-9-7: Construction And Securities
10-9-1: PURPOSE:
The large scale development site plan is required for any large scale
development. It is intended to provide a detailed layout of buildings,
utilities, other improvements and construction details to insure that Village
public health and safety standards and subdivision and applicable zoning
requirements are met.
The permitted uses and densities and other requirements of the site's existing
zoning district shall be met. Sites inside the Village limits, or outside the
Village limits but subject to an annexation agreement and located within 1.5
miles of the Village, are subject to the Village zoning ordinance. Sites
outside the Village limits and not subject to an annexation agreement are
subject to the Sangamon County zoning ordinance. However, all sites within 1.5
miles of the Village limits are subject to the Village's subdivision
jurisdiction. (Ord. 17-14, 8-14-2017)
10-9-2: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General: All proposed large scale development submissions shall consist
of the following elements:
      1.   A site plan.
      2.   Evidence of suitability per section
10-2-3 of this title.
      3.   The required review fee, which shall be as follows:
 
Residential large scale development  $100.00 plus $3.00/unit or 1,000 sq. ft.
                                     of non- residential use
                                     $500.00 plus actual cost to Village of
                                     plan review by engineers or other
Commercial or industrial large scale technical consultants. The $500.00 will be
development                          submitted at the time the site plan is
                                     submitted; the actual cost of plan review
                                     will be paid before final approval
 
   B.   Site Plans: The site plan shall include the following information at a
scale of no more than one hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100'):
      1.   Title of the development.
      2.   North point, scale and date.
      3.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner, subdivider and
engineer. A contact person should be designated.
      4.   Boundary lines with accurate distances and angles.
      5.   Acreage.
      6.   On-site vehicular circulation.
      7.   Parking.
      8.   Sidewalks.
      9.   Sewer distribution.
      10.   Site grading.
      11.   Storm drainage.
      12.   Location of structures.
      13.   Water distribution and size of mains.
      14.   Location of fire hydrants and valves.
      15.   Street profiles and typical cross-sections.
      16.   Yard setbacks.
      17.   Landscape plans.
      18.   Location of outdoor lighting and signs.
      19.   Traffic analysis if more than two hundred (200) cars are to be
accommodated on site.
      20.   Seal and signature of a registered professional engineer.
   C.   Variances: The subdivider may request variances of Village requirements
as part of a large scale plan submission, and all such requests shall be
handled in accordance with section
10-11-2 of this title. (Ord. 17-14, 8-14-2017)
10-9-3: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The plans must comply with all standards and requirements of applicable
Village codes including land subdivision regulations, zoning ordinance, if
applicable, any Arterial Roadway Network Plan and any Building, Housing and
Fire Codes. The following exceptions shall be observed:
      1.   Yard Requirements:
         a.   For all residential developments:
 
Front yard 30 feet
Side yard  20 feet each
Rear yard  20 feet
 
         b.   For all commercial and industrial districts:
 
Front yard 20 feet
Side yard  15 feet each
Rear yard  15 feet
 
         c.   Yard area shall be open area and not be used for parking.
         d.   When a commercial or industrial development abuts or adjoins a
residential district on a side or rear yard, an additional ten feet (10') shall
be required for each yard that abuts or adjoins a residential district. The
proposed commercial or industrial development shall be screened on each side
abutting or adjoining a residential district by a wall, opaque fence or densely
planted compact hedge not less than five feet (5') in height.
         e.   For all developments the front yard shall be that area fronting a
public width to accommodate unimpeded movement of fire vehicles. Pavement width
shall vary depending upon parking along the street and direction of vehicle
movement.
      2.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall provide pedestrian movement within the
development and to existing public streets or sidewalks. Sidewalks shall also
be constructed along streets adjoining the development. Sidewalks shall be a
minimum of four feet (4') wide, four inches (4") thick and be constructed of
Portland cement concrete. (Ord. 17-14, 8-14-2017)
10-9-4: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   The developer shall file an appropriate number (10 to 12) of the site
plan of the proposed development in the Office of the Village Clerk with the
required fee, to be deposited in the appropriate Village account. The site plan
will be reviewed according to the filing deadline and review schedule
established by the Plan Commission.
   B.   The Village Clerk shall retain one print on file and distribute the
prints as follows:
         Two (2) prints to the Plan Commission;
         One print to the Water and Gas Department;
         One print to the Village Engineer;
         One print to the Sangamon County Superintendent of Highways, if
applicable;
         One print to the appropriate Township Highway Commissioner, if
applicable;
         One print to the Zoning Administrator;
         One print to the Pawnee Fire Protection District;
         One print to cable franchisee; and
         One print to the electric service company (CIPS or RECC) having the
franchise over the subdivided area.
   The reviewing entities shall review the plans for conformance with Village
codes and transmit any comments or requirements in writing to the Plan
Commission within three (3) weeks of receipt. (Ord. 17-14, 8-14-2017)
10-9-5: COMMISSION ACTION:
   A.   General: The Plan Commission shall conduct a meeting to consider the
Large Scale Plan, at which a representative of the developer shall appear. In
the case of a commercial or industrial large scale development, the Village
Engineer shall also appear. Consideration of the Large Scale Plan shall be
limited to the issues of whether suitability has been shown and whether the
plan meets the requirements of this chapter. At the meeting, any variances
requested by the developer shall also be considered. The meeting shall be
conducted in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, and members of the public
may make comments in accordance with section
1-5-8 of this Code.
   B.   Approval: If the Plan Commission finds that the site plan meets the
requirements of this chapter, the subdivider shall submit three (3) prints to
the Plan Commission. The Chairman shall indicate approval on the plan in
substantially the following language:
      This large scale development is approved.
   By:                                
      Chairman
   Date:                             
   One print so endorsed shall be retained on file in the Village office, one
endorsed print shall be sent to the Village Engineer, and the third endorsed
print shall be returned to the developer or his representative.
   C.   Disapproval:
   If the Plan Commission finds that the site plans do not comply with the
requirement of this chapter, it shall inform the developer of its disapproval
in writing and state the non-compliance found.
   One print of the proposed site plan with the written findings of the Plan
Commission disapproving the plan shall be retained by the Plan Commission.
   If the developer desires to amend the disapproved large scale plans, the
developer shall submit ten (10) prints of the amended plan to the Village Clerk
which shall be reviewed according to the filing deadline and review schedule
established by the Plan Commission. No filing fee shall be necessary except, if
applicable, additional plan review fees in the case of a commercial or
industrial large scale plan. The Village Clerk shall transmit copies of the
amended plan as described in section
10-9-3 of this chapter, and review will proceed as indicated in said section.
(Ord. 17-14, 8-14-2017)
10-9-6: APPEAL OF THE PLAN COMMISSION DECISION:
If the large scale development plans are found unsatisfactory and are not
approved by the Plan Commission, the developer may appeal the decision to the
Village Board as described in section
10-11-3 of this title. (Ord. 17-14, 8-14-2017)
10-9-7: CONSTRUCTION AND SECURITIES:
   A.   No building permits shall be issued for any structure or mobile homes
that are subject to the review process outlined above until the Plan Commission
has found the plans meet the Village standards, that utility services will be
adequate and that drives, street improvements, grading and drainage
construction work either have been installed according to standards or a
security for the completion has been given to the Village in the same amount
and in the manner called for in the Village land subdivision ordinance.
Security for completion of private drives, streets, grading, drainage, etc.,
shall not be required where residential developments containing less than eight
(8) living units are to be built or security provided.
   B.   If construction has not begun one year from Plan Commission approval,
the approval shall expire and the plans must be resubmitted as described in
section
10-8-3 of this title. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-1991)
CHAPTER 10
TRACT SURVEYS
SECTION:
10-10-1: Purpose
10-10-2: Submission Requirements
10-10-3: Fees
10-10-4: Review Procedure
10-10-5: Recording
10-10-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Tract survey approval shall be required as set forth in section
10-1-5 of this title.
   B.   Tract survey approval is designed to insure that all divisions of land
comply with the Illinois Plat Act, this title and the applicable zoning
ordinance which, for properties located within the Village or subject to the
Village's zoning jurisdiction through an annexation agreement, is the Village
zoning ordinance.
   C.   Tract survey jurisdiction is limited to the corporate limits of the
Village and the Village's 1.5 mile extraterritorial subdivision jurisdiction.
(Ord. 17-15, 10-9-2017)
10-10-2: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
When a tract survey is required by this chapter, a land survey shall be
submitted to the Plats Officer, which includes:
   A.   A north arrow, scale and date.
   B.   The name, address and phone number of the land surveyor and owner.
   C.   A certification by an Illinois professional land surveyor, together
with the surveyor's seal, attesting to the accuracy of the survey.
   D.   A statement indicating whether or not any part of the land surveyed is
located in a special flood hazard area.
   E.   The location of 100-year floodplain, if applicable.
   F.   The location of all building and their distances from front, rear, and
side property lines.
   G.   The applicable parcel identification number. (Ord. 17-15, 10-9-2017)
10-10-3: FEES:
The fee for a tract survey shall be paid directly to the Plats Officer. The fee
shall be established from time to time by the Sangamon County Board, whether
pursuant to resolution 10-1 filed October 12, 2000, or a subsequent resolution
or ordinance. The Springfield-Sangamon County Regional Plan Commission shall
keep all fees paid by the applicant. (Ord. 17-15, 10-9-2017)
10-10-4: REVIEW PROCEDURE:
   A.   Five (5) copies of the tract survey shall be submitted to the Plats
Officer accompanied by the appropriate fee.
   B.   The Plats Officer shall review the survey to insure that it conforms to
the pertinent requirements of this title and applicable zoning regulations. The
owner shall be notified of tract survey approval or disapproval as soon as
practicable.
      1.   Disapproval: If the Plats Officer finds that the tract survey does
not meet the requirements of this title, the disapproval and noncompliance
found shall be specified, in writing.
      2.   Approval: If the Plats Officer finds that the tract survey meets the
requirements of this title, the Plats Officer shall indicate his or her
approval with an appropriate notation and signature on the original and prints
of the survey.
   C.   The Plats Officer shall keep one copy and transmit four (4) copies of
the approved tract survey to the owner for recording. (Ord. 17-15, 10-9-2017)
10-10-5: RECORDING:
It is the responsibility of the owner to record the approved tract survey with
the Recorder of Deeds of Sangamon County. Tract surveys not recorded within one
hundred eighty (180) days of approval are void. (Ord. 17-15, 10-9-2017)
CHAPTER 11
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
10-11-1: Procedure at Public Hearings
10-11-2: Variance of Subdivision Requirements
10-11-3: Review of Adverse Commission Decision
10-11-4: Penalty
10-11-5: Effective Date
10-11-1: PROCEDURE AT PUBLIC HEARINGS:
The rules for conducting the public hearing provided for in this Title shall be
published by filing the same in the office of the Village Clerk. (Ord. 91-14,
9-23-91)
10-11-2: VARIANCE OF SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A subdivider may request a variance of the requirements of this Title.
Application for a variance shall be made, in writing, and submitted with the
location and sketch maps unless the need is not then evident. Variance
applications shall clearly state the provisions to be varied and the reasons
why the variance is needed. In all cases, variance requests shall be made no
later than the time the preliminary plan is reviewed by the Plan Commission.
   B.   If, as a result of changes imposed by the Plan Commission at its
preliminary plan review meeting, the subdivider desires a variance, it may be
requested orally at that meeting.
   C.   A variation from the requirements of this Title may be granted if the
Plan Commission finds that the subdivision substantially complies with the
following requirements:
      1.   The intent of this Title is maintained;
      2.   Extraordinary circumstances of topography, land ownership, adjacent
development or other circumstances not provided for in this Title exist;
      3.   The extraordinary circumstances will result in a hardship, not
merely an inconvenience;
      4.   The circumstances upon which the request for variance is based are
not common to most other tracts of land;
      5.   The circumstances upon which the request for variance is based are
not the result of the subdivider's affirmative act or failure to act; and
      6.   The purpose of a variation is not based exclusively on the desire to
eliminate development costs at the expense of the public improvement standards
as outlined in this Title.
   D.   Action by the Plan Commission to approve a preliminary plan containing
variances shall not be deemed final until the preliminary plan is approved by
the Village Board. The Commission shall send said plan to the Village Clerk who
shall deliver it with the letter of transmittal to the Village Board at its
next regular session. If the Village Board finds that the subdivision
substantially complies with the requirements of subsection C of this Section,
it shall approve the plan. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-11-3: REVIEW OF ADVERSE COMMISSION DECISION:
If a preliminary plan, minor subdivision location map, or large scale
development site plan is disapproved by the Plan Commission, the subdivider may
file a petition within thirty (30) days of the Plan Commission's decision with
the Village Clerk asking for review of the Commission's decision by the Village
Board. The petition shall point out those parts of the Commission's decision to
which the subdivider objects. A public hearing shall be conducted by the
Village Board after a one week's notice has been mailed by the Village Clerk to
the subdivider. During the hearing, the Village Board shall review the
sufficiency or the propriety of the plan in light of the Plan Commission's
decision. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Village Board may affirm or
modify the decision of the Plan Commission or approve the preliminary plan,
location map or site plan. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91)
10-11-4: PENALTY:
Any subdivider who violates any of the provisions of this Title shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 91-14, 9-23-91; 1994
Code)
10-11-5: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Title shall become effective upon its passage, approval and publication as
required by law. The Clerk shall forthwith publish this Title in pamphlet form
and furnish a copy to any member of the public for ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord.
91-14, 9-23-91)
TITLE 11
FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purpose
11-1-2: Definitions
11-1-3: Base Flood Elevation
11-1-4: Duties Of The Zoning Administrator
11-1-5: Development Permit
11-1-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
11-1-7: Protecting Buildings
11-1-8: Subdivision Requirements
11-1-9: Public Health And Other Standards
11-1-10: Variances
11-1-11: Disclaimer Of Liability
11-1-12: Penalty
11-1-13: Severability
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to municipalities
pursuant to the Illinois municipal code, including, but not limited to,
sections
1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-2, 11-30-8, and 11-31-2 thereof, in order to accomplish
the following purposes:
   A.   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   B.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   C.   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   D.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   E.   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   F.   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   G.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 04-02, 4-12-2004)
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
11-1-3 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls
and a roof including manufactured homes, prefabricated buildings, and gas or
liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel
trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per
year.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any public or private facility which, if flooded, would
create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life
and health. Examples are public buildings, emergency operations and
communication centers, healthcare facilities and nursing homes, schools, and
toxic waste treatment, handling or storage facilities.
DEVELOPMENT: A. Any manmade change to real estate including, but not
necessarily limited to:
      1.   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
      2.   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
      3.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
      4.   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts
or similar projects;
      5.   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls, or fences;
      6.   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
      7.   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks; and
      8.   Channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
   B.   "Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION OR FPE: The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): Are synonymous. Those lands
within the jurisdiction of the village, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of
the village, or that may be annexed into the village that are subject to
inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of the village are generally
identified as such on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Sangamon
County, Illinois, prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated
May 3, 2004. "Floodplain" also includes those areas of known flooding as
identified by the community.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway for the floodplains of Horse Creek and Henkle Branch shall
be as delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Sangamon County,
Illinois, prepared by FEMA and dated May 3, 2004. The floodways for each of the
remaining floodplains of the village shall be according to the best data
available from federal, state, or other sources.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water resources.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Hazard Area (SFHA).
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is
started, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: a) any
project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions or b) any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic
Places.
TRAVEL TRAILER OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
VILLAGE: The village of Pawnee, Illinois. (Ord. 04-02, 4-12-2004)
11-1-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   A.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Horse Creek and Henkle
Branch shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide
flood insurance study of Sangamon County prepared by the federal emergency
management agency dated May 3, 2004.
   B.   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH zone"
or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the countywide
flood insurance rate map of Sangamon County, Illinois, dated May 3, 2004.
   C.   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance rate map of
Sangamon County, Illinois, shall be according to the best data available from
federal, state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering
study must be financed to determine base flood elevations.
   D.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Sangamon County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the village, or that may be annexed into the village, shall be
as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles of the countywide flood insurance
study of Sangamon County prepared by the federal emergency management agency
and dated May 3, 2004. (Ord. 04-02, 4-12-2004)
11-1-4: DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The zoning administrator shall be responsible for the general administration of
this chapter and ensure that all development activities within the floodplains
under the jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements of this chapter.
Specifically, the zoning administrator shall:
   A.   Process development permits in accordance with section
11-1-5 of this chapter;
   B.   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
11-1-6 of this chapter;
   C.   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
11-1-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as built"
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   D.   Ensure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
11-1-8 of this chapter;
   E.   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
11-1-9 of this chapter;
   F.   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
11-1-10 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   G.   Inspect all development projects and take any and all actions outlined
in section
11-1-12 of this chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   H.   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   I.   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse;
   J.   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   K.   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
and
   L.   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies
of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development
activities subject to this chapter.
   M.   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain.
   N.   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 04-02, 4-12-2004)
11-1-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator
shall not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet
the requirements of this chapter.
   A.   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
11-1-7 of this chapter;
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   B.   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the zoning
administrator shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to
be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled
after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map is not in the
floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter.
Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood
elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current flood
insurance rate map is subject to the provisions of this chapter. The zoning
administrator shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at
the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior
to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification. (Ord.
04-02, 4-12-2004)
11-1-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within the floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development, will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat
to public health and safety. The following specific development activities
shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit no. 3;
      2.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit no. 4;
      3.   Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit
no. 5;
      4.   Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit no. 6;
      5.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 7;
      6.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 8;
      7.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit no. 9;
      8.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 10;
      9.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 11;
      10.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 12;
      11.   Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit no. 13; and
      12.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area.
   B.   Other development activities not listed in subsection A of this section
may be permitted only if:
      1.   A permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); and
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 04-02, 4-12-2004)
11-1-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   A.   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of section
11-1-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building valued at more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet;
      2.   Substantial improvements made to an existing building. This
alteration shall be figured cumulatively beginning with any alteration which
has taken place subsequent to the adoption of this chapter;
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively beginning with any repairs which have taken place
subsequent to the adoption of this chapter.
      4.   Structural alterations made to an existing building that increase
the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%);
      5.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage); and
      6.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      7.   "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
11-1-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent landfill in accordance
with the following:
         a.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation;
         b.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
         c.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure;
         d.   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporate
debris or refuse materials; and
         e.   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties and when necessary, storm water management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated; or
      2.   The building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
         a.   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters;
         b.   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation;
         c.   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade. The openings shall provide a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation;
         d.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice and floating debris;
         e.   The finished interior grade shall not be less than the finished
exterior grade;
         f.   All structural components below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
         g.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed; and
         h.   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space.
   C.   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile
home tie down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code 870.
   D.   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days shall meet the elevation requirements of subsection C
of this section unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck. The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;
      2.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches;
      3.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling;
      4.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet;
      5.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated;
      6.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement out of the floodplain;
      7.   Propane tanks, electrical and sewage connections must be quick
disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation;
      8.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model;
      9.   The vehicle must be either: a) entirely supported by jacks rather
than blocks or b) have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires
touching the ground, and be supported by blocks in a manner that will allow the
blocks to be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   E.   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu
of elevation) provided a registered professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood;
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice; and
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity. Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   F.   Garages or sheds constructed ancillary to a residential use may be
permitted provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable;
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use;
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway;
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot;
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage;
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation;
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening for
every square foot of floor area;
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than seven thousand five hundred
dollars ($7,500.00) in market value or replacement cost, whichever is greater,
or less than five hundred (500) square feet;
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning;
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation;
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
   G.   A building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
      1.   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
      2.   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade;
      3.   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade;
      4.   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet
(4') at any point;
      5.   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable period of time
after a flood event;
      6.   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must
be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
      7.   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation. (Ord. 04-02, 4-12-2004)
11-1-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The zoning board/plan commission and the village board shall take into account
flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions
related to land management use and development.
   A.   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protection standards
of sections
11-1-6 and 11-1-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall
include the following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain (where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation);
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      3.   A signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 . (Ord. 04-02, 4-12-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
11-1-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   A.   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
11-1-6 and 11-1-7 of this chapter, the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
11-1-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters;
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Critical facilities shall be protected to the 500-year flood
elevation. In addition, all ingress and egress from any critical facility must
be protected to the 500-year flood elevation.
   B.   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not
to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 04-02, 4-12-
2004)
11-1-10: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the zoning board of appeals
for a variance. The zoning board of appeals shall review the applicant's
request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the village
board. The village board shall grant or deny a variance by resolution or
ordinance, and may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems
necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
   A.   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all
of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health or safety, or
creation of a nuisance;
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      7.   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained.
   B.   The zoning board of appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that a
variance from the requirements of the building protection standards of section
11-1-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   C.   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
11-1-7 of this chapter requested in connection with the reconstruction, repair
or alteration of a site or building included on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places may be granted
using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsection
11-1-9A1 through A5 of this chapter. (Ord. 04-02, 4-12-2004)
11-1-11: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
This chapter is based on a model ordinance provided and mandated by the state
of Illinois. The state of Illinois considers the degree of protection required
by this chapter to be reasonable for regulatory purposes and claims that the
model ordinance is based on available information derived from engineering and
scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be
increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that
development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free from
flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of the
village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results
from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 04-02, 4-12-2004)
11-1-12: PENALTY:
   A.   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure
to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the village board may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. In
such event, the village board shall direct the village clerk to notify the
owner in writing of such violation. The notice shall be delivered by hand or
shall be mailed, certified mail, return receipt requested.
   B.   If such owner fails within ten (10) days after personal service of a
notice, or thirteen (13) days after the date of mailing of a notice, to correct
the violation:
      1.   The village shall make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter;
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
      4.   The village shall record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   C.   As part of the notice, the village clerk shall inform the owner that
any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and
therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.
   D.   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 04-02, 4-12-2004)
11-1-13: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed severable and the
invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the
remainder. (Ord. 04-02, 4-12-2004)
TITLE 12
ADULT USES
CHAPTER 1
ADULT USES REGULATED
SECTION:
12-1-1: Definitions
12-1-2: Liquor Sale And Consumption Prohibited
12-1-3: Location
12-1-4: Criminal Background Requirement
12-1-5: Permit Review
12-1-6: Action By Chief Of Police
12-1-7: Action By Corporate Authorities
12-1-8: Exterior Display
12-1-9: Existing Adult Uses
12-1-10: Permit Renewal
12-1-11: Offenses
12-1-12: Penalties
12-1-13: Enlargement Or Change In Nature Of Use
12-1-14: Severability
12-1-15: Appendix A
12-1-16: Appendix B
12-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or for
viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin operated means,
and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or
"specified anatomical areas"; or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such materials; or an establishment that
holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its
signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin
operated booths, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any
other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such
material.
ADULT CLUB: A public or private establishment, a primary purpose of which is to
provide members or guests with a venue to perform "specified sexual activities"
with other members or guests.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which: a)
features topless dancers, strippers, "go-go" dancers, male or female
impersonators, lingerie or bathing suit fashion shows; b) not infrequently
features entertainers who display "specified anatomical areas"; or c) features
entertainers who by reason of their appearance or conduct perform in a manner
which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient interest of the patron or
features entertainers who engage in, or are engaged in explicit simulation of,
"specified sexual activities".
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY: As defined by section
11-5-1.5 of the Illinois municipal code, "a striptease club or a pornographic
movie theatre whose business is the commercial sale, dissemination, or
distribution of sexually explicit material, shows or other exhibitions or an
adult book store or adult video store whose primary business is the commercial
sale, dissemination, or distribution of sexually explicit material, shows or
other exhibitions".
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A building or area used for presenting materials
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"
for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT NOVELTY STORE: An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing
"novelties", lotion and other items distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on or use for "specialized sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of
such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales,
exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors
showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.
ADULT USE: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult entertainment
cabarets, adult entertainment facility, adult novelty stores, adult clubs, and
other similar uses of property within the village.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
      1.   Human genitals,
      2.   Pubic region,
      3.   Buttock,
      4.   Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola, and
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
   B.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
   C.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breasts; and excretory functions as part of or in connection
with any of the foregoing activities. (Ord. 01-15, 10-22-2001)
12-1-2: LIQUOR SALE AND CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED:
No liquor license shall be issued and no liquor shall be sold or consumed on
the premises of any adult use. (Ord. 01-15, 10-22-2001)
12-1-3: LOCATION:
Adult uses are permitted only in areas zoned I industrial under the zoning
title of this code, provided:
   A.   No adult use shall be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any
property which is zoned residential or used for residences, churches, schools,
parks or another adult use;
   B.   In accordance with section
11-5-1.5 of the Illinois municipal code, no adult entertainment facility shall
be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property boundaries of any
school, daycare center, cemetery, public park, forest preserve, public housing,
and place of religious worship;
   C.   No adult use shall be located in a building in which there is an
establishment selling alcoholic liquors. (Ord. 01-15, 10-22-2001)
12-1-4: CRIMINAL BACKGROUND REQUIREMENT:
No permit shall be issued to a person who has been convicted of any felony or
misdemeanor involving prostitution, obscenity or other offense of a sexual
nature, or to a business entity, any manager or owner of five percent (5%) or
more of the interest of which has been convicted of such a crime. (Ord. 01-15,
10-22-2001)
12-1-5: PERMIT REVIEW:
Permits for constructing or occupying an adult use shall be issued only after
the following review process. The applicant shall apply to the zoning
administrator for the permit; the application shall be accompanied by a three
hundred fifty dollar ($350.00) application fee. The application shall be on a
form substantially in the form of appendix A of this chapter.
The zoning administrator shall provide a copy of the application to the chief
of police, and shall process the portion of the application marked "For Zoning
Administrator's Review" and shall forward the application to the planning
commission for review. Within sixty (60) days of filing, the planning
commission shall conduct a review of the application for conformance with the
zoning, subdivision, and adult use titles of this code. The planning commission
shall render a recommendation to the village board as to whether the proposed
adult use conforms with all village ordinances, and may recommend conditions on
the development and operation of the adult use related to site plan, floor
plan, construction materials, lighting, parking and circulation, ingress and
egress, landscaping and screening, and signage in order to assure that the
design and operation of the adult use is in conformance with all village
ordinances and is compatible with surrounding uses. (Ord. 01-15, 10-22-2001)
12-1-6: ACTION BY CHIEF OF POLICE:
The chief of police shall run a criminal background check on all persons
disclosed by the application to have a five percent (5%) or greater ownership
interest in the permit application, in order to verify that no such persons
have been convicted of the crimes of prostitution, obscenity, or other crimes
of a sexual nature. The chief of police shall report his findings to the
village board. (Ord. 01-15, 10-22-2001)
12-1-7: ACTION BY CORPORATE AUTHORITIES:
Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the planning commission's recommendation,
the village board shall, by resolution, duly made, seconded, passed, and signed
by the village president, grant or deny the permit. The village board's action
shall specify the location, by legal description and common address, of the
adult use, and shall specify the nature of the adult use permitted. The village
board may place conditions on the adult use. The village board's determination
is a final agency action subject to administrative review. (Ord. 01-15, 10-22-
2001)
12-1-8: EXTERIOR DISPLAY:
No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of
any material depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from any property not
registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply to any display,
decoration, sign, show window or other opening. (Ord. 01-15, 10-22-2001)
12-1-9: EXISTING ADULT USES:
Any adult use which existed lawfully, but which became nonconforming upon the
adoption of this chapter, may be continued as hereinafter provided:
   A.   Upon written notice from the village to the owners or interests therein
that any building, structure, lot or regulated use is nonconforming under the
provisions of the zoning ordinance as amended, the owners or interests therein
shall, within two (2) months from the date of such notice, apply to the village
clerk for a certificate of nonconformance.
   B.   Failure to apply for a certificate of nonconformance within two (2)
months of the notice provided in subsection A of this section will require the
amortization of the nonconformance within six (6) months of the notice provided
for in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Nonconformances that have applied for a certificate of nonconformance
from the village clerk shall be discontinued within one year of the notice
provided in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 01-15, 10-22-2001)
12-1-10: PERMIT RENEWAL:
   A.   Except as set forth in subsection B of this section, a permit granted
pursuant to this chapter is valid until December 31 of the year in which it is
granted. During the month of December of each year, each licensee shall apply
for a permit renewal, using the permit renewal application set forth in
appendix B of this chapter. A renewal permit, when granted, shall be valid
until December 31 of the following year. The annual permit renewal fee shall be
fifty dollars ($50.00).
   B.   Upon any change in ownership of greater than five percent (5%) of a
corporate or LLC licensee, the licensee shall apply for a permit renewal, using
application set forth in appendix B of this chapter. The renewal permit shall
be valid until December 31 of the year in which it was issued.
   C.   The chief of police shall run a criminal background check on all
persons disclosed by a renewal application under either subsection A or B of
this section to have a five percent (5%) or greater ownership interest in the
applicant, in order to verify that no such persons have been convicted of the
crimes of prostitution, obscenity, or other crimes of a sexual nature. The
chief of police shall report his findings to the village president. Renewal
permits shall be granted by the village president unless the village president
finds that the applicant is in violation of this chapter or any other provision
of this code, or of the conditions of the original permit. Any denial of a
renewal permit application is subject to administrative review. (Ord. 01-15,
10-22-2001)
12-1-11: OFFENSES:
   A.   No natural person, and no legal person such as a corporation, limited
liability company, or other business entity shall own, manage, or operate an
adult use within the corporate limits of the village without a permit from the
village obtained in accordance with this chapter.
   B.   No natural person, and no legal person such as a corporation, limited
liability company, or other business entity shall provide false information on
an application for an adult use permit.
   C.   No natural person, and no legal person such as a corporation, limited
liability company, or other business entity shall own, manage or operate an
adult use within the corporate limits of the village except in conformance with
this chapter. (Ord. 01-15, 10-22-2001)
12-1-12: PENALTIES:
Natural and legal persons found guilty of violating this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day
a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. Where a corporation,
limited liability company or other legal person owns or operates an adult use,
all officers, directors, managers and employees who knowingly participated in
management decisions shall be liable to the same extent as the legal person.
(Ord. 01-15, 10-22-2001)
12-1-13: ENLARGEMENT OR CHANGE IN NATURE OF USE:
An adult use permit is specific to a location and to a use. No adult use may be
enlarged, nor the nature of the adult use changed, without the owner and
manager thereof securing a new permit. (Ord. 01-15, 10-22-2001)
12-1-14: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of this chapter,
or if section
11-5-1.5 of the Illinois municipal code is invalidated by a court of law, then
the offending section of this chapter, shall be severed and the remainder of
this chapter shall be enforced to the full extent possible. (Ord. 01-15, 10-22-
2001)
12-1-15: APPENDIX A:
Appendix A
   VILLAGE OF PAWNEE, ILLINOIS
   APPLICATION FOR ADULT USE PERMIT
   Directions to Applicant: All information requested must be supplied.
   Use a continuation sheet if needed.
   The undersigned hereby applies for an adult use permit from the Village of
Pawnee in accordance with Title 12 of the Village of Pawnee Code of Ordinances.
   1.   Name, address and telephone number of applicant:
   
   
   
   2.   Type of business entity:
None–the applicant is an individual or individuals. If proposed use is "adult
club" as defined in Title 12 of the Pawnee Code of Ordinances, identify all
members on a separate sheet.
Corporation* LLC*
Other–please specify          
*Attach a certificate of good standing from the Illinois Secretary of State.
   3.   Names and addresses of all persons with a 5% or greater ownership
interest in the applicant, if the applicant is other than an individual or
individuals:
   
   
   
   
   
   4.   Name and address of person to contact regarding this application, and
such person's relationship to the applicant:
   
   
   
   5.   Address and legal description of the premises at which the adult use
will be conducted:
   
   
   
   
   6.   Nature of applicant's interest in the premises:
    Ownership (attach copy of deed) Leasehold (attach copy of lease)
    Contract for deed (attach copy of contract)
    Other (please specify and attach evidence of interest)    
   7.   Narrative description of intended use of the property:
   
   
   
   
   8.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of managers of adult use:
   
   
   
   
   
   9.   A site plan and floor plan drawn to scale, identification of
construction materials, and plans for lighting, parking and circulation,
ingress and egress, landscaping and screening, and signage, are attached.
   I hereby certify under penalty of perjury that the foregoing statements are
true and correct. I have reviewed Title 12 of the Village of Pawnee Code of
Ordinances and will abide by its terms. I attach a check in the amount of $350
to cover the cost of the permit application.
         Signature:    
         Date:       
 
   For Zoning Administrator's use only
Present zoning of the property:       
Zoning classifications and uses of all properties within 1000 feet of property
line:
   
   
   
Recommend Approval    Recommend Denial for the following reasons:
   
   
   
   
Signature:            Date:                                   
   For Planning Commission's Use Only
Recommend Approval    Recommend denial, for the following reasons:
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Minutes of the Planning Commission hearing on this application are attached.
            Date:    
   For Chief of Police Use Only
   I have performed a criminal background check on all persons listed in this
application as owners of a 5% or greater interest in the applicant or as the
manager of the facility. I find that:
   no such persons have been convicted of the crimes of prostitution or
obscenity, or other crimes of a sexual nature.
   the following persons listed in this application have been convicted of the
crimes of prostitution or obscenity or other crimes of a sexual nature:
Name       Date of Conviction Description of Crime
   
   
   
   
               
Date         Chief of Police
   For Village Clerk's Use Only
   This application was approved denied by action of the Village Board of the
Village of Pawnee on                      pursuant to Resolution No.           
.
                                             
            Village Clerk
(Ord. 01-15, 10-22-2001)
12-1-16: APPENDIX B:
Appendix B
   VILLAGE OF PAWNEE, ILLINOIS
   APPLICATION FOR ADULT USE RENEWAL PERMIT
   Directions to Applicant: All information requested must be supplied.
   Use a continuation sheet if needed.
   The undersigned hereby applies for an adult use renewal permit from the
Village of Pawnee in accordance with Title 12 of the Village of Pawnee Code of
Ordinances.
   1.   Date of approval of original permit:          
   2.   Name, address and telephone number of applicant:
   
   
   
   3.   Type of business entity:
None–the applicant is an individual or individuals. If proposed use is "adult
club" as defined in Title 12 of the Pawnee Code of Ordinances, identify all
members on a separate sheet.
Corporation* LLC*
Other–please specify          
   *Attach a certificate of good standing from the Illinois Secretary of State.
   4.   Names and addresses of all persons with a 5% or greater ownership
interest in the applicant, if the applicant is other than an individual or
individuals:
   
   
   
   
   
   5.   Name and address of person to contact regarding this application, and
such person's relationship to the applicant:
   
   
   
   6.   Address of the premises at which the adult use will be conducted:
   
   
   
   
   7.   Nature of applicant's interest in the premises, if different from
original permit:
    Ownership (attach copy of deed) Leasehold (attach copy of lease)
    Contract for deed (attach copy of contract)
    Other (please specify and attach evidence of interest)    
   8.   Applicant hereby certifies that the use of the premises is the same as
set forth in the original permit.
   9.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of managers of adult use:
   
   
   
   
   
   I hereby certify under penalty of perjury that the foregoing statements are
true and correct. I have reviewed Title 12 of the Village of Pawnee Code of
Ordinances and will abide by its terms. I attach a check in the amount of
$50.00 to cover the cost of the permit application.
         Signature:    
         Date:       
   For Chief of Police Use Only
   I have performed a criminal background check on all persons listed in this
application as owners of a 5% or greater interest in the applicant or as the
manager of the facility. I find that:
   no such persons have been convicted of the crimes of prostitution or
obscenity, or other crimes of a sexual nature.
   the following persons listed in this application have been convicted of the
crimes of prostitution or obscenity or other crimes of a sexual nature:
Name       Date of Conviction Description of Crime
   
   
   
   
               
Date         Chief of Police
   For Village President's Use Only
   This renewal application is approved denied for the following reasons:
   
   
   
   
   
               
         Village President
(Ord. 01-15, 10-22-2001)
CHAPTER 2
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED
SECTION:
12-2-1: Definitions
12-2-2: Cannabis Business Establishments
12-2-3: Public Nuisance Declared
12-2-4: Violations
12-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this Chapter, have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
                                        A cultivation center, craft grower,
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS             processing organization, infuser
ESTABLISHMENT:                          organization, dispensing organization
                                        or transporting organization.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, dry, cure and package
                                        cannabis and perform other necessary
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:        activities to make cannabis available
                                        for sale at a dispensing organization
                                        or use at a processing organization,
                                        per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
                                        Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be
                                        amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, process, transport and
                                        perform necessary activities to provide
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:  cannabis and cannabis-infused products
                                        to licensed cannabis business
                                        establishments, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
                                        0027), as it may be amended from time-
                                        to-time, and regulations promulgated
                                        thereunder.
                                        A facility operated.by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Financial and
                                        Professional Regulation to acquire
                                        cannabis from licensed cannabis
                                        business establishments for the purpose
                                        of selling or dispensing cannabis,
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING           cannabis-infused products, cannabis
ORGANIZATION:                           seeds, paraphernalia or related
                                        supplies to purchasers or to qualified
                                        registered medical cannabis patients
                                        and caregivers, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
                                        0027), as it may be amended from time-
                                        to-time, and regulations promulgated
                                        thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        directly incorporate cannabis or
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION cannabis concentrate into a product
OR INFUSER:                             formulation to produce a cannabis-
                                        infused product, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
                                        0027), as it may be amended from time-
                                        to-time, and regulations promulgated
                                        thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        either extract constituent chemicals or
                                        compounds to produce cannabis
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING           concentrate or incorporate cannabis or
ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR:              cannabis concentrate into a product
                                        formulation to produce a cannabis
                                        product, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        An organization or business that is
                                        licensed by the Illinois Department of
                                        Agriculture to transport cannabis on
                                        behalf of a cannabis business
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING         establishment or a community college
ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER:            licensed under the Community College
                                        Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot
                                        Program, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        Any person, firm, corporation,
                                        association, club, society or other
PERSON:                                 organization, including any owner,
                                        manager, proprietor, employee,
                                        volunteer or agent. (Ord. 19-16, 8-12-
                                        2019)
 
12-2-2: CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
The following Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments are prohibited in the
Village of Pawnee. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be
operated or aide, abet or assist in the operation within the Village of Pawnee
of any of the following:
   Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower
   Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center
   Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization
   Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser
   Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor
   Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter (Ord. 19-16, 8-
12-2019)
12-2-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
Operation of any prohibited Cannabis Business Establishment within the Village
of Pawnee in violation of the provisions of this Chapter is hereby declared a
public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies. (Ord.
19-16, 8-12-2019)
12-2-4: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this Chapter may be enforced in accordance with this Code. (Ord.
19-16, 8-12-2019)
TITLE 13
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
CHAPTER 1
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
SECTION:
13-1-1: Purpose
13-1-2: Relationship To Zoning Ordinance
13-1-3: Definitions
13-1-4: Applicability
13-1-5: General Requirements
13-1-6: Permitted Uses
13-1-7: Administratively Approved Uses
13-1-8: Special Use Permits
13-1-9: Buildings Or Other Equipment Storage
13-1-10: Removal Of Abandoned Antennas And Towers
13-1-11: Nonconforming Uses
13-1-12: Special Procedures For Special Use Determinations
13-1-13: Severability
13-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for the siting
of wireless communications towers and antennas. The goals of this chapter are
to: a) protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts
of towers and antennas; b) encourage the location of towers in nonresidential
areas; c) minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; d)
strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary
option rather than construction of additional single use towers; e) encourage
users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas
where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; f) encourage users of
towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse
visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting,
landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; g) enhance the
ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such
services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; h) consider
the public health and safety of communication towers; and i) avoid potential
damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and
careful siting of tower structures. In furtherance of these goals, the village
of Pawnee shall give due consideration to its comprehensive plan, zoning map,
existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for
the location of towers and antennas. (Ord. 02-02, 2-11-2002)
13-1-2: RELATIONSHIP TO ZONING ORDINANCE:
This chapter is closely related to and shall be interpreted together with
zoning, title 9, of this code. All terms contained in this chapter shall have
the same meanings as when used in title 9 of this code, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise. However, in the event of any conflict between this
chapter and title 9 of this code, this chapter shall control. (Ord. 02-02, 2-
11-2002)
13-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE: Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light
poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or
conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANTENNA: Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK: The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to one
or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers,
or the public switched telephone network.
FAA: The federal aviation administration.
FCC: The federal communications commission.
HEIGHT: When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured
from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or
other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAS: Any tower or antenna for which a
building permit or conditional permitted use permit has been properly issued
prior to the effective date hereof, including permitted towers or antennas that
have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not
expired.
TOWER: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose
of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar
communication purposes, including self- supporting lattice towers, guyed
towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission
towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers,
alternative tower structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and
any support thereto.
VILLAGE: The village of Pawnee.
ZONING TITLE: Title 9 of this code. (Ord. 02-02, 2-11-2002)
13-1-4: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   New Towers And Antennas: All new towers or antennas in the village of
Pawnee shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in subsections
B through D of this section, inclusive.
   B.   Amateur Radio Station Operators/Receive Only Antennas: This chapter
shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under
seventy feet (70') in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed
amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only
antennas.
   C.   Preexisting Towers Or Antennas: Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter, other
than the requirements of subsections
13-1-5F and G of this chapter.
   D.   AM Array: For purposes of implementing this chapter, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which
functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower.
Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the
outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units
may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right. (Ord. 02-02, 2-11-
2002)
13-1-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Principal Or Accessory Use: Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses under the zoning title. A different existing
use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the
installation of an antenna or tower on such lot.
   B.   Lot Size: For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with zoning district regulations, including, but not
limited to, setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such
requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the
antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot.
   C.   Inventory Of Existing Sites: Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to the zoning administrator an inventory of its existing towers,
antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the
jurisdiction of village of Pawnee or within one mile of the border thereof,
including specific information about the location, height, and design of each
tower. The zoning administrator may share such information with other
applicants applying for administrative approvals or conditional use permits
under this chapter or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the
jurisdiction of the village of Pawnee, provided, however that the zoning
administrator is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or
warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
   D.   Aesthetics: Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject
to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to
reduce visual obtrusiveness.
      2.   At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding
buildings.
      3.   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral
color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the
supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible.
   E.   Lighting: Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
   F.   State Or Federal Requirements: All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the
state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas.
If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers
and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of
the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency.
Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised
standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower
or antenna at the owner's expense.
   G.   Building Codes; Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance
with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the
applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries
Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the village of
Pawnee concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and
constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to
the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such
tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within said thirty (30) days shall constitute grounds for the
removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
   H.   Not Essential Services: Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this chapter and shall not be regulated or permitted as
essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
   I.   Franchises: Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall
certify, that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or
operation of a wireless communication system in the village of Pawnee have been
obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the zoning
administrator.
   J.   Public Notice: For purposes of this chapter, any conditional permitted
use request, variance request, or appeal of an administratively approved use or
conditional permitted use shall require public notice to all abutting property
owners and all property owners of properties that are located within the
corresponding separation distance listed in subsection
13-1-8B5b, table 2 of this chapter, in addition to any notice otherwise
required by the zoning ordinance.
   K.   Signs: No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
   L.   Buildings And Support Equipment: Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements of
section
13-1-8 of this chapter.
   M.   Multiple Antenna/Tower Plan: The village of Pawnee encourages the users
of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of multiple
towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall
be given priority in the review process. (Ord. 02-02, 2-11-2002)
13-1-6: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   General: The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted
uses and shall not require administrative approval or a special use permit.
   B.   Permitted Uses: The following uses are specifically permitted:
Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled
by the village of Pawnee, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna
or tower has been approved by the village of Pawnee. (Ord. 02-02, 2-11-2002)
13-1-7: ADMINISTRATIVELY APPROVED USES:
   A.   General: The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
administrative approvals for towers and antennas:
      1.   The zoning administrator may administratively approve the uses
listed in this section.
      2.   Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the zoning
administrator providing the information set forth in subsections
13-1-8B1 and B3 of this chapter and a nonrefundable fee of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) to reimburse the village of Pawnee for the costs of reviewing
the application.
      3.   The zoning administrator shall review the application for
administrative approval and determine if the proposed use complies with section
13-1-5 and subsections
13-1-8B4 and B5 of this chapter.
      4.   The zoning administrator shall respond to each such application
within sixty (60) days after receiving it by either approving or denying the
application. If the zoning administrator fails to respond to the applicant
within said sixty (60) days, then the application shall be deemed to be denied.
      5.   In connection with any such administrative approval, the zoning
administrator may, in a case involving shared use, administratively waive any
zoning district setback requirements in subsection
13-1-8B4 of this chapter or separation distances between towers in subsection
13-1-8B5 of this chapter by up to fifty percent (50%).
      6.   In connection with any such administrative approval, the zoning
administrator may, in order to encourage the use of monopoles, administratively
allow the reconstruction of an existing tower to monopole construction.
      7.   If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant's
administrative remedy shall be limited to filing an application for a special
use permit pursuant to section
13-1-8 of this chapter.
   B.   List Of Administratively Approved Uses: The following uses may be
approved by the zoning administrator after conducting an administrative review:
      1.   Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional
buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or
antenna, in any industrial zoning district.
      2.   Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with
the terms of subsections B2a and B2b of this section.
         a.   Antennas On Existing Structures: Any antenna which is not
attached to a tower may be approved by the zoning administrator as an accessory
use to any commercial, industrial, professional, institutional, or multi-family
structure of eight (8) or more dwelling units, provided:
            (1)   The antenna does not extend more than thirty feet (30') above
the highest point of the structure;
            (2)   The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations; and
            (3)   The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
         b.   Antennas On Existing Towers: An antenna which is attached to an
existing tower may be approved by the zoning administrator and, to minimize
adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of
towers, collocation of antennas by more than one carrier on existing towers
shall take precedence over the construction of new towers, provided such
collocation is accomplished in a manner consistent with the following:
            (1)   Type: A tower which is modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower
type as the existing tower, unless the zoning administrator allows
reconstruction as a monopole.
            (2)   Height:
               (A)   An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller
height, not to exceed thirty feet (30') over the tower's existing height, to
accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna.
               (B)   The height change referred to in subsection B2b(2)(A) of
this section may only occur one time per communication tower.
               (C)   The additional height referred to in subsection B2b(2)(A)
of this section shall not require an additional distance separation as set
forth in section
13-1-8 of this chapter. The tower's premodification height shall be used to
calculate such distance separations.
            (3)   On Site Location:
               (A)   A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the
collocation of an additional antenna may be moved on site within fifty feet
(50') of its existing location.
               (B)   After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate collocation,
only one tower may remain on the site.
               (C)   A relocated on site tower shall continue to be measured
from the original tower location for purposes of calculating separation
distances between towers pursuant to subsection
13-1-8B5 of this chapter. The relocation of a tower hereunder shall in no way
be deemed to cause a violation of subsection
13-1-8B5 of this chapter.
               (D)   The on site relocation of a tower which comes within the
separation distances to residential units or residentially zoned lands as
established in subsection
13-1-8B5 of this chapter shall only be permitted when approved by the zoning
administrator.
      3.   New towers in nonresidential zoning districts. Locating any new
tower in a nonresidential zoning district other than industrial provided a
licensed professional engineer certifies the tower can structurally accommodate
the number of shared users proposed by the applicant; the zoning administrator
concludes the tower is in conformity with the goals set forth in section
13-1-1 of this chapter and the requirements of section
13-1-5 of this chapter; the tower meets the setback requirements in subsection
13-1-8B4 of this chapter and separation distances in subsection
13-1-8B5 of this chapter; and the tower meets the following height and usage
criteria:
         a.   For a single user, up to ninety feet (90') in height;
         b.   For two (2) users, up to one hundred twenty feet (120') in
height; and
         c.   For three (3) or more users, up to one hundred fifty feet (150')
in height.
      4.   Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple low
powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such as
conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not
require the use of towers. (Ord. 02-02, 2-11-2002)
13-1-8: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   General: The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special
use permits for towers or antennas by the planning commission:
      1.   If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under section
13-1-6 of this chapter or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to
section
13-1-7 of this chapter, then a special use permit shall be required for the
construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts.
      2.   Applications for special use permits under this section shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements of the zoning ordinance, except as
modified in this section.
      3.   In recommending the grant of a special use permit, the planning
commission may suggest conditions to the extent the planning commission
concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the
proposed tower on adjoining properties.
      4.   Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits,
whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
      5.   An applicant for a special use permit shall submit the information
described in this section and a nonrefundable fee of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) plus a commitment to reimburse the village its out of pocket costs
for a review by a licensed engineer.
   B.   Towers:
      1.   Information Required: In addition to any information required for
applications for special use permits pursuant to the zoning ordinance,
applicants for a special use permit for a tower shall submit the following
information:
         a.   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses
and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), zoning
classification of the site and all properties within the applicable separation
distances set forth in subsection B5 of this section, adjacent roadways,
proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of
the proposed tower and any other structures, topography, parking, and other
information deemed by the zoning administrator to be necessary to assess
compliance with this chapter.
         b.   Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
         c.   The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted
residentially zoned properties.
         d.   The separation distance from other towers described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to subsection
13-1-5C of this chapter shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The
applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s)
and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
         e.   A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
         f.   Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
         g.   A description of compliance with subsections
13-1-5C, D, E, F, G, J, L, and M of this chapter, and subsections B4 and B5 of
this section and all applicable federal, state or local laws.
         h.   A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction
of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future
users.
         i.   Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for
the tower(s) described in the application and other towers and antennas owned
or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
         j.   A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers,
other structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or
structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of the
proposed new tower.
         k.   A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the village of Pawnee based upon existing physical,
engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event the
proposed tower is erected.
      2.   Factors Considered In Granting Special Use Permits For Towers: In
addition to the standards for consideration of special use permit applications
pursuant to the zoning ordinance, the planning commission shall consider the
following factors in determining whether to recommend issuance of a special use
permit, although the planning commission may recommend waiver or reduction of
the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the planning
commission concludes that the goals of this chapter are better served thereby:
         a.   Height of the proposed tower;
         b.   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
         c.   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
         d.   Surrounding topography;
         e.   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
         f.   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness;
         g.   Proposed ingress and egress; and
         h.   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as
discussed in subsection B3 of this section.
      3.   Availability Of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures, Or
Alternative Technology: No new tower shall be recommended unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the planning commission that no
existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the
use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna.
An applicant shall submit information requested by the planning commission
related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing
tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's
proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:
         a.   No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet applicant's engineering requirements.
         b.   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet applicant's engineering requirements.
         c.   Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
         d.   The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed antenna.
         e.   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner
in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower
or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower
development are presumed to be unreasonable.
         f.   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
         g.   The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell
network using multiple low powered transmitters/receivers attached to a
wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new
tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology
unsuitable.
      4.   Setbacks: The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers for which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the
planning commission may recommend reduction of the standard setback
requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby:
         a.   Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least seventy five
percent (75%) of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
         b.   Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
      5.   Separation: The following separation requirements shall apply to all
towers and antennas for which a special use permit is required; provided,
however, that the planning commission may reduce the standard separation
requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby:
         a.   Separation from off site uses/designated areas.
            (1)   Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower
to the lot line of the off site uses and/or designated areas as specified in
table 1 of this section, except as otherwise provided in table 1 of this
section.
            (2)   Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the
minimum standards established in table 1 of this section.
TABLE 1
 
Off Site Use/ Designated Area          Separation Distance
Single-family or duplex residential    200 feet or 300 percent height of tower
units1                                 whichever is greatest
Vacant single-family or duplex
residentially zoned land which is
either platted or has preliminary      200 feet or 300 percent height of tower2
subdivision plan approval which is not
expired
Vacant unplatted residentially zoned   100 feet or 100 percent height of tower
lands3                                 whichever is greater
Existing multi-family residentially    100 feet or 100 percent height of tower
units greater than duplex units        whichever is greater
Nonresidentially zoned lands or        None; only setbacks apply
nonresidential uses
 
   1.   Includes modular homes and mobile homes used for living purposes.
   2.   Separation measured from base of tower to closest building setback
line.
   3.   Includes any unplatted residential use properties without a valid
preliminary subdivision plan or valid development plan approval and any multi-
family residentially zoned land greater than duplex.
         b.   Separation distances between towers.
            (1)   Separation distances between towers shall be applicable for
and measured between the proposed tower and preexisting towers. The separation
distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the
base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of
the proposed tower. The separation distance (listed in linear feet) shall be
shown in table 2 of this section.
TABLE 2
EXISTING TOWERS – TYPES
 
                      Lattice Guyed Monopole 75 Feet In Monopole Less Than 75
                                    Height Or Greater   Feet In Height
Lattice               5,000   5,000 1,500               750
Guyed                 500     500   1,500               750
Monopole 75 feet in   1,500   1,500 1,500               750
height or greater
Monopole less than 75 750     750   750                 750
feet in height
 
      6.   Security Fencing: Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not
less than six feet (6') in height and shall also be equipped with an
appropriate anticlimbing device; provided however, that the planning commission
may waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate.
      7.   Landscaping: The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding towers for which a special use permit is required; provided,
however, that the planning commission may waive such requirements if the goals
of this chapter would be better served thereby:
         a.   Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screen the view of the tower compound from property
used for residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at
least four feet (4') wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
         b.   In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived.
         c.   Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as
towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property
perimeter may be sufficient buffer. (Ord. 02-02, 2-11-2002)
13-1-9: BUILDINGS OR OTHER EQUIPMENT STORAGE:
   A.   Antennas Mounted On Structures Or Rooftops: The equipment cabinet or
structure used in association with antennas shall comply with the following:
      1.   The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than two hundred
twenty five (225) square feet of gross floor area or be more than fifteen feet
(15') in height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are less than
sixty five feet (65') in height, the related unmanned equipment structure, if
over one hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area or eight feet (8')
in height, shall be located on the ground and shall not be located on the roof
of the structure.
      2.   If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment structure and other equipment and structures shall not
occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the roof area.
      3.   Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
   B.   Antennas Mounted On Utility Poles Or Light Poles: The equipment cabinet
or structure used in association with antennas shall be located in accordance
with the following:
      1.   In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may be
located:
         a.   In a front or side yard provided the cabinet or structure is no
greater than three feet (3') in height or sixteen (16) square feet of gross
floor area and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of fifteen feet (15')
from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen
hedge with an ultimate height of at least forty two (42) to forty eight inches
(48") and a planted height of at least thirty six inches (36").
         b.   In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater
than five feet (5') in height or twenty five (25) square feet in gross floor
area. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an
ultimate height of eight feet (8') and a planted height of at least thirty six
inches (36").
      2.   In commercial or industrial districts the equipment cabinet or
structure shall be no greater than five feet (5') in height or twenty five (25)
square feet in gross floor area. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by
an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet (8') and a planted
height of at least thirty six inches (36").
   C.   Antennas Located On Towers: The related unmanned equipment structure
shall not contain more than two hundred twenty five (225) square feet of gross
floor area or be more than fifteen feet (15') in height, and shall be located
in accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in
which located.
   D.   Modification Of Building Size Requirements: The requirements of
subsections A through C of this section may be modified by the zoning
administrator in the case of administratively approved uses or by the planning
commission in the case of uses permitted by special use to encourage
collocation. (Ord. 02-02, 2-11-2002)
13-1-10: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS:
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve
(12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or
tower shall remove the same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from
the village of Pawnee notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to
remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said ninety (90) days shall be
grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two
(2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the tower. (Ord. 02-02, 2-11-2002)
13-1-11: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   No Expansion Of Nonconforming Use: Towers that are constructed, and
antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or
structure.
   B.   Preexisting Towers: Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement
with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be permitted on such
preexisting towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a
preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Rebuilding Damaged Or Destroyed Nonconforming Towers Or Antennas:
Notwithstanding section
13-1-10 of this chapter, bona fide nonconforming towers or antennas that are
damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain
administrative approval or a special use permit and without having to meet the
separation requirements specified in subsections
13-1-8B4 and B5 of this chapter. The type, height, and location of the tower on
site shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility approval.
Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable
building codes and shall be obtained within one hundred eighty (180) days from
the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if
said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as
specified in section
13-1-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-02, 2-11-2002)
13-1-12: SPECIAL PROCEDURES FOR SPECIAL USE DETERMINATIONS:
The procedures for special uses shall be the same as in the zoning title of
this code with respect to a public hearing and approval of the special use by
ordinance of the corporate authorities. However, the following requirements,
peculiar to the telecommunications act, shall apply:
   A.   If the applicant shows that the antenna tower and the equipment to be
installed thereon meet all requirements of the FCC, the planning commission
shall disallow and disregard evidence regarding the environmental effects
(including interference) of radio frequency emissions, and the village board
shall disregard any such evidence in making its final determination.
   B.   All findings of the planning commission shall be in writing and shall
be based on substantial evidence.
   C.   Since the telecommunications act requires a written record, there shall
be a certified shorthand reporter present at any public hearing, and a written
transcript shall be prepared of any public hearing.
   D.   The village board shall not take final action on a special use permit
application until all fees required to be paid, including reimbursement of the
cost of an engineering review, have been paid. (Ord. 02-02, 2-11-2002)
13-1-13: SEVERABILITY:
The various parts, sections and clauses of this chapter are hereby declared to
be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of the chapter shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 02-02, 2-11-2002)
TITLE 14
UTILITY BILLING
CHAPTER 1
UTILITY BILLING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
14-1-1: General Statement
14-1-2: General Information
14-1-3: Establishing Service
14-1-4: Level Payment Program
14-1-5: Monthly Billing Cycle
14-1-6: Special Provisions
14-1-7: Payment Agreement
14-1-8: Delinquent Accounts
14-1-9: Restoring Utilities After Shutoff
14-1-10: Delinquent/Closed Accounts
14-1-11: Discontinuing Service
14-1-12: Estimated Bills
14-1-13: Water Leak Allowances
14-1-14: Care Of Water And Gas Meters On Customer's Property
14-1-15: Nonsufficient Funds Checks
14-1-16: Transfer Of Account Balances
14-1-17: Collections
14-1-1: GENERAL STATEMENT:
This title shall govern all matters pertaining to billing for water, sewer and
gas systems. In the event of a conflict between this title and title 6 or 7 of
this code, this title shall prevail. However, nothing in this title shall be
interpreted as limiting the reasons for which the village may terminate utility
services as set forth in title 6 or 7 of this code, affecting shutoff or
reconnection fees in title 6 or 7 of this code for reasons other than
nonpayment, or limiting the collection remedies and methods available to the
village under law. (Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
14-1-2: GENERAL INFORMATION:
   A.   The village of Pawnee utility billing office is located at 617 7th
Street, Pawnee, IL 62558. The utility billing direct phone number is (217) 625-
2941 and fax is (217) 625-7729. E-mail address is vpawnee@comcast.net (office
manager) and vpawnee2@comcast.net (billing clerk). Office hours are Monday
through Friday from seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00)
P.M., excluding holidays.
   B.   The utility bill consists of charges for the following services:
      1.   Water.
      2.   Sewer.
      3.   Gas.
   C.   There is always a utility bill associated with a property, unless the
property has no service lines and a sewer main is not available within two
hundred feet (200') of the property line. Properties may be subject to a
monthly minimum bill for gas, water and sewer. A facility fee will be charged
for both water and gas meters each month, no exceptions.
   D.   Utility bill payments can be made as follows:
      1.   By mail.
      2.   At utility counter inside village hall.
      3.   Drop box located outside village hall at the 7th Street entrance.
(Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
14-1-3: ESTABLISHING SERVICE:
Customers must contact the village of Pawnee utility office in person or by
phone to initiate service. A service worker will read the utility meters on the
date requested and the account is activated for billing if the procedures below
are satisfied.
   A.   New Customers:
      1.   Homeowners who have not previously had village of Pawnee utilities
in their name must apply in person at the utility office. Photo identification
will be required to open new account.
      2.   Residential tenants shall complete an application which obligates
the landlord to pay for utilities if the tenant fails to pay, and submit
required deposit before services will be offered. If the landlord signs the
application, thereby agreeing to be bound to pay for utilities if the tenant
fails to pay, the deposit required for water service is seventy five dollars
($75.00) and for gas service is one hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00). If
the landlord fails or refuses to join in the application, the deposit required
for water service is one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and for gas service is
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). The failure of a landlord to join in an
application does not absolve the landlord from joint and several liability with
the tenant, or insulate the property served from imposition of a lien for
nonpayment.
   B.   Nonresidential Accounts: The deposit required for nonresidential
accounts for water service is seventy five dollars ($75.00) and for gas service
is one hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00).
   C.   Existing And Prior Customers: Utility billing staff will request the
necessary information to update the account and initiate service. All account
balances for existing and/or prior accounts must be current before a new
account is established. (Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
14-1-4: LEVEL PAYMENT PROGRAM:
   A.   The level payment program is a program that allows the customer to pay
a set payment that is due by the fifteenth of each month. This monthly amount
is calculated based on an average of the customer's actual usage during the
previous year and may be adjusted from time to time to keep balance in line
with customer's actual consumption. This program begins in June of each year. A
customer agreement will be sent out in April that must be signed and returned
no later than May 15.
   B.   If payment is not made by the twentieth of each month, the village may
remove the customer from the level payment program and any unpaid balance will
become due and payable immediately.
   C.   Customer or village may terminate the level payment agreement at any
time by written notice, at which time all balances are due and payable. (Ord.
14-17, 10-27-2014)
14-1-5: MONTHLY BILLING CYCLE:
   A.   Payment For Service: All charges for gas, water and sewer supplied by
the village, and all other charges relating to utilities, shall be paid to the
village on or before the twelfth day of the month in which the charges are due.
   B.   Penalties For Nonpayment: All charges due and unpaid on or after the
twelfth day of the month in which they are due shall be assessed a penalty of
ten percent (10%) of the total amount unpaid.
   C.   Responsibility: The customer is responsible for all billings while the
account is in his, her or its name.
   D.   Monthly Billing Statement Schedule:
      1.   First Billing: Monthly utility statements are taken to the U.S. post
office for mailing on or before the first day of each month.
      2.   Nonpayment: If balance is not received by close of business on the
twelfth day of the month, an additional fee of ten percent (10%) will be
applied to the unpaid balance.
      3.   Shutoff Notice: A shutoff notice is mailed on or about the twentieth
of the month to the address of the account, which will include a ten dollar
($10.00) fee for the red shutoff letter. If the account balance is not paid in
full by the close of business of the date stated in the notice, the account
will be shut off without further notice.
      4.   Disconnect Fee: In the event of a shutoff, a forty dollar ($40.00)
disconnect fee is added to the customer's account. The utilities will not be
turned on until the entire account balance including any late fees, red letter
fees and disconnect fees are paid in full.
      5.   Hearing: A customer threatened with a shutoff has the right to
request an informal hearing as to the amount of the bill before the shutoff.
Hearings will be conducted by the office manager or other person designated by
the village president, during the regular business hours of the village. The
shutoff notice shall notify the customer of this right. (Ord. 14-17, 10-27-
2014)
14-1-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Relating To Cold Weather: No gas service furnished to residential users
shall be terminated for nonpayment of bills on: 1) any day when the national
weather service forecast for the following twenty four (24) hours covering the
area in which the residence is located includes a forecast that the temperature
will be twenty degrees Fahrenheit (20°F) or below; or 2) any day preceding a
holiday or a weekend when such a forecast indicates that the temperature will
be twenty degrees Fahrenheit (20°F) or below during the holiday or weekend.
   B.   Relating To Master Metered Apartments: In the event of termination of
service to an apartment building having three (3) or more residential
apartments with a master meter, the village shall, in addition to the notice to
the landlord, notify all tenants of the building of the proposed termination of
utility service. This notice shall contain the following information: 1) the
specific date, no sooner than ten (10) days after the notice is rendered, that
utility service is subject to termination; 2) a statement of the tenant's
statutory right either: a) to pay the utility company from the rent due on the
rental agreement or b) to petition the court for appointment of a receiver to
collect the rents due for use and occupancy of the building and remit a portion
to the utility company for payment of utility bills; 3) the dollar amount of
the utility bills due and owing on the date such notice is given and the
average monthly utility bills; and 4) the name and telephone number of any
legal services agency within the utility company's service area where the
tenants may obtain free legal assistance. The notice provided to the tenants of
the building shall be of a conspicuous size, on red paper, and in at least 14-
point boldface type, except that the words "Notice Of Water Service
Termination" shall be in 36-point boldface type if the notice is posted, and
shall state:
      It is unlawful for the landlord or his or her agent to alter, deface,
tamper with or remove this notice. A landlord or his or her agent who violates
this provision is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
The provisions of this section are in accordance with the rental property
utility service act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 735/0.01 et seq., and if
that act is amended, this section shall be deemed amended in accordance
therewith. (Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
14-1-7: PAYMENT AGREEMENT:
A customer may make a payment agreement, by which the customer shall pay twenty
five percent (25%) of the current billing (which includes 10 percent late fee
and $10.00 shutoff letter fee) at the time of signing the agreement, with the
remaining seventy five percent (75%) to be paid on or before the fifth of the
following month, or if the fifth of the following month is on a weekend, by
close of business of the Friday before the weekend. A customer may not have
more than one payment agreement outstanding at any time. (Ord. 14-17, 10-27-
2014)
14-1-8: DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
   A.   Tenants: Tenants receive monthly bills as stated above. Tenants are
responsible for all billings while the account remains in their name. When a
tenant's account is subject to disconnection, the landlord will receive a copy
of the disconnect notice that was sent to tenant. In the event of
disconnection, a forty dollar ($40.00) disconnect fee is charged to the tenant.
The utilities will not be turned back on in the tenant's name until the entire
account balance and disconnect fees are paid in full. Except when the landlord
has signed the application of the prior tenant as set forth in section
14-1-3 of this chapter, a new tenant shall not be refused service because of a
prior tenant's failure to pay a utility bill.
   B.   Landlords: When a tenant's account is subject to disconnection, the
landlord will receive a copy of the third and final notice that was sent to
tenant. The tenant has a due date by which the delinquent account balance must
be paid. If the balance remains unpaid, the landlord can have services
transferred into their name and assume responsibility for the delinquency and
all future billings.
   When a rented dwelling for which a delinquent bill is owed is occupied by a
tenant, but the utility is in the landlord's name and the account is not billed
to the tenant for payment, no termination of utilities will occur unless the
tenant is first provided an opportunity to place the account in the tenant's
own name without incurring any liability for the landlord's delinquent bill.
   The village is not responsible for damage to property due to lack of
utilities. It is the landlord's responsibility to monitor the occupancy of the
landlord's property. (Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
14-1-9: RESTORING UTILITIES AFTER SHUTOFF:
Village employees cannot relight pilot lights. Arrangements must be made by the
customer to have some responsible person over the age of eighteen (18) present
to relight the pilot light when utilities are restored. The customer must
contact the village office to make arrangements to turn utilities on after a
shutoff. (Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
14-1-10: DELINQUENT/CLOSED ACCOUNTS:
   A.   Tenants: A tenant cannot have more than one account at any given time.
A tenant cannot start service at a property if the tenant has a delinquent
balance for any other village utility accounts (active or inactive). If a
tenant with a delinquent balance moves to another residence in the village of
Pawnee, the utilities will be in the new landlord's name until the tenant's
delinquent account is paid in full. Unpaid utility bills, in addition to
appropriate administrative fees incurred by the village to recoup delinquent
balance, not paid timely will be subject to collection in accordance with
section
14-1-17 of this chapter. (Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
14-1-11: DISCONTINUING SERVICE:
When a customer requests termination of services a utility worker will read the
meters on the requested date of termination so long as the requested date is a
regular business day for the village.
   A.   Tenants: When tenants request service be discontinued and a new tenant
has not requested service, utility service will be placed in the landlord’s
name.
   B.   Landlords and property owners: As stated above, Landlords have primary
responsibility for utility bills for the property they rent. The Village will
put the bills in a tenants name for the convenience of the landlord and the
tenant, but the landlord has continuing and primary responsibility for those
bills. Utilities will be placed in the property owner’s name when the utilities
are not established with a tenant.
   A Landlord may request a disconnection of gas and/or water service between
tenants. When anew tenant applies for gas and/or water at said property a forty
dollar ($40.00) reconnection fee will be charged and paid by the Landlord.
   For property owners who will be vacating the property for more than two (2)
weeks, the Village will disconnect water and/or gas services per the property
owners request. There will be a reconnect fee of forty dollars ($40.00).
   For property owners or landlords undertaking repairs, and requiring
utilities to be disconnected only for the purpose of those repairs, the Village
will disconnect gas and/or water service per instructions from the landlord,
property owner, or contractor on the project. There will be no fee to reconnect
utilities, unless the village determines that no repair project has been
undertaken, or the landlord or property owner are attempting to avoid
disconnect fees by claiming the existence of a repair project.
   C.   Homeowners (Sale of Property): If the buyer has applied for service
meter reading is obtained on the scheduled date and future billings are
transferred to the new owner’s name. The meter is read on the date the seller
schedules and a final bill will be sent to the seller. If the new owner has not
applied for service by the final read date, services will be disconnected until
utility office is notified by buyer. There is no fee to turn utilities back on.
(Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014; amd. Ord. 19-15, 7-22-2019)
14-1-12: ESTIMATED BILLS:
When it is not possible for meter readers to read the meters, the amount of
utilities used will be estimated on the basis of use of the premises in
comparable periods. Refund of the overpayment will not be made but will be
credited to the customer's account. If the customer terminates his account, any
refund due will be credited on final bill. (Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
14-1-13: WATER LEAK ALLOWANCES:
   A.   A leak allowance adjustment for sewer is considered in some situations.
A customer is allowed a onetime adjustment during a twelve (12) month period.
In order to be considered for the adjustment, the customer must identify the
leak and complete the necessary repairs if needed. Adjustment is limited to two
(2) months of charges. Future bills must reflect a reduction in usage.
   B.   A onetime sewer adjustment is allowed during a twelve (12) month period
for filling of pools. It is the responsibility of the user to contact the
utility billing office to request the adjustment. (Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
14-1-14: CARE OF WATER AND GAS METERS ON CUSTOMER'S PROPERTY:
Any physical damage or abuse of village meters or lines is the responsibility
of the owner or tenant of the property. Any necessary repairs for broken or
damaged meters and/or lines will be made by the village with the cost charged
to the owner or tenant. The village will maintain and monitor these meters and
lines and shall have access to them. (Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
14-1-15: NONSUFFICIENT FUNDS CHECKS:
Any time a payment to the village, whether a check or automatic withdrawal, is
returned for reason of nonsufficient funds, closed bank account, stopped
payment or refer to maker, or for any other reason the customer will be charged
a fee of thirty dollars ($30.00). The village will attempt to contact the
customer first by phone; if no contact was made, a letter will be sent with a
disconnection date. If the village is unable to resolve the issue and services
are disconnected, an additional fee of forty dollars ($40.00) will be charged
to the customer when services are resumed. All returned items and fees must be
paid in cash or by money order. After a second NSF check in a twelve (12) month
period, the village will not accept checks or automatic withdrawal from a
customer for a period of one (1) year. All billings during such one (1) year
period shall be paid only by cash or money order. If in the twelve (12) months
immediately following a suspension of check and automatic withdrawal privileges
a customer has two (2) NSF checks returned, the village will no longer accept
checks or automatic withdrawals, and all future billings shall be paid only by
cash or money order. (Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014; amd Ord. 24-08, 12-10-2024)
14-1-16: TRANSFER OF ACCOUNT BALANCES:
Whenever a utility customer closes an account with an unpaid account balance,
the unpaid account balance shall be paid in full before any utility deposit is
returned to the customer. The balance may also be transferred at the discretion
of the village to any new account opened by such customer. If requested by the
customer, and if the customer is current on its old account, the village shall
also transfer any utility deposit from the old account to the new account.
(Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
14-1-17: COLLECTIONS:
In the event of unpaid bills, the village may avail itself of any and all
collection methods available under law, included, but not limited to:
   A.   Recordation of liens against properties which have received utility
services for which no payment has been received, and foreclosing such liens;
   B.   Participation in the comptroller's local debt recovery program;
   C.   Turning accounts over to collection agencies;
   D.   Bringing suit. (Ord. 14-17, 10-27-2014)
 
